



Billy Baxter's Letters

by William J. Kountz, Jr.





Contents:
Preface
Out Hunting
One Night
In Society
In Love
In New York
Johnny Black's Girl



PREFACE

In presenting this work, we believe that an explanation is  due the reader as to why the letters are given in their present  form at this time.

The first book published, "One Night," was "issued by The Duquesne  Distributing Company to show its great love for the American  people, and to incidentally advertise the 'R--R--S--.'"  Its  success was immediate.

"In Society" appeared February 1, 1899, and scored as promptly  as "One Night." The demand for the booklets was phenomenal, and  Mr. Kountz received thousands of friendly letters applauding  him for his humor. He also received flattering offers from the  leading comic weeklies, the metropolitan dailies, and great  advertisers throughout the Union. He declined them all, being  primarily a business man, and carrying literature only as a  side line.

On May 1st "In Love" was given to the public, with the promise  that "In New York" would follow on October Ist. On the evening  of August 9th, William J. Kountz, Jr., turned to the writer of  this preface, and referring to "In New York," said: "Well, I'm  through, all but going over it." He never returned to his office,  and on August 18th he died in the room where he was born not  quite thirty-two years before.

We then conceived the idea of putting the letters out in their  present form, as a last tribute to the author, who in less than  a year's work lifted himself into a place among the nation's  humorists.

We have reproduced only such of the prefaces and advertisements  as have been widely discussed for their humorous quality, and  which the author's friends insisted should no be omitted.

The two heretofore unmentioned letters were discovered after  the author's death, and are published in the rough, as they  were found. "Out Hunting" is based on a trip which actually  took place, and from personal knowledge contains a good deal  of fact. It was doubtless written before "One Night," and for  that reason is given priority in the arrangement.

"Johnny Black's Girl" is merely a scrap, and is inserted as  such. It shows, however, that the author had a "tear for pity"  as well as an eye for the ridiculous.

Geo. McC. Kountz.



OUT HUNTING

Pittsburg, September 1, 1898.

Dear Jim:

I am just back from St. Paul, where I spent a couple of days  with Teddy Worthington. Teddy and Bud Hathaway of Chicago were  going on a shooting trip in the Big Woods of Minnesota, and they  asked me to go with them. It was new deal for me, so of course I  was for it. I hired a hammerless breech-loader for seven a week,  borrowed a lot of fishing-tackle, and bought a hunting-knife with  a nickel-plated handle. It was a beaut, and stood me three fifty.  A fellow can never be too careful. Up there you are likely any  minute to come face to face with an Apache or some old left-over  Aztec rubbering around among the trees.

At the last minute Bud Hathaway's father had to die, so just Teddy  and myself went. After we left the train we rode twenty miles in  a wagon to Freshwater Lake, which was our destination. The house  where we stayed was kept by a half-breed guide named Sarpo, and  with him lived his two sons and his second wife, who was a young  white girl, and not a bad looker at that.

The next morning we started out after ducks. I made a horrible  bluff that I was one of the old boys at the business, and that  I was on to everything--till it came to loading my hammerless,  and there's where I went to the bad. I couldn't get the blamed  thing open. Teddy handed me a few of his kind little remarks,  and I got back at him with something personal. He got sore. No  thoroughbred kidder would have grown personal, but I couldn't  think of anything else at the time. There was nothing stirring  in the duck line, and for two hours we sat all hunched up in a  little boat among a lot of weeds. It was getting to be a sad  affair for me, and I was thinking of Atlantic City, and the bands  of music, and the swell dances, and trying to figure where these  hunters have the fun they are always coming home and talking  about, when suddenly along came a drove of ducks.  On the square,  there must have been a million. The other members of the party  began picking them off, but your Uncle Bill is one of those wise  shooters. I waited till they were right over my head. Say! they  were so thick I couldn't see the sky. I let go with the first  barrel, right into the center of the bunch. Nit duck. Then the  second barrel went off of its own accord. I'll swear, Jim, I had  nothing whatever to do with it. Anyway, nit duck. I think if I'd  had three barrels on that gun I would have nailed a duck, a duck  and a half, or two ducks, as I was just getting good. I loaded  up, and I must have been flustered a bit, as I blew one of the  decoys clear into the next block.

Then things again assumed their usual hunter's attitude, and  after sitting for another hour we paddled over to our sail-boat  and started down the lake for the house. It was blowing pretty  hard, and the sky was blacker than Pittsburg. The skipper said  something about a squall, but it didn't hit us until we were  about two hundred yards from the dock. Then we got it, and got  it good. It was buttercups and daisies. Thunder, lightning, rain,  and all the side dishes. I'd have given eight dollars to have  seen a cable car coming along about that time. The skipper yelled  to me to ease off the larboard stay. Now, I might know something  about mince pie, but a larboard stay is not my long and hasty.  Then some one pushed me aside, and succeeded in putting things  in such excellent shape that we ran plumb through the dock. It  was great!

That night we sat around, and Sarpo and his sons told some funny  stories. My, but they were to the saddings! I told one of my best,  and nobody filtered but Teddy.

The next morning at five we took the dogs and started out after  deer. They have what they call run-ways or deer passes, and the  deer always go the same route. They ought to have better sense,  although as far as I am concerned they are perfectly safe. They  put me on one of the passes, behind a lot of underbrush. Well,  I sat and sat until I went to sleep, but I slept with one eye  open. Deadwood Dick and all the great scouts and trappers had the  one-eye-open habit. I was awakened by hearing something crack,  and there standing about twenty feet away with its side turned  to me was a deer. It must have belonged to the fair sex, as it  had no horns. Talk about shaking! I would have shaken my best  friend. I finally pulled myself together, and remembering the  ducks, I let her have both barrels at once. She kicked her feet  up in the air, turned her head, and on the level, she gave me  the laugh and cut into the woods. I believe she saw me all the  time, and knew I was a lobster.

On the way back, I met the half-breed, and we walked together.  On reaching the house we happened to glance through the window,  and there was Teddy with his arm around the young wife's waist.  Teddy always was a rubber.  It was lovely cards for a while, and  Teddy worked the old gag that he was showing her how they did in  a play, but she wasn't wise enough to follow it up, so we had to  leave.

While returning on the train I made the horrible discovery that  I had been using my buckshot on the ducks and my birdshot on the  deer. I can see how the deer got away, but I'll say one thing,  and that is, that if a passing duck had ever reached his mitt out  for one of those buckshot he would have thought Rusie was doing  the pitching. He would have got it fine and daisy.

I am not for the country. They have ticks, jiggers, and gnats,  all doing a nice conservative business at once.  You never had  a tick on you, did you, Jim?  Well, a tick is a very busy little  cup of tea. First, he'll crawl all over you, and then select a  spot on the back directly between the shoulder blades, where you  can't reach him. I talked to a man who was up on ticks, and he  said a tick was wiser than a bedbug. Now, you take a bedbug whose  head is perfectly clear, and who hasn't been drinking or smoking  too much, and there won't be many men on Wall Street much wiser  than he is. Well, after a tick gets his place picked out he  burrows in under the skin, then dies and festers. You wouldn't  catch a bedbug standing for that martyr game.

There should be some kind of a law against gnats.  About two  hundred of them will stay right in front of your eyes until one  of them gets an opening; then he'll cut in and land a jab, and  the other hundred and ninety-nine will give you the Big Minnehaha.  I had so many lumps on me when I got back to St. Paul that they  called me Pneumatic Willie.

Talk about your sylvan dells and sweet-scented fragrance! Why,  an asphalt street has a sylvan dell skinned to death, and a  twelve-percent soap factory is sweet enough for me.

Yours as ever,

Billy.

P. S.--Good night. I'm for the sleeps.



ONE NIGHT

A Kind of a Preface

The Baxter Letters are written in the up-to-date slang of the  day, by one who has seen several of the sides of life, and who  has also come in contact with a few of the corners.

We will mail "One Night" to any address in North America upon  receipt of four cents* in postage. Do not lick stamps and attach  to letter of request, as at some future date we may wish to use  same, and the Government foolishly requires a whole stamp. 

As there are several people in the United States with whom we  are not personally acquainted, and not being mind-readers, we  ask that all signatures be written plainly.

* This offer is superseded by the publication of this volume.


Admiral Dewey's Letter

In November, 1898 we sent Admiral Dewey a copy of "One Night."  The appended letter is photographed from the original reply  addressed to the president of our company, which was received  March 9, 1899.

Flagship Olympia Manila,

Jan'y 28/99

Dear Sir,

Accept my best thanks for the book (One Night) which you were  good enough to send me.

Very truly

George Dewey

We also sent a copy to His Royal Highness, Albert, Prince of  Wales, and, having heard nothing from him, it now looks as  though Al were going to snob us. Under the circumstances, when  he runs for King we can't be for him.


One Night

Pittsburg, PA., August, 189-.

Dear Jim:

You remember I wrote you about a sack suit I ordered last week.  Well, it came yesterday, and you know the finish. Why can't a  fellow put on a new suit, make a few calls, and go home like a  gentleman? The minute I got into that suit, I fell off the water  wagon with an awful bump, although I hadn't touched a drink for  thirty-seven days. Oh! But I got a lovely bun on. That's the last.  No more for me. There's nothing in it. If anybody says, "Have  something, Billy," you'll see your Uncle Bill take to the trees. 

Yesterday at 2:30 I had a hundred and ten dollars; this morning  I'm there with a dollar eighty, and that's the draw out of a  two-dollar touch. If there is any truth in the old saying that  money talks, I am certainly deaf and dumb to-day. Besides I have  a card in my pocket which says I've opened up a running account  of thirty-two forty at George's place. I wonder if this George  is on the level, because I'll swear I don't think I was in there  at all. I'll bet he stuck the forty on anyway. You know me, Jim;  I am one of those bright people who tries to keep up with a lot  of guys who have nothing to do but blow their coin. I stood around  yesterday and looked wise, and licked up about four high-balls;  then I kind of stretched. Whenever I give one of those little  stretches and swell up a bit that's a sign I am commencing to  get wealthy. I switched over and took a couple of gin fizzes,  and then it hit me I was richer than Jay Gould ever was; I had  the Rothschilds backed clear off the board; and I made William  H. Vanderbilt look like a hundred-to-one shot. You understand,  Jim, this was yesterday. I got a little red spot in each cheek,  and then I leaned over the bar and whispered, "Mr. Bartender,  break a bottle of that Pommery." Ordinarily I call the booze  clerk by his first name, but when you are cutting into the grape  at four dollars per, you always want to say Mr. Bartender, and  you should always whisper, or just nod your head each time you  open a new bottle, as it makes it appear as though you were  accustomed to ordering wine. You see, Jim, that's where I go off  my dip. That wine affair is an awful stunt for a fellow who makes  not over two thousand a year, carries ten thousand life, and rooms  in a flat that's fifteen a month stronger than he can stand. But  to continue, I lost the push I started out with, and got mixed  up with a fellow named Thorne, or Thorpe, or something like that,  and we got along great for a while. He knew a lot of fellows in  Boston that I did, and every time we struck a new mutual friend  we opened another bottle. I don't know just what the total  population of Boston is, but we must have known everybody there.  Finally Thorne got to crying because his mother had died. You  know I am a good fellow, so I cried, too. I always cry some time  during a bat, and there was an opening for your life. I cried so  hard that the bartender had to ask me to stop three different  times. I made Niobe look like a two spot. Between sobs I asked  him about the sad affair, and found that his mother had died  when he was born. I guess it had just struck him. Then there  were doings.

I had wasted a wad of cries that would float the Maine, and I was  sore for fair. A fat fellow cut into the argument, and some one  soaked him in the eye, and then, as they say in Texas, "there was  three minutes rough house." In the general bustle a seedy looking  man pinched the Fresh Air Fund, box and all. You know I'm not much  for the bat cave, and to avoid such after-complications as patrol  wagons and things, I blew the bunch and started up street. I guess  the wind must have been against me, as I was tacking.

I met Johnny Black, and he was going to keep a date with a couple  of swell heiresses at one of the hotel dining-rooms. I saw them  on the street to-day, and they won't do. One of them wore an  amethyst ring that weighed about sixty carats, and the other  had on white slippers covered with little beads.

I don't know anything about them, but I'll gamble that they are  the kind of people that have pictures of the family and wreaths  in the parlor. They looked fine and daisy last night, though.  Probably the grape. My girl's name was Estelle. Wouldn't that  scald you? Estelle handed me a lot of talk about having seen  me on the street for the last two years, and how she had always  been dying to meet me, and I got swelled up and bought wine like  a horse owner. Johnny was shaking his head and motioning for me  to chop, but what cared I? Estelle was saying, "He done it,"  "I seen it," and "Usen't you?" right along, but the grape stood  for everything.

Estelle's friend was talking about her piano, and how hard it  was to get good servants nowadays, and say, Jim, I've heard  knockers in my time, but Estelle is the original leader of the  anvil chorus. She just put everybody in town on the pan and  roasted them to a whisper. She could build the best battleship  Dewey ever saw with her little hammer. Estelle's friend, after  much urging, then sang a pathetic ballad entitled, "She Should  Be Scolded, but Not Turned Adrift," and I sat there with one  eye shut, so that I could see single, and kept saying, "Per'fly  beauf'ful."

About this time I commenced to forget. I remember getting an  awful rise out of Estelle by remarking that her switch didn't  match her hair. She came up like a human yeast cake. Johnny  sided with the dame, and said I might at least try to act like  a gentleman, even if I weren't one. Perhaps the grape wasn't  getting to Johnny by this time. He was nobby and boss. He was  dropping his r's like a Southerner, and you know how much of a  Southerner Johnny is--Johnstown, Pa.; and he was hollering around  about his little three-year-old, standard-bred, and registered  bay mare out of Highland Belle, by Homer Wilkes, with a mark of  twenty-one, that could out-trot any thing of her age that ever  champed a bit. Did you get that, Jim? That ever champed a bit;  and still he said at noon to-day that he had had two, possibly  three, glasses of wine, but no more. The only way that mare of  Johnny's can go a mile in twenty-one is "In the Baggage Coach  Ahead."

Say, Jim, I've never said much about it, but you let any of these  fellows who own horses get a soak on, and they get to be a kind  of a village pest, with their talk about blowing up in the stretch,  shoe blisters on the left forearm, etc. Now, since when did a horse  get an arm? They have got me winging. I can't follow them at all.

But to return to last night. When Johnny threw that thing at me  about champing the bit, it was all off to Buffalo with little  Will. I went out of business right there.

When I got up this morning I had to ask the bellboy what hotel  I was in. I'll see the fellows to-night, and they'll all tell me  how dirty my face was, and what I called so and so, and make me  feel as bad as they possibly can. It's a wonder a fellow doesn't  get used to that, but I never do; I feel meaner each time. Guess  I'll take the veil.

Don't fail to come down Saturday. Several of us are going yachting  on the Ohio River. It will be lovely billiards.  

Yours as ever,

Billy.

P. S.--Do you know anything about that George's place?


Horse Sense

Sometimes you eat too much, sometimes you drink too much, and  sometimes you do both. In any event, you feel like the very old  scratch the next morning. Too much liquor overheats the blood.  Too much food, and the liver goes on a strike. The first remedy  which should suggest itself is a purgative which will act on the  liver, and cleanse the system of all the indigestible junk with  which it has been overtaxed. This is positively the foundation  for permanent relief. The next thing is to cool the blood. Now,  isn't it common horse sense?

Think it over.

The R--R-- is the only water which acts on the liver. It's base  is sodium phosphate.

The R--R-- is the only water which cools the blood, Overheated blood is what  causes the pressure on the head.

The R--R-- is the only pleasant-tasting aperient water of any  strength on the market to-day.

We have stumbled onto a good thing, and we've got the money to  push it.

You remember the man who at breakfast said: "Waiter, bring me  about ten grains of oatmeal, and put stickers on it so that it  will stay down; and say, waiter, please look as pleasant as  possible, for I feel like h--l."

Well, that's how a person's stomach gets some mornings.

If you are going to drink an aperient, why try to force down a  water that is warm, and tastes like a lot of bad eggs, doesn't  touch your liver, and won't cool your blood, when you can get  the R--R--, cold and sparkling and pleasant, which will do all  these things?

If you are annoyed with constipation, stomach or liver trouble,  use as your system dictates, and see bow much better you feel.  It can't hurt you. Best before breakfast.



IN SOCIETY

Preface

In presenting "In Society," we are confident of success. Upon  "One Night" comment is unnecessary. A bona fide demand for nearly  250,000 copies in less than three months speaks for itself. In  inclosing stamps for books, our men readers who will join the  "Union" mentioned on page 36 will so state. No names attached to  such communications will be published. The partial description  of the Grand Opera "Die Walkure" in this book is given precisely  as it occurred; and although the up-to-date slang used might  suggest exaggeration, such is really not the case. Again we ask  that your name be written plainly. This caution is not addressed  to the women. We have given up all hope of ever getting a readable  signature from a woman. Don't think for a moment that we have  anything against the women. Heaven forbid! We merely say that  if there is a woman in the United States who can write plainly,  that particular woman hasn't written us yet.


In Society

Pittsburg, Pa., Feb. 1, 1899. 

Dear Jim:

There is no new scandal worth mentioning. What I started to write  you about was Hemingway's duplicate whist party which was pulled  off last night. I had a bid, and as there was nothing else stirring,  I put on that boy's size dress suit of mine, and blew out there.  Jim, you know the signs you see on the dummies in front of these  little Yiddisher stores, "Take me home for $io.98," or "I used  to be $6.21, now I'm yours for $3.39." Well, that's your Uncle  Bill in a dress suit. Every one takes me for a waiter.

I have just been thinking this society push over, and I have  come to the conclusion that an active leader in society has more  troubles than a man in the wheat pit, and a man in the wheat pit  is long on troubles about as often as he is on wheat. If you don't  believe it, ask Joe Leiter. He was long on both at the same time.

Take the woman who uses fair English and has coin, and let her  display the same good cold judgment that has made her husband  successful in business, and some rainy Thursday morning the four  hundred will wake up and find a new member has joined the order.  While she is on her way she'll get many a frost, but after she  lands she'll even up on the other candidates.

I have heard it said that locomotive engineers as a rule suffer  from kidney troubles, caused by the jolting and bumping of the  engine. If jolts and bumps go for anything, some of these people  who are trying to break into society must have Bright's Disease  something grievous.

Jim, if you have never been to a duplicate whist party, see some  of those people play whist and then order your shroud. Last night  for a partner I drew an old girl who was a Colonial Dame because  her ancestors on both sides had worked on the Old Colony Railroad.  She must have taken a foolish powder or something, just before she  left home, as she was clean to the bad. She had to be called five  minutes before each play, and the way she trumped my ace the first  time around was enough to drive a person dippy. Once she mentioned  her husband's diamond-studded airship. Poor old lady! Probably took  a double dose by mistake. How careless!

Everybody was making a great fuss over some girl who is lecturing  throughout the country on "Man as Woman Sees Him." Talk about  lavish eyes. My boy! my boy! but this dame was there with the  swell lamps. A hundred candle power easily. I tried to sit up  to her, but there was nothing doing. I might have known I was a  dead one. Because why? Because Mr. Percy Harold was talking to  her, and he knows all about rare china, real old lace, and such  things. When I came up the subject was Du Bois' Messe de Mariage.  (Spelling not guaranteed.) I asked about it this morning, Jim.  A Messe de Mariage seems to be some kind of a wedding march, and  a bishop who is a real hot dog won't issue a certificate unless  the band plays the Messe. Mr. Percy Harold kept right on talking  about Jack Hayes being so desperately in love with Mrs. Hardy- Steele, and how late they were getting home from the Opera the  other night, and what a shame it was, as Mr. Steele seemed like  such a nice fellow. There I stood like a Harlem goat. I couldn't  cut in, because I have so many troubles of my own getting home  from any place at all that I haven't time to keep tab on other  people. I must be as slow getting onto a scandal as the injured  husband. If 115,000 people know something about a woman, my  number is 14,999, and the husband's number is 15,000. It seems  strange, but the husband always seems to get wise last.

But to return to the girl with the electric eyes. I hung around in  that sad dress suit like a big dub, hoping that the conversation  would finally get switched to theaters or dogs or sparring, or  something where I could make good, but Mr. Harold had the floor,  and he certainly had me looking like a dirty deuce in a new deck.  I stood for him till he suddenly exclaimed, "Oh, fudge!" because  he had forgotten one of his rings, and there was where I took to  the tall timbers. If I were a ring I wouldn't let a guy like that  wear me. Now will you kindly tell me why it is that a girl will  throw a good fellow down every time for one of those Lizzie boys?  If I thought there were enough men in the country who feel as  I do, I would start "The American Union for the Suppression of  Lizzie Boys."

Well, I decided to get into my class, so I started for the  smoking-room. I hadn't gone three feet till some woman held me  up, and began telling me how she adored grand opera. I didn't  even reply. I flew madly and remained hidden in the tall grasses  of the smoking-room until it was time to go home. Jim, should  any one ever tell you that grand opera is all right, he is either  trying to even up, or he is not a true friend. I was over in New  York with the family last winter, and they made me go with them  to "Die Walkure" at the Metropolitan Opera House. When I got  the tickets I asked the man's advice as to the best location.  He said that all true lovers of music occupied the dress circle  and balconies, and that he had some good center dress circle  seats at three bones per. Here's a tip, Jim. If the box man ever  hands you that true lover game, just reach in through the little  hole and soak him in the solar for me. It's coming to him. I'll  give you my word of honor we were a quarter of a mile from the  stage. We went up in an elevator, were shown to our seats, and  who was right behind us but my old pal Bud Hathaway from Chicago.  Bud had his two sisters with him, and he gave me one sad look  which said plainer than words, "So you're up against it, too,  eh?" We introduced all hands around, and about nine o'clock the  curtain went up. After we had waited fully ten minutes, out came  a big, fat, greasy looking Dago with nothing on but a bear robe.  He went over to the side of the stage, and sat down on a bum rock.  It was plainly to be seen, even from my true lover's seat, that  his bearlets was sorer than a dog about something. Presently in  came a woman, and none of the true lovers seemed to know who she  was. Some said it was Melba, others Nordica. Bud and I decided it  was May Irwin. We were mistaken, though, as Irwin has this woman  lashed to the mast at any time or place. As soon as Mike the  Dago espied the dame it was all off. He rushed, and drove a  straight-arm jab, which had it reached would have given him the  purse. But Shifty Sadie wasn't there. She ducked, side-stepped,  and landed a clever half-arm hook which seemed to stun the big  fellow. They clinched, and swayed back and forth, growling  continually, while the orchestra played this trembly  Eliza-crossing-the-ice music. Jim, I'm not swelling this a bit.  On the level, it happened just as I write it. All of a sudden  some one seemed to win. They broke away, and ran wildly to the  front of the stage with their arms outstretched, yelling to beat  three of a kind. The band cut loose something fierce. The leader  tore out about $9.00 worth of hair, and acted generally as though  he had bats in his belfry. I thought sure the place would be  pinched. It reminded me of Thirsty Thornton's dance-hall out in  Merrill, Wisconsin, when the Silent Swede used to start a general  survival of the fittest every time Mamie the Mink danced twice  in succession with the young fellow from Albany, whose father  owned the big mill up Rough River. Of course, this audience was  perfectly orderly, and showed no intention whatever of cutting in,  and there were no chairs or glasses in the air, but I am forced to  admit that the opera had Thornton's faded for noise. I asked Bud  what the trouble was, and he answered that I could search him.  The audience apparently went wild. Everybody said "Simply sublime!"  "Isn't it grand?" "Perfectly superb!" "Bravo!" etc., not because  they really enjoyed it, but merely because they thought it was the  proper thing to do. After that for three solid hours Rough House  Mike and Shifty Sadie seemed to be apologizing to the audience  for their disgraceful street brawl, which was honestly the only  good thing in the show. Along about twelve o'clock I thought I  would talk over old times with Bud, but when I turned his way I  found my tried and trusty comrade "Asleep at the Switch."

At the finish the woman next to me, who seemed to be on, said that  the main lady was dying. After it was too late, Mike seemed kind  of sorry. He must have given her the knife, or the drops, because  there wasn't a minute that he could look in on her according to the  rules. He laid her out on the bum rock, they set off a lot of red  fire for some unknown reason, and the curtain dropped at 12:25.  Never again for my money. Far be it from me knocking, but any time  I want noise I'll take to a boiler shop or a Union Station where  I can understand what's coming off. I'm for a good mother show.  Do you remember "The White Slave," Jim? Well, that's me. Wasn't  it immense where the main lady spurned the leering villain's gold,  and exclaimed with flashing eye, "Rags are royal raiment, when  worn for virtue's sake." Great! 

"The White Slave" has "Die Walkure" beaten to a pulp, and they  don't get to you for three cases gate money, either.

Say, Jim, if you ever happen to be hunting around for a real true  old sport, don't overlook General Hemingway, last evening's host.  When it comes to warm propositions he is certainly the bell cow.  They all follow him. He is one of those fat, bald headed old boys  who at one time has had the smallpox so badly that he looks as  though he had lost a lot of settings out of his face. He hustled  for about twenty years, harnessed up a bunch of money, and now his  life is one continual crimson sunset. Some people know when they  have enough, but when the old general has enough he doesn't know  anything. Smoke up! Jim, I didn't get that one myself the first  time I heard it. Every time the general gets lit up, he places his  arm around your shoulder, puts his face close to yours, blows ashes  in your eyes, and tells you confidentially, so that every one in  Texas can hear him, that he knew your father when the seat of his  trousers was ragged, and he didn't have one dollar to rub against  another. I don't mind that so much, but every time he comes to  a word with the letter _P_ in it, he spits all over a fellow.  Why, the other night he was telling me about our newly acquired  _P_ossessions, the _P_hilippines, being a land of _P_erpetual  _P_lenty, and for a while I thought I was in the natatorium. Under  the circumstances I don't know which would be more desirable, a  plumber for the general, or a mackintosh for myself. 

Yours as ever,

Billy.

P. S.--Jim, you know those little white checks they issue in  some bars and you pay at the cashier's desk? Well, one of the  boys just telephoned me that he saw Johnny Black a few minutes  ago in a down-town place with a beautiful sosh on, and that he  was eating his checks because he was broke. He had swallowed  five checks amounting to $2.30 before the bartender tumbled.  That's a new one on me, and it's all right. My! but that boy  Johnny is a sincere drinker.


More Horse Sense

Sometimes you get up in the morning feeling as though you were  not expected to live. You know the cause. If you are at home, the  first thing to do is to square yourself. Some experts on squaring  say that it is best to deny everything, others advise a partial  acknowledgment of the facts, together with a solemn promise that  it will never occur again. We would respectfully suggest that you  try the first; If unsuccessful, spring the second, and if both fail,  be a thoroughbred and take it like a man. You probably deserve it,  but look at the fun you had the night before singing bass. Remember  one thing: don't say you missed the twelve o'clock car, and rather  than wait you walked home. You may have arrived in a cab. Wonderful  what a noise one small cab can make in the middle of the night.  Well, the next thing is your physical condition. Your liver must  be got going. Would you rather drink a cold, sparkling, pleasant- tasting R--R--S-- that will produce instant action upon the liver?  or would you prefer a water that is warm and sickening, tastes  like an Italian tenement looks, and half the time won't stay down?  Many a good fellow has his own troubles in the morning trying to  find something that will stick. The R--R-- will stick, and what's  more, it cools the blood, which naturally relieves the pressure  upon the head. For constipation, stomach, and liver troubles,  R--R-- has no equal. Being on a sodium phosphate base, it is  positively the only liver water on the market to-day. Why subject  yourself to probable salivation from poisonous calomel when the  R--R-- is absolutely harmless and will give you better results?  Keep our goods at your home, and when you are away from home you  can get it at any first-class hotel, cafe, or club.



IN LOVE

Pittsburg, Pa., May 1, 1899.

Dear Jim:

So you want to know how a fellow is going to tell positively when  he is stuck on a girl, do you? Well, I'll tell you, and I'll tell  you mighty quick. If some guy cuts in on your steady, you are  going out to her home, and you are going to call her fine and  plenty, aren't you? And unless she promises to bump the other  fellow, you are going to leave her in a rage, aren't you? _Now,  if you go back without being sent for, you're it._

Jim, if you can you had better wait for her to break the ice.  If you don't, from that time on she will make you look like a  white chip. A woman is like one of the big trusts. The instant  she acquires a controlling interest in you she becomes a regular  ring-master. She will make you jump through, lie down and roll  over, walk lame, and play dead; and don't think for a moment you  won't do it, either. All the rest of them have. You show me a man  who hasn't been up against such a game, and I'll show you a man  who lacks experience. A lot of these handsome gazabes go around  looking wise, winning girls out, and thinking they are the happy  thought. That's because they have had a run of luck and landed  in among a bunch of marks. Let them keep it up. It is only a matter  of time until they will stumble over a live wire, and then it will  be pay-day on the Wabash. It's grand to see a great big slob  running along behind some little bit of a girl, a faithful Fido,  taking his orders like a politician. I know what I'm talking about,  Jim, because I have certainly been the original human dog. I used  to think I was the Village Rubber--but not any more. They have  made me look like thirty cents not once, but a dozen times. I can  gaze into the dim, hazy distance and see where every one of these  coy, clever fellows is going to get it, and get it good, and I am  glad of it. My hat's off.

Say, Jim, I'm not much for these love stories in the books. They  are liable to mislead a fellow. You read how Benton Brockway,  the hero, looks into pretty Bessie Bell's blue eyes, places his  hand on her shapely shoulder, and tells her how he loves her.  Even her downcast eye doesn't hide the pearly tear as she answers  "Yes." Now, I can look into their eyes for four hours, and I can  tell them how I love them till I am black in the face, and they  seem to like it; but whenever I come to the laying of the hand on  the shapely shoulder part, it's all off. I am told that I am no  gentleman, and to roll my hoop out of that house forever. What's  a fellow going to do? You can never tell whether a girl is really  sore or whether she is stalling. A girl might be for a fellow  strong, and yet she wouldn't admit it for a thousand dollars.  There may be some things I wouldn't admit for a thousand, but I  don't just recall them at the present time. It only goes to show  that things are not always what they seem. Many a girl wears a  sailor hat who doesn't own a yacht. 

Just to show you what a chance a man has nowadays: The other  night I went out to see a certain girl. Won't mention any names.  Never do, sober. She made what she called a Robert E. Lee punch  out of apple brandy and stuff. Well, sir, after I had hit three  Robert E. Lees, I could see waving green fields and fruit-laden  orchards, and kind-faced old cows standing in silvery streams of  water. I couldn't remember of owing a cent, and the drawing-room  lamp looked like a flood of golden sunshine. Jim, I have never  been against the pipe, because I'm too young, but if it beats the  Robert E. Lee punch, I'll have to go after it. I took one more  dipper of Robert E. Lee, and then I decided that any girl who  could make that kind of a mix could have me for better or for  worse; and if I didn't propose right there I'll eat your hat.  I told her that I had loved her madly for months, but had never  found the courage to say so till that night. I also mentioned  the fact that even if she was very small and I was large, and  even if the people in the church would say we looked like Rhode  Island and Texas marching out together, that it made no difference  where true love was concerned. I finished it all up with a look  that would have melted the heart of a bank dealer. My work must  have been a little to the sandpaper, or I may have backed up  kind of foolish like, or something. Whatever it was, she answered,  "Billy, your brother's hair is a good deal darker than yours,  isn't it?" Now, what do you think of that frosty-hearted fairy?  Literally forced me to drink that punch, gets me ripened up, and  then throws the hooks into me. As a love-maker I guess I am a  shine. Jim, have you ever gone home late at night and told yourself  in front of the mirror how you loved some girl? and have you ever  seen that same girl walking along the street the next day with  another fellow, and the instant you discovered them, did a great  big lump come into your breast? And did you immediately think of  a lot of things about the fellow you didn't like, although  previously you had rather admired him? Well, that thing you get  in your breast is what we experts call the love lump, and you were  placing yourself in a position to later on become a kind of Patsy  to that girl.

Isn't that love lump all the money, though? It makes a well-developed  case of indigestion look like a sunny summer day. When you come to  figure it all over, there's nothing to that jealousy thing. I used  to be Billy Brighteyes, and sneak out to my regular's home, thinking  that perhaps I would catch some one else there. What do I do now?  Why, I telephone that I will be out in thirty minutes. What you  don't know won't hurt you.

Jim, what has ever become of that girl you were so crazy about  a couple of years ago? I guess maybe she didn't put a dent into  your heart that a person could drive a four-in-hand into and never  touch the sides, a regular Hoosac Tunnel. Then when she had you  all ribbed up and done to a turn, she said, "I love Mr. Hawkins  and Mr. Hawkins loves me. Good by, Jim; take care of yourself."  You couldn't have gotten a better jolt on the B. & 0. You will  pardon my suppressed merriment, but that girl certainly made you  look like a trailer. Never mind, Jim, old pal, we have all had a  crimp put into us at one time or another, and if you work hard and  observe good hours you'll get over it in four or five years. It's  nothing at all.

I have often thought I would land a girl with coin, blow business,  and sit around for a while. It would be great to have your own  hearthstone with a couple of registered St. Bernard's lying around,  and here and there a golden-haired darling romping and playing  with a bottle of paregoric. But somehow or other I always fall  down. Now, take that Katherine Clark, who has been visiting the  Hemingways for the past month. When she first came I said to  myself, "Billy, my boy, here's your chance; break in and cop out  an heiress." So I sicked myself on to her. Well, you know I'm  not a piker. I went after her right. Eats, drinks, shows, and  all the expensive things. I touched Johnny Black's brother-in-law  for fifty, and gave an informal luncheon that was a pippin. I  wore my New York Central shirt with the four stripes, and we had  wine with cobwebs. There wasn't a thing served that any one could  pronounce, and Johnny Black got loaded and told us on the quiet  why his sister had left her husband. I insulted Johnny by making  some remark about his joining the Tell Club, and altogether  everything was a big success. The check came to $44.60, and I  flashed Johnny's brother-in-law's fifty. When the waiter brought  the five-forty change I waved him away as though the Standard Oil  Company was the smallest thing I owned. The tip was out that old  man Clark was black with money, and if it's so I know why. He is  tight-ribbed and popcorn. Down in George's Place the other day  I asked the old man what he was going to drink, and he said he  would rather have the money. And say, he gave me a cigar that  looked as though it had some skin trouble, and smelled like some  one was shoeing a horse. However, a fellow doesn't always have  to live with the bride's parents. Jim, this girl was a dream.  Tailor-made, cloak-model form, city-broke, kind, and sound. She  could just naturally beat the works out of a piano; and talk about  your swell valves. Why, the other night she sang "A Sailor's Life's  the Life for Me" so realistically that Johnny Black got seasick.  Well, to make a long story short, this morning I got an invitation  to Katherine Clark's wedding. Jim, did you ever have a fellow  come up behind you and smear you back of the ear when you weren't  looking? Well, that's exactly how that invitation felt. She is  going to marry some lobster out in St. Louis, and I'll bet he is  a pup, and is marrying her for her money. I figured it up on the  back of the invitation, and that lady sent me along for just two  hundred and ten dollars, not counting what I owe Johnny Black's  brother-in-law; and the best I get is a "come to the church." Of  course you will say I'm stung again, and that some one should  lead me out to the end of the Chicago Crib and push me into the  lake, and all that sort of rot; but hang it all, Jim, if I could  get that girl I would take her if she didn't have a cent. I guess  I'll light my p1pe. 

Yours as ever,

Billy.

P. S.--"Good by, Jim; take care of yourself."


More Horse Sense Have you ever sat on the edge of the bed in the morning with  your elbows on your knees, your head buried in your hands, and  wondered if there was anything you overlooked the night before  that would have made you feel worse? Among the more polite, this  feeling is spoken of as the realization of indiscretion in diet;  but we plain people call it old Colonel R. E. Morse. There are  lots of things that will give you a Colonel, but a R--R--S-- is  the only thing that will make you feel like a person with a future  instead of a person with a past. You must cleanse your liver, and  that's all there is to it. Here's the proposition: Say there were  two glasses of aperient water standing on a table. One was muddy- looking, bad-tasting, warm, and flat, and wouldn't touch your  liver. The other was clear, pleasant-tasting, cold, and sparkling,  and acted instantly upon your liver. Which would you take? Inasmuch  as our circulation is confined entirely to the most intelligent,  all we ask is, that you give this proposition one moment of your  thought. The immense sale of R--R--S-- proves beyond a doubt that  the American people are thoroughly disgusted with vile-tasting  foreign bitter waters, and were merely awaiting the advent of  something new and sparkling, like R--R--.



IN NEW YORK

Preface

"In New York" is the last of the Baxter Letters for the present.  We think it well to stop before we get bad. We make but one claim  for distinction--the largest circulation America has ever seen  or heard of. The people, up to date, have actually demanded over  three and a half million copies, or nearly five car-loads of our  little books, and there is no telling where it will stop. We have  Robinson Crusoe backed clear off his island, and Uncle Tom's Cabin  burned to the ground. Still it would have been a different story  had we asked a dollar apiece for our books; so we are not so much  after all.


In New York

Pittsburg, Pa., August 1, 1899.

Dear Jim:

Just got back from New York this morning. Bud Hathaway stopped  off here on his way from Chicago, and coaxed Johnny Black and me  to go over East with him. We went, and a pretty mess we made of  it. Bud is sore on both of us, I got touched for ninety, and  Johnny is lost.

Nothing of interest occurred going over on the train, excepting  that when I turned in I took off my trousers without spilling my  money all over the Pullman floor. This is done by sewing the human  pocket shut. We landed at Twenty-third Street, in good shape, early  in the morning of the day before yesterday. When we reached the  Pennsylvania cab-stand some one had taken the hansom, so we had to  hire a carriage. They are building another hansom, and then there  will be plenty of hansoms for all. At the hotel Johnny claimed I  had a drag because I drew a room with a window in it. Breakfast  was hardly over until Bud, without consulting us at all, commenced  arrangements for giving a swell dinner to a couple of heiresses  who lived on Eighteenth Street and who were worth eight millions,  or who lived in Eighth Street and were worth eighty millions--  Johnny and I didn't know which. Bud gave us a lot of hot air about  his mother's cousin standing fifteen balls in the New York Four,  and how that made him a nonresident member, and if we did just  as he said, he would put us in right. He told us that there were  thousands of people right in New York City, any one of whom would  give a cool million for our opportunity. Johnny immediately began  to figure, on how he would treat certain people over in Pittsburg  who had given him the eye in bygone days; and I got so struck on  myself that I cut the head waiter dead, although I had known him  intimately for years. Along about 11 A.M. the deal went through  by 'phone for seven o'clock that evening. Bud went to get shaved,  and Johnny and I retired to the bar to wait until it was time to  get ready for the dinner.

Well, sir, I never met so many people in all my life as we met  in that bar. There was a wine agent whom everybody called Dick,  and I'm for Dick. He sapped up all kinds of booze except wine,  like four dollars' worth of blue blotters, and every time he took  a drink he raised his salary a thousand dollars a year. Once I  weakened, and went outside and watched the hotel lobby go around  for a while. When I returned, Johnny Black, Dick the wine agent,  and a large red-faced man who looked as though he had helped to  make Milwaukee famous, and who said he was from K. C., Mizzoo,  were doing some close harmony that was great. The three of them  were bunched with their arms resting on each others' shoulders,  singing "She May Have Seen Better Days," and the way they all  looked up toward heaven was something pathetic. Whenever they  came to a barber-shop minor they would hold it for a full minute,  and then they would all stop and tell each other how good they  were. Suddenly a fellow rushed in through the street door and  breathlessly exclaimed: "My goodness gracious, sakes alive! the  undertow almost carried me beyond the bar." The newcomer still  wore his dress suit from the evening before, and his shirt front  was all spattered with egg. He was promptly named "His Chickens."  His Chickens did a trick with a wine glass and a half-dollar, and  finally succeeded in cutting a gash in his wrist an inch long.  Johnny Black, who was rapidly becoming normal, remarked that His  Chickens was the village cut-up. I laughed so loud at Johnny's  shine joke that the manager of the hotel called me, and the whole  tribe got insulted and told the man his place was no good anyhow.

We started out, and the first thing we did was to strike one of  those foolish cabs. We made a bargain for a dollar and a half  the first hour and a dollar each succeeding hour, and then we  fell in and told the pilot to take us all over New York. He said  he would, and from the way I feel, he did. K. C. started an awful  argument in one place by declaring that a straight should beat a  flush because there were only eight chances to fill a straight,  while with a flush there were nine. I never figured it out before,  but K. C. is right.

In another place we met a Philadelphia-looking sort of a fellow  with a soft hat, a Prince Albert coat with narrow braid on it,  and a couple of those little bow-legged dogs with the long ears  and their stomachs away down on the ground. They call them Dasch  hounds, or something, and I can't for the life of me see what  anybody would want with such fool-looking dogs. They look as  though they had been born under a bureau or in a New York hotel  room, where you have to close the folding bed to find your clothes,  or in the Boston baseball grounds. The dog man said he used to know  a George Black years ago in Johnstown, Pa., who was a puddler in  the mills there. Johnny answered, "That's my father. He is manager  of those mills now, and what's more, he can lick any man in Cambria  County, just the same as I can lick any man in New York City." The  last was announced in a tone sufficiently loud to be heard all over  the place. Jim, I got it four times just from the overflow. Now,  you know merely because Johnny's father can lick any man in Cambria  County, is that any reason why I should land out in the middle of  the car track? Not at all.

Along about ten in the evening Bud wanted to keep the seven-o'clock- dinner date with the heiresses, but the rest of the gang were too  busy. We blew into one of those concert halls over on Eighth Avenue  where they have sand on the floor, red-white-and-blue tissue paper  around the edge of the ceiling, no programme because it costs too  much, and a bum piano for an orchestra. The Professor wore no coat,  but he certainly knew his way around the ivories. A sad-looking,  thin guy, with a four days' growth and a large near-diamond stud,  came out and announced that the next turn was the feature of the  evening--the winsome Sisters Montclair, who would sing a lovely  waltz ballad written expressly for them, entitled, "The Check  Was Forged--He Had Went Too Far." Johnny Black set 'em up to the  Professor right in the middle of the song, and the Professor bowed  his regards, blew the froth off his beer, drank it, and lit a  cigarette without losing a note. Immediately after the act the  Professor presented Miss Alice Montclair of the famous "Sisters  Montclair." Barring the fact that Miss Montclair had a mouth like  a cave, she wasn't a bad looker. Old K. C. gave what was intended  for a tender, loving look, and asked her if he could call her  Alice; then without waiting for an answer, passed into a Rip Van  Winkle that looked good for a hundred years.

We told the lady it was up to her, and she said she would take a  Brandy and soda. Brandy and soda being fifty a throw and beer five  a copy, we told her to behave, and ordered the waiter to back her up  a tub of suds, Texas size. I noticed Miss Montclair's handkerchief  was marked "Mary Burke." Probably some mistake on the part of the  laundry. Careless laundry! Alice told us what lovely people her  folks were; she said her father was mayor of his town, and if we  only knew her real name it would surprise us all. Johnny Black  started to guess it, but was interrupted by having to settle for  the last round His Chickens had ordered. It seems His Chickens  would madly order, and then when the waiter would kind of hang  around for the price, he would do the earnest conversation gag  until some one else had made good. Alice, who was now getting a  trifle weary, went on to tell us that the girl who appeared with  her was not her sister, and that the only reason she stood for her  at all was because she had once been good to her when she was sick.  All of a sudden old K. C., who had been leaning over farther and  farther, did a Brodie out of his chair and lit on his eye. We dug  him out of the sand and put him back where he belonged, and he  immediately departed into another dreamless but jumpy slumber. At  this juncture somebody sold Dick six tickets at a dollar per for a  ball that had been given over a month ago by the Varnish Makers'  Union, K. of L., No. 229. Upon learning that he had been bunked,  Dick became very dignified, and said he would remember the fellow  perfectly, and that the day would come when they would be brought  face to face.

We were all getting along great; everybody was calling Alice  by her first name, and Alice was saying, "I'll leave it to Bill  if it ain't right," and speaking of Manager Frohman as Charley,  when Johnny Black, the president of all the trouble-makers,  spoiled the whole business. It appears that Alice's eyelids were  slightly granulated. It was barely noticeable, and nobody but a  dog like Johnny would have mentioned such a thing. Anyway, Johnny  suggested that the lady's granulated eyelids were probably caused  by looking for a rise in "Sugar." Jim, you should have seen Alice  go up! Johnny certainly cut her weights fine and proper. Of course,  Johnny was batting under two hundred, but for some unknown reason  we all got the blue pencil. She called Johnny an illy bred, low-  born, undersized, cavery-faced Protestant pup. Johnny was so  excited he couldn't get back at all. He just sputtered and spit  and made motions with his mouth. It was grand and touching and  refined. I cut in and tried to square it, and the lady told me  I was a spangle-eyed big dub. I'll bet that's one of the worst  things a fellow can be. Dick was then told what he was, and he  put it down in a book, after which Alice finished it all up with  a flood of tears. The head waiter came up and said: "Look a here,  Mary, what ails you, anyway? You're getting so lately you turn  them tears on every night. Be a good fellow, and don't make a  lot of gents think we're running a morgue. You've blowed half  your make-up as it is." Mary, alias Alice, gave the head waiter  one withering look, and left the place. We started to move on,  but found it was impossible to bring old K. C. back. We pounded  him and yelled at him for ten minutes, but there wasn't a leaf  stirring, except once, when he came to long enough to remark that  he was sweating like a June bride. We finally took his watch and  all his money but two dollars, and left him like a dog. A fellow  is perfectly safe in New York without any money.

We then mounted our deep-sea-going cab, and told the skipper  we were for the eats. He took us to a big restaurant on upper  Sixth Avenue. We told the waiter to bring us everything that  was good. When the waiter returned with the knives and forks,  he also brought us some Dill pickles. I took a bite at one of  them, and she squirted and hit a fellow at the next table in the  eye. I guess a Dill pickle must smart right pert--however, I won't  bore you with any details. Jim, I can remember that just at the  start of it a waiter happened to be passing with a very large  order on his tray, and for a while the air was literally crowded  with oyster stews, Welsh rarebits, glasses, showers of booze,  frogs' legs, and everything that wasn't chained down. When the  smoke cleared away I was occupying my regular position in the  center of the car track. They wouldn't let me in again, and the  rest of the fellows were too hungry to come out; so there I was  "Alone in New York." The cabman then asked for his money for the  whole day. I told him that the lack of money was the least of my  troubles, and I went down after ninety dollars that I had pinned  in my trousers watch-pocket with a safety pin. Exit money. Whoever  got to me hadn't even left the safety pin. The cabman made some  remarks about taking it out of my hide, and I spent all of twenty  minutes proving to him that the rest of the bunch would settle when  they came out. I then walked all the way down to the hotel, alone  and hungry. In my whole life I never met such a quarrelsome lot  of people. You know yourself, Jim, that any one who can guess  when a Dill pickle is going to squirt is entitled to the barrel  of flour, or the gold-plated oil stove; and as far as that ninety  is concerned, I suppose I went in front of the City Hall and  presented it to somebody. I'll bet, all told, I've been in a  hundred scraps in New York, and have never won a battle. I'll  win out yet, if I have to go out and beat up a poor old apple-woman.

Say, Jim, the greatest game in New York is to walk into some hotel  Palm-room with a particularly swell girl and watch all the rest  of them get jealous. You know that Harper girl from Louisville?  Well, I showed her around New York a couple of months ago, and  she made them all look like a summer resort on a rainy day. When  we entered any of the big restaurants I would send her along ahead,  and I would trail to hear the cracks. It was grand to see them  rubber and hear the women say, "She isn't so much," or "My, isn't  she padded frightfully!" and hear the men say, "Gee! A dream," or  "Pipe, Dan, I guess she's perfectly miserable, eh?" I lost two or  three sets of studs that trip just from swelling up.

Well, I'm home, and here I am going to stay. Just on the quiet,  I never felt so bad in my life. I'm all sore and stiff from that  car-track habit, and talk about your jumps! Why, a minute ago I  was sitting as quiet as a lamb, when, without the slightest warning  I did a leap straight up into the air about four feet. I wonder what  causes that? Coming down to the office this morning somebody kept  calling me continually, and when I would look around there wouldn't  be a soul near, and I am all the time hearing bands of music, and  maybe I am not perspiring!

If I ever get over this, that narrow-path gag for your Uncle Bill  for a long time to come. When you get to throwing your money away  there is nothing doing. Far be it from me casting up, neither am I  a hard loser, but I certainly could use that ninety. Well, that'll  be about all.

Yours as ever,

Billy.

P. S.--Just received the following telegram from Johnny Black,  dated New York, 1:50 P. M.: "Old K. C. has just been sighted.  She's a little dismantled, but game. She's arranging for a  foolisher for a whole week, and I am going to stay with him.  Dick sends best. Chickens has a roll."

I wired Johnny as follows: "If you see a safety pin anywhere  around Chickens, that roll belongs to me."



JOHNNY BLACK'S GIRL

Pittsburg, Pa., July 1, 1899. 

Dear Jim:

I have something to tell you, and it's not necessary to stand  on the courthouse steps at high noon and do the human phonograph  act, as it's strictly under your bonnet. One evening about three  years ago, before Johnny and I had moved to our new flat, I had  turned in kind of early, as I had been to the Cabinet-Makers' Ball  at Turner's Hall the night before, and it had been a great success.  I was wakened by Johnny beating me and asking me to shake hands.  He was dancing around like a crazy man, and as soon as I fairly  got my eyes opened I guessed the cause. Little Nellie Morrison  had told him she loved him, and they were engaged. My! but Johnny  was happy and important. Well, sir, he just kept me up till two  o'clock, telling me all their plans. It wasn't very hard to do,  either, for although I tried to appear kind of careless, I was  as much excited as Johnny. It was just six months later that  poor little Nell was taken out dead from that big wreck over  East. Well, now comes the trouble. Johnny Black loves that little  girl just as much as he did the day she was brought back home.  So far as the boys are concerned, he has hidden it fairly well.  They think he is over it, but, Jim, he's getting worse. Last night  I came in about twelve, and there sat Johnny curled up in the big  chair you gave me last Christmas. He had cried himself to sleep,  and in his hand was a picture of Nell. There she was in a little  white dress, smiling up at him just as she used to before it all  happened. I leaned over and touched him as gently as I could, and  said, "Come on to bed, Johnny." He never answered a word. He placed  the picture in his pocket, and I led him off to his room. He didn't  speak until just before he put out his light, and then he said,  "You know, Bill, I used to tell her all my schemes, and she was  so kind, and how she did want to see me a success. You know how  things are coming, Bill, and I'd like to see her just a minute  and have her cuddle up and say, 'I knew my boy was all right.'"  What was I going to do? I don't know anything about consoling  people, so I just said, "Never mind, Johnny; you and I'll take  a trip and try to forget it." Jim, it's been over two years now,  and he loves her more than ever. What I want you to do is to write  him and tell him to take a rest. He can afford it easily enough.  Every time he looks at anything somebody gallops in and hands him  a check. Do this, will you Jim?

Yours as ever,

Billy.






End  