

Biographical Study of A. W. Kinglake

by Rev. W. Tcikwell



 PREFACE



IT is just eleven years since Kinglake passed away, and his life  has not yet been separately memorialized.  A few years more, and  the personal side of him would be irrecoverable, though by  personality, no less than by authorship, he made his contemporary  mark.  When a tomb has been closed for centuries, the effaced  lineaments of its tenant can be re-coloured only by the idealizing  hand of genius, as Scott drew Claverhouse, and Carlyle drew  Cromwell.  But, to the biographer of the lately dead, men have a  right to say, as Saul said to the Witch of Endor, "Call up Samuel!"   In your study of a life so recent as Kinglake's, give us, if you  choose, some critical synopsis of his monumental writings, some  salvage from his ephemeral and scattered papers; trace so much of  his youthful training as shaped the development of his character; 

depict, with wise restraint, his political and public life: but  also, and above all, re-clothe him "in his habit as he lived," as  friends and associates knew him; recover his traits of voice and  manner, his conversational wit or wisdom, epigram or paradox, his  explosions of sarcasm and his eccentricities of reserve, his words  of winningness and acts of kindness: and, since one half of his  life was social, introduce us to the companions who shared his  lighter hour and evoked his finer fancies; take us to the Athenaeum  "Corner," or to Holland House, and flash on us at least a glimpse  of the brilliant men and women who formed the setting to his  sparkle; "DIC IN AMICITIAM COEANT ET FOEDERA JUNGANT."

This I have endeavoured to do, with such aid as I could command  from his few remaining contemporaries.  His letters to his family  were destroyed by his own desire; on those written to Madame  Novikoff no such embargo was laid, nor does she believe that it was  intended.  I have used these sparingly, and all extracts from them  have been subjected to her censorship.  If the result is not Attic  in salt, it is at any rate Roman in brevity.  I send it forth with  John Bunyan's homely aspiration:


And may its buyer have no cause to say, His money is but lost or thrown away.



CHAPTER I - EARLY YEARS



THE fourth decade of the deceased century dawned on a procession of  Oriental pilgrims, variously qualified or disqualified to hold the  gorgeous East in fee, who, with BAKSHISH in their purses, a theory  in their brains, an unfilled diary-book in their portmanteaus,  sought out the Holy Land, the Sinai peninsula, the valley of the  Nile, sometimes even Armenia and the Monte Santo, and returned home  to emit their illustrated and mapped octavos.  We have the type  delineated admiringly in Miss Yonge's "Heartsease," (1) bitterly in  Miss Skene's "Use and Abuse," facetiously in the Clarence Bulbul of  "Our Street."  "Hang it! has not everybody written an Eastern book?   I should like to meet anybody in society now who has not been up to  the Second Cataract.  My Lord Castleroyal has done one - an honest  one; my Lord Youngent another - an amusing one; my Lord Woolsey  another - a pious one; there is the 'Cutlet and the Cabob' - a  sentimental one; Timbuctoothen - a humorous one."  Lord Carlisle's  honesty, Lord Nugent's fun, Lord Lindsay's piety, failed to float  their books.  Miss Martineau, clear, frank, unemotional Curzon,  fuddling the Levantine monks with rosoglio that he might fleece  them of their treasured hereditary manuscripts, even Eliot  Warburton's power, colouring, play of fancy, have yielded to the  mobility of Time.  Two alone out of the gallant company maintain  their vogue to-day: Stanley's "Sinai and Palestine," as a Fifth  Gospel, an inspired Scripture Gazetteer; and "Eothen," as a  literary gem of purest ray serene.

In 1898 a reprint of the first edition was given to the public,  prefaced by a brief eulogium of the book and a slight notice of the  author.  It brought to the writer of the "Introduction" not only  kind and indulgent criticism, but valuable corrections, fresh  facts, clues to further knowledge.  These last have been carefully  followed out.  The unwary statement that Kinglake never spoke after  his first failure in the House has been atoned by a careful study  of all his speeches in and out of Parliament.  His reviews in the  "Quarterly" and elsewhere have been noted; impressions of his  manner and appearance at different periods of his life have been  recovered from coaeval acquaintances; his friend Hayward's Letters,  the numerous allusions in Lord Houghton's Life, Mrs. Crosse's  lively chapters in "Red Letter Days of my Life," Lady Gregory's  interesting recollections of the Athenaeum Club in Blackwood of  December, 1895, the somewhat slender notice in the "Dictionary of  National Biography," have all been carefully digested.  From these,  and, as will be seen, from other sources, the present Memoir has  been compiled; an endeavour - SERA TAMEN - to lay before the  countless readers and admirers of his books a fairly adequate  appreciation, hitherto unattempted, of their author.

I have to acknowledge the great kindness of Canon William  Warburton, who examined his brother Eliot's diaries on my behalf,  obtained information from Dean Boyle and Sir M. Grant Duff, cleared  up for me not a few obscure allusions in the "Eothen" pages.  My  highly valued friend, Mrs. Hamilton Kinglake, of Taunton, his  sister-in-law, last surviving relative of his own generation, has  helped me with facts which no one else could have recalled.  To Mr.  Estcott, his old acquaintance and Somersetshire neighbour, I am  indebted for recollections manifold and interesting; but above all  I tender thanks to Madame Novikoff, his intimate associate and  correspondent during the last twenty years of his life, who has  supplemented her brilliant sketch of him in "La Nouvelle Revue" of  1896 by oral and written information lavish in quantity and of  paramount biographical value.  Kinglake's external life, his  literary and political career, his speeches, and the more fugitive  productions of his pen, were recoverable from public sources; but  his personal and private side, as it showed itself to the few close  intimates who still survive, must have remained to myself and  others meagre, superficial, disappointing, without Madame  Novikoff's unreserved and sympathetic confidence.


Alexander William Kinglake was descended from an old Scottish  stock, the Kinlochs, who migrated to England with King James, and  whose name was Anglicized into Kinglake.  Later on we find them  settled on a considerable estate of their own at Saltmoor, near  Borobridge, whence towards the close of the eighteenth century two  brothers, moving southward, made their home in Taunton - Robert as  a physician, William as a solicitor and banker.  Both were of high  repute, both begat famous sons.  From Robert sprang the eminent  Parliamentary lawyer, Serjeant John Kinglake, at one time a  contemporary with Cockburn and Crowder on the Western Circuit, and  William Chapman Kinglake, who while at Trinity, Cambridge, won the  Latin verse prize, "Salix Babylonica," the English verse prizes on  "Byzantium" and the "Taking of Jerusalem," in 1830 and 1832.  Of  William's sons the eldest was Alexander William, author of  "Eothen," the youngest Hamilton, for many years one of the most  distinguished physicians in the West of England.  "Eothen," as he  came to be called, was born at Taunton on the 5th August, 1809, at  a house called "The Lawn."  His father, a sturdy Whig, died at the  age of ninety through injuries received in the hustings crowd of a  contested election.  His mother belonged to an old Somersetshire  family, the Woodfordes of Castle Cary.  She, too, lived to a great  age; a slight, neat figure in dainty dress, full of antique charm  and grace.  As a girl she had known Lady Hester Stanhope, who lived  with her grandmother, Lady Chatham, at Burton Pynsent, her own  father, Dr. Thomas Woodforde, being Lady Chatham's medical  attendant. (2)  The future prophetess of the Lebanon was then a  wild girl, scouring the countryside on bare-backed horses; she  showed great kindness to Mary Woodforde, afterwards Kinglake's  mother.  It was as his mother's son that she received him long  afterwards at Djoun.  To his mother Kinglake was passionately  attached; owed to her, as he tells us in "Eothen," his home in the  saddle and his love for Homer.  A tradition is preserved in the  family that on the day of her funeral, at a churchyard five miles  away, he was missed from the household group reassembled in the  mourning home; he was found to have ordered his horse, and galloped  back in the darkness to his mother's grave.  Forty years later he  writes to Alexander Knox: "The death of a mother has an almost  magical power of recalling the home of one's childhood, and the  almost separate world that rests upon affection."  Of his two  sisters, one was well read and agreeably talkative, noted by  Thackeray as the cleverest woman he had ever met; the other, Mrs.  Acton, was a delightful old ESPRIT FORT, as I knew her in the  sixties, "pagan, I regret to say," but not a little resembling her  brother in the point and manner of her wit.  The family moved in  his infancy to an old-fashioned handsome "Wilton House," adjoining  closely to the town, but standing amid spacious park-like grounds,  and inhabited in after years by Kinglake's younger brother  Hamilton, who succeeded his uncle in the medical profession, and  passed away, amid deep and universal regret, in 1898.  Here during  the thirties Sydney Smith was a frequent and a welcome visitor; it  was in answer to old Mrs. Kinglake that he uttered his audacious  MOT on being asked if he would object, as a neighbouring clergyman  had done, to bury a Dissenter: "Not bury Dissenters?  I should like  to be burying them all day!"

Taunton was an innutrient foster-mother, ARIDA NUTRIX, for such  young lions as the Kinglake brood.  Two hundred years before it had  been a prosperous and famous place, its woollen and kersey trades,  with the population they supported, ranking it as eighth in order  among English towns.  Its inhabitants were then a gallant race,  republican in politics, Puritan in creed.  Twice besieged by Goring  and Lumford, it had twice repelled the Royalists with loss.  It was  the centre of Monmouth's rebellion and of Jeffrey's vengeance; the  suburb of Tangier, hard by its ancient castle, still recalls the  time when Colonel Kirke and his regiment of "Lambs" were quartered  in the town.  But long before the advent of the Kinglakes its glory  had departed; its manufactures had died out, its society become  Philistine and bourgeois - "little men who walk in narrow ways" -  while from pre-eminence in electoral venality among English  boroughs it was saved only by the near proximity of Bridgewater.  A  noted statesman who, at a later period, represented it in  Parliament, used to say that by only one family besides Dr.  Hamilton Kinglake's could he be received with any sense of social  or intellectual equality.

Not much, however, of Kinglake's time was given to his native town:  he was early sent to the Grammar School at Ottery St. Mary's, the  "Clavering" of "Pendennis," whose Dr. Wapshot was George Coleridge,  brother of the poet.  He was wont in after life to speak of this  time with bitterness; a delicate child, he was starved on  insufficient diet; and an eloquent passage in "Eothen" depicts his  intellectual fall from the varied interests and expanding  enthusiasm of liberal home teaching to the regulation gerund- grinding and Procrustean discipline of school.  "The dismal change  is ordained, and then - thin meagre Latin with small shreds and  patches of Greek, is thrown like a pauper's pall over all your  early lore; instead of sweet knowledge, vile, monkish, doggerel  grammars and graduses, dictionaries and lexicons, and horrible odds  and ends of dead languages are given you for your portion, and down  you fall, from Roman story to a three-inch scrap of 'Scriptores  Romani,' - from Greek poetry, down, down to the cold rations of  'Poetae Graeci,' cut up by commentators, and served out by school- masters!"

At Eton - under Keate, as all readers of "Eothen" know - he was  contemporary with Gladstone, Sir F. Hanmer, Lords Canning and  Dalhousie, Selwyn, Shadwell.  He wrote in the "Etonian," created  and edited by Mackworth Praed; and is mentioned in Praed's poem on  Surly Hall as


"Kinglake, dear to poetry, And dear to all his friends."


Dr. Gatty remembers his "determined pale face"; thinks that he made  his mark on the river rather than in the playing fields, being a  good oar and swimmer.  His great friend at school was Savile, the  "Methley" of his travels, who became successively Lord Pollington  and Earl of Mexborough.  The Homeric lore which Methley exhibited  in the Troad, is curiously illustrated by an Eton story, that in a  pugilistic encounter with Hoseason, afterwards an Indian Cavalry  officer, while the latter sate between the rounds upon his second's  knee, Savile strutted about the ring, spouting Homer.

Kinglake entered at Trinity, Cambridge, in 1828, among an  exceptionally brilliant set - Tennyson, Arthur Hallam, John  Sterling, Trench, Spedding, Spring Rice, Charles Buller, Maurice,  Monckton Milnes, J. M. Kemble, Brookfield, Thompson.  With none of  them does he seem in his undergraduate days to have been intimate.   Probably then, as afterwards, he shrank from CAMARADERIE, shared  Byron's distaste for "enthusymusy"; naturally cynical and self- contained, was repelled by the spiritual fervour, incessant logical  collision, aggressive tilting at abuses of those young "Apostles,"  already


"Yearning for the large excitement that the coming years would  yield, Eager-hearted as a boy when first he leaves his father's field,"


waxing ever daily, as Sterling exhorted, "in religion and  radicalism."  He saw life differently; more practically, if more  selfishly; to one rhapsodizing about the "plain living and high  thinking" of Wordsworth's sonnet, he answered: "You know that you  prefer dining with people who have good glass and china and plenty  of servants."  For Tennyson's poetry he even then felt admiration;  quotes, nay, misquotes, in "Eothen," from the little known  "Timbuctoo"; (3) and from "Locksley Hall"; and supplied long  afterwards an incident adopted by Tennyson in "Enoch Arden,"


"Once likewise in the ringing of his ears Though faintly, merrily - far and far away - He heard the pealing of his parish bells," (4)


from his own experience in the desert, when on a Sunday, amid  overpowering heat and stillness, he heard the Marlen bells of  Taunton peal for morning church. (5)

In whatever set he may have lived he made his mark at Cambridge.   Lord Houghton remembered him as an orator at the Union; and  speaking to Cambridge undergraduates fifty years later, after  enumerating the giants of his student days, Macaulay, Praed,  Buller, Sterling, Merivale, he goes on to say: "there, too, were  Kemble and Kinglake, the historian of our earliest civilization and  of our latest war; Kemble as interesting an individual as ever was  portrayed by the dramatic genius of his own race; Kinglake, as bold  a man-at-arms in literature as ever confronted public opinion."  We  know, too, that not many years after leaving Cambridge he received,  and refused, a solicitation to stand as Liberal representative of  the University in Parliament.  He was, in fact, as far as any of  his contemporaries from acquiescing in social conventionalisms and  shams.  To the end of his life he chafed at such restraint: "when  pressed to stay in country houses," he writes in 1872, "I have had  the frankness to say that I have not discipline enough."   Repeatedly he speaks with loathing of the "stale civilization," the  "utter respectability," of European life; (6) longed with all his  soul for the excitement and stir of soldiership, from which his  shortsightedness debarred him; (7) rushed off again and again into  foreign travel; set out immediately on leaving Cambridge, in 1834,  for his first Eastern tour, "to fortify himself for the business of  life."  Methley joined him at Hamburg, and they travelled by  Berlin, Dresden, Prague, Vienna, to Semlin, where his book begins.   Lord Pollington's health broke down, and he remained to winter at  Corfu, while Kinglake pursued his way alone, returning to England  in October, 1835. (8)  On his return he read for the Chancery Bar  along with his friend Eliot Warburton, under Bryan Procter, a  Commissioner of Lunacy, better known by his poet-name, Barry  Cornwall; his acquaintance with both husband and wife ripening into  lifelong friendship.  Mrs. Procter is the "Lady of Bitterness,"  cited in the "Eothen" Preface.  As Anne Skepper, before her  marriage, she was much admired by Carlyle; "a brisk witty prettyish  clear eyed sharp tongued young lady"; and was the intimate, among  many, especially of Thackeray and Browning.  In epigrammatic power  she resembled Kinglake; but while his acrid sayings were emitted  with gentlest aspect and with softest speech; while, like Byron's  Lambro:


"he was the mildest mannered man That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat, With such true breeding of a gentleman, You never could divine his real thought,"


her sarcasms rang out with a resonant clearness that enforced and  aggravated their severity.  That two persons so strongly resembling  each other in capacity for rival exhibition, or for mutual  exasperation, should have maintained so firm a friendship, often  surprised their acquaintance; she explained it by saying that she  and Kinglake sharpened one another like two knives; that, in the  words of Petruchio,


"Where two raging fires meet together, They do consume the thing that feeds their fury."


Crabb Robinson, stung by her in a tender place, his boastful  iterative monologues on Weimar and on Goethe, said that of all men  Procter ought to escape purgatory after death, having tasted its  fulness here through living so many years with Mrs. Procter; "the  husbands of the talkative have great reward hereafter," said  Rudyard Kipling's Lama.  And I have been told by those who knew the  pair that there was truth as well as irritation in the taunt.  "A  graceful Preface to 'Eothen,'" wrote to me a now famous lady who as  a girl had known Mrs. Procter well, "made friendly company  yesterday to a lonely meal, and brought back memories of Mr.  Kinglake's kind spoiling of a raw young woman, and of the wit, the  egregious vanity, the coarseness, the kindness, of that hard old  worldling our Lady of Bitterness."  In the presence of one man,  Tennyson, she laid aside her shrewishness: "talking with Alfred  Tennyson lifts me out of the earth earthy; a visit to Farringford  is like a retreat to the religious."  A celebrity in London for  fifty years, she died, witty and vigorous to the last, in 1888.   "You and I and Mr. Kinglake," she says to Lord Houghton, "are all  that are left of the goodly band that used to come to St. John's  Wood; Eliot Warburton, Motley, Adelaide, Count de Verg, Chorley,  Sir Edwin Landseer, my husband."  "I never could write a book," she  tells him in another letter, "and one strong reason for not doing  so was the idea of some few seeing how poor it was.  Venables was  one of the few; I need not say that you were one, and Kinglake."

Kinglake was called to the Chancery Bar, and practised apparently  with no great success.  He believed that his reputation as a writer  stood in his way.  When, in 1845, poor Hood's friends were helping  him by gratuitous articles in his magazine, "Hood's Own," Kinglake  wrote to Monckton Milnes refusing to contribute.  He will send 10  pounds to buy an article from some competent writer, but will not  himself write.  "It would be seriously injurious to me if the  author of 'Eothen' were AFFICHED as contributing to a magazine.  My  frailty in publishing a book has, I fear, already hurt me in my  profession, and a small sin of this kind would bring on me still  deeper disgrace with the solicitors."

Twice at least in these early years he travelled.  "Mr. Kinglake,"  writes Mrs. Procter in 1843, "is in Switzerland, reading Rousseau."   And in the following year we hear of him in Algeria, accompanying  St. Arnaud in his campaign against the Arabs.  The mingled interest  and horror inspired in him by this extra-ordinary man finds  expression in his "Invasion of the Crimea" (ii. 157).  A few, a  very few survivors, still remember his appearance and manners in  the forties.  The eminent husband of a lady, now passed away, who  in her lifetime gave Sunday dinners at which Kinglake was always  present, speaks of him as SENSITIVE, quiet in the presence of noisy  people, of Brookfield and the overpowering Bernal Osborne; liking  their company, but never saying anything worthy of remembrance.  A  popular old statesman, still active in the House of Commons,  recalls meeting him at Palmerston, Lord Harrington's seat, where  was assembled a party in honour of Madame Guiccioli and her second  husband, the Marquis de Boissy, and tells me that he attached  himself to ladies, not to gentlemen, nor ever joined in general  tattle.  Like many other famous men, he passed through a period of  shyness, which yielded to women's tactfulness only.  From the first  they appreciated him; "if you were as gentle as your friend  Kinglake," writes Mrs. Norton reproachfully to Hayward in the  sulks.  Another coaeval of those days calls him handsome - an  epithet I should hardly apply to him later - slight, not tall,  sharp featured, with dark hair well tended, always modishly dressed  after the fashion of the thirties, the fashion of Bulwer's  exquisites, or of H. K. Browne's "Nicholas Nickleby" illustrations;  leaving on all who saw him an impression of great personal  distinction, yet with an air of youthful ABANDON which never quite  left him: "He was pale, small, and delicate in appearance," says  Mrs. Simpson, Nassau Senior's daughter, who knew him to the end of  his life; while Mrs. Andrew Crosse, his friend in the Crimean  decade, cites his finely chiselled features and intellectual brow,  "a complexion bloodless with the pallor not of ill-health, but of  an old Greek bust."



CHAPTER II - "EOTHEN"



"EOTHEN" appeared in 1844.  Twice, Kinglake tells us, he had  essayed the story of his travels, twice abandoned it under a sense  of strong disinclination to write.  A third attempt was induced by  an entreaty from his friend Eliot Warburton, himself projecting an  Eastern tour; and to Warburton in a characteristic preface the  narrative is addressed.  The book, when finished, went the round of  the London market without finding a publisher.  It was offered to  John Murray, who cited his refusal of it as the great blunder of  his professional life, consoling himself with the thought that his  father had equally lacked foresight thirty years before in  declining the "Rejected Addresses"; he secured the copyright later  on.  It was published in the end by a personal friend, Ollivier, of  Pall Mall, Kinglake paying 50 pounds to cover risk of loss; even  worse terms than were obtained by Warburton two years afterwards  from Colburn, who owned in the fifties to having cleared 6,000  pounds by "The Crescent and the Cross."  The volume was an octavo  of 418 pages; the curious folding-plate which forms the  frontispiece was drawn and coloured by the author, and was compared  by the critics to a tea-tray.  In front is Moostapha the Tatar; the  two foremost figures in the rear stand for accomplished Mysseri,  whom Kinglake was delighted to recognize long afterwards as a  flourishing hotel keeper in Constantinople, and Steel, the  Yorkshire servant, in his striped pantry jacket, "looking out for  gentlemen's seats."  Behind are "Methley," Lord Pollington, in a  broad-brimmed hat, and the booted leg of Kinglake, who modestly hid  his figure by a tree, but exposed his foot, of which he was very  proud.  Of the other characters, "Our Lady of Bitterness" was Mrs.  Procter, "Carrigaholt" was Henry Stuart Burton of Carrigaholt,  County Clare.  Here and there are allusions, obvious at the time,  now needing a scholiast, which have not in any of the reprints been  explained.  In their ride through the Balkans they talked of old  Eton days.  "We bullied Keate, and scoffed at Larrey Miller and  Okes; we rode along loudly laughing, and talked to the grave  Servian forest as though it were the Brocas clump." (9)  Keate  requires no interpreter; Okes was an Eton tutor, afterwards Provost  of King's.  Larrey or Laurie Miller was an old tailor in Keate's  Lane who used to sit on his open shop-board, facing the street, a  mark for the compliments of passing boys; as frolicsome youngsters  in the days of Addison and Steele, as High School lads in the days  of Walter Scott, were accustomed to "smoke the cobler."  The Brocas  was a meadow sacred to badger-baiting and cat-hunts.  The badgers  were kept by a certain Jemmy Flowers, who charged sixpence for each  "draw"; Puss was turned out of a bag and chased by dogs, her chance  being to reach and climb a group of trees near the river, known as  the "Brocas Clump."  Of the quotations, "a Yorkshireman  hippodamoio" (p. 35) is, I am told, an OBITER DICTUM of Sir Francis  Doyle.  "Striving to attain," etc. (p. 33), is taken not quite  correctly from Tennyson's "Timbuctoo."  Our crew were "a solemn  company" (p. 57) is probably a reminiscence of "we were a gallant  company" in "The Siege of Corinth."  For "'the own armchair' of our  Lyrist's 'Sweet Lady'" Anne'" (p. 161) see the poem, "My own arm- chair" in Barry Cornwall's "English Lyrics."  "Proud Marie of  Anjou" (p. 96) and "single-sin - " (p.  121), are unintelligible; a  friend once asked Kinglake to explain the former, but received for  answer, "Oh! that is a private thing."  It may, however, have been  a pet name for little Marie de Viry, Procter's niece, and the CHERE  AMIE of his verse, whom Eothen must have met often at his friend's  house.  The St. Simonians of p. 83 were the disciples of Comte de  St. Simon, a Parisian reformer in the latter part of the eighteenth  century, who endeavoured to establish a social republic based on  capacity and labour.  Pere Enfantin was his disciple.  The "mystic  mother" was a female Messiah, expected to become the parent of a  new Saviour.  "Sir Robert once said a good thing" (p. 93), refers  possibly to Sir Robert Peel, not famous for epigram, whose one good  thing is said to have been bestowed upon a friend before Croker's  portrait in the Academy.  "Wonderful likeness," said the friend,  "it gives the very quiver of the mouth."  "Yes," said Sir Robert,  "and the arrow coming out of it."  Or it may mean Sir Robert  Inglis, Peel's successor at Oxford, more noted for his genial  kindness and for the perpetual bouquet in his buttonhole at a date  when such ornaments were not worn, than for capacity to conceive  and say good things.  In some mischievous lines describing the  Oxford election where Inglis supplanted Peel, Macaulay wrote


"And then said all the Doctors sitting in the Divinity School, Not this man, but Sir Robert' - now Sir Robert was a fool."


But in the fifth and later editions Kinglake altered it to "Sir  John."

By a curious oversight in the first two editions (p. 41) JOVE was  made to gaze on Troy from Samothrace; it was rightly altered to  Neptune in the third; and "eagle eye of Jove" in the following  sentence was replaced by "dread Commoter of our globe."  The phrase  "a natural Chiffney-bit" (p. 109), I have found unintelligible to- day through lapse of time even to professional equestrians and  stable-keepers.  Samuel Chiffney, a famous rider and trainer, was  born in 1753, and won the Derby on Skyscraper in 1789.  He managed  the Prince of Wales's stud, was the subject of discreditable  insinuations, and was called before the Jockey Club.  Nothing was  proved against him, but in consequence of the FRACAS the Prince  severed his connection with the Club and sold his horses.  Chiffney  invented a bit named after him; a curb with two snaffles, which  gave a stronger bearing on the sides of a horse's mouth.  His rule  in racing was to keep a slack rein and to ride a waiting race, not  calling on his horse till near the end.  His son Samuel, who  followed him, observed the same plan; from its frequent success the  term "Chiffney rush" became proverbial.  In his ride through the  desert (p. 169) Kinglake speaks of his "native bells - the innocent  bells of Marlen, that never before sent forth their music beyond  the Blaygon hills."  Marlen bells is the local name for the fine  peal of St. Mary Magdalen, Taunton.  The Blaygon, more commonly  called the Blagdon Hills, run parallel with the Quantocks, and  between them lies the fertile Vale of Taunton Deane.  "Damascus,"  he says, on p. 245, "was safer than Oxford"; and adds a note on Mr.  Everett's degree which requires correction.  It is true that an  attempt was made to NON-PLACET Mr. Everett's honorary degree in the  Oxford Theatre in 1843 on the ground of his being a Unitarian; not  true that it succeeded.  It was a conspiracy by the young lions of  the Newmania, who had organized a formidable opposition to the  degree, and would have created a painful scene even if defeated.   But the Proctor of that year, Jelf, happened to be the most-hated  official of the century; and the furious groans of undergraduate  displeasure at his presence, continuing unabated for three-quarters  of an hour, compelled Wynter, the Vice-Chancellor, to break up the  Assembly, without recitation of the prizes, but not without  conferring the degrees in dumb show: unconscious Mr. Everett  smilingly took his place in red gown among the Doctors, the Vice- Chancellor asserting afterwards, what was true in the letter though  not in the spirit, that he did not hear the NON-PLACETS.  So while  Everett was obnoxious to the Puseyites, Jelf was obnoxious to the  undergraduates; the cannonade of the angry youngsters drowned the  odium of the theological malcontents; in the words of Bombastes:


"Another lion gave another roar, And the first lion thought the last a bore."


The popularity of "Eothen" is a paradox: it fascinates by violating  all the rules which convention assigns to viatic narrative.  It  traverses the most affecting regions of the world, and describes no  one of them: the Troad - and we get only his childish raptures over  Pope's "Homer's Iliad"; Stamboul - and he recounts the murderous  services rendered by the Golden Horn to the Assassin whose SERAIL,  palace, council chamber, it washes; Cairo - but the Plague shuts  out all other thoughts; Jerusalem - but Pilgrims have vulgarized  the Holy Sepulchre into a Bartholomew Fair.  He gives us  everywhere, not history, antiquities, geography, description,  statistics, but only KINGLAKE, only his own sensations, thoughts,  experiences.  We are told not what the desert looks like, but what  journeying in the desert feels like.  From morn till eve you sit  aloft upon your voyaging camel; the risen sun, still lenient on  your left, mounts vertical and dominant; you shroud head and face  in silk, your skin glows, shoulders ache, Arabs moan, and still  moves on the sighing camel with his disjointed awkward dual swing,  till the sun once more descending touches you on the right, your  veil is thrown aside, your tent is pitched, books, maps, cloaks,  toilet luxuries, litter your spread-out rugs, you feast on  scorching toast and "fragrant" (10) tea, sleep sound and long; then  again the tent is drawn, the comforts packed, civilization retires  from the spot she had for a single night annexed, and the Genius of  the Desert stalks in.

Herein, in these subjective chatty confidences, is part of the  spell he lays upon us: while we read we are IN the East: other  books, as Warburton says, tell us ABOUT the East, this is the East  itself.  And yet in his company we are always ENGLISHMEN in the  East: behind Servian, Egyptian, Syrian, desert realities, is a  background of English scenery, faint and unobtrusive yet persistent  and horizoning.  In the Danubian forest we talk of past school- days.  The Balkan plain suggests an English park, its trees planted  as if to shut out "some infernal fellow creature in the shape of a  new-made squire"; Jordan recalls the Thames; the Galilean Lake,  Windermere; the Via Dolorosa, Bond Street; the fresh toast of the  desert bivouac, an Eton breakfast; the hungry questing jackals are  the place-hunters of Bridgewater and Taunton; the Damascus gardens,  a neglected English manor from which the "family" has been long  abroad; in the fierce, dry desert air are heard the "Marlen" bells  of home, calling to morning prayer the prim congregation in far-off  St. Mary's parish.  And a not less potent factor in the charm is  the magician's self who wields it, shown through each passing  environment of the narrative; the shy, haughty, imperious Solitary,  "a sort of Byron in the desert," of cultured mind and eloquent  speech, headstrong and not always amiable, hiding sentiment with  cynicism, yet therefore irresistible all the more when he  condescends to endear himself by his confidence.  He meets the  Plague and its terrors like a gentleman, but shows us, through the  vicarious torments of the cowering Levantine that it was courage  and coolness, not insensibility, which bore him through it.  A foe  to marriage, compassionating Carrigaholt as doomed to travel  "Vetturini-wise," pitying the Dead Sea goatherd for his ugly wife,  revelling in the meek surrender of the three young men whom he sees  "led to the altar" in Suez, he is still the frank, susceptible,  gallant bachelor, observantly and critically studious of female  charms: of the magnificent yet formidable Smyrniotes, eyes, brow,  nostrils, throat, sweetly turned lips, alarming in their latent  capacity for fierceness, pride, passion, power: of the Moslem women  in Nablous, "so handsome that they could not keep up their  yashmaks:" of Cypriote witchery in hair, shoulder-slope,  tempestuous fold of robe.  He opines as he contemplates the plain,  clumsy Arab wives that the fine things we feel and say of women  apply only to the good-looking and the graceful: his memory wanders  off ever and again to the muslin sleeves and bodices and "sweet  chemisettes" in distant England.  In hands sensual and vulgar the  allusions might have been coarse, the dilatings unseemly; but the  "taste which is the feminine of genius," the self-respecting  gentleman-like instinct, innocent at once and playful, keeps the  voluptuary out of sight, teaches, as Imogen taught Iachimo, "the  wide difference 'twixt amorous and villainous."  Add to all these  elements of fascination the unbroken luxuriance of style; the easy  flow of casual epigram or negligent simile; - Greek holy days not  kept holy but "kept stupid"; the mule who "forgot that his rider  was a saint and remembered that he was a tailor"; the pilgrims  "transacting their salvation" at the Holy Sepulchre; the  frightened, wavering guard at Satalieh, not shrinking back or  running away, but "looking as if the pack were being shuffled,"  each man desirous to change places with his neighbour; the white  man's unresisting hand "passed round like a claret jug" by the  hospitable Arabs; the travellers dripping from a Balkan storm  compared to "men turned back by the Humane Society as being  incurably drowned."  Sometimes he breaks into a canter, as in the  first experience of a Moslem city, the rapturous escape from  respectability and civilization; the apostrophe to the Stamboul  sea; the glimpse of the Mysian Olympus; the burial of the poor dead  Greek; the Janus view of Orient and Occident from the Lebanon  watershed; the pathetic terror of Bedouins and camels on entering a  walled city; until, once more in the saddle, and winding through  the Taurus defiles, he saddens us by a first discordant note, the  note of sorrow that the entrancing tale is at an end.

Old times return to me as I handle the familiar pages.  To the  schoolboy six and fifty years ago arrives from home a birthday  gift, the bright green volume, with its showy paintings of the  impaled robbers and the Jordan passage; its bulky Tatar, towering  high above his scraggy steed, impressed in shining gold upon its  cover.  Read, borrowed, handed round, it is devoured and discussed  with fifth form critical presumption, the adventurous audacity  arresting, the literary charm not analyzed but felt, the vivid  personality of the old Etonian winged with public school  freemasonry.  Scarcely in the acquired insight of all the  intervening years could those who enjoyed it then more keenly  appreciate it to-day.  Transcendent gift of genius! to gladden  equally with selfsame words the reluctant inexperience of boyhood  and the fastidious judgment of maturity.  Delightful self- accountant reverence of author-craft! which wields full knowledge  of a shaddock-tainted world, yet presents no licence to the  prurient lad, reveals no trail to the suspicious moralist.



CHAPTER III - LITERARY AND PARLIAMENTARY LIFE



KINGLAKE returned from Algiers in 1844 to find himself famous both  in the literary and social world; for his book had gone through  three editions and was the universal theme.  Lockhart opened to him  the "Quarterly."  "Who is Eothen?" wrote Macvey Napier, editor of  the "Edinburgh," to Hayward: "I know he is a lawyer and highly  respectable; but I should like to know a little more of his  personal history: he is very clever but very peculiar."  Thackeray,  later on, expresses affectionate gratitude for his presence at the  "Lectures on English Humourists":- "it goes to a man's heart to  find amongst his friends such men as Kinglake and Venables,  Higgins, Rawlinson, Carlyle, Ashburton and Hallam, Milman,  Macaulay, Wilberforce, looking on kindly."  He dines out in all  directions, himself giving dinners at Long's Hotel.  "Did you ever  meet Kinglake at my rooms?" writes Monckton Milnes to MacCarthy:  "he has had immense success.  I now rather wish I had written his  book, WHICH I COULD HAVE DONE - AT LEAST NEARLY."  We are reminded  of Charles Lamb - "here's Wordsworth says he could have written  Hamlet, IF HE HAD HAD A MIND."  "A delightful Voltairean volume,"  Milnes elsewhere calls it.

"Eothen" was reviewed in the "Quarterly" by Eliot Warburton.   "Other books," he says, "contain facts and statistics about the  East; this book gives the East itself in vital actual reality.  Its  style is conversational; or the soliloquy rather of a man  convincing and amusing himself as he proceeds, without reverence  for others' faith, or lenity towards others' prejudices.  It is a  real book, not a sham; it equals Anastasius, rivals 'Vathek;' its  terseness, vigour, bold imagery, recall the grand style of Fuller  and of South, to which the author adds a spirit, freshness,  delicacy, all his own."  Kinglake, in turn, reviewed "The Crescent  and the Cross" in an article called "The French Lake."  From a  cordial notice of the book he passes to a history of French  ambition in the Levant.  It was Bonaparte's fixed idea to become an  Oriental conqueror - a second Alexander: Egypt in his grasp, he  would pass on to India.  He sought alliance against the English  with Tippoo Saib, and spent whole days stretched upon maps of Asia.   He was baffled, first at Aboukir, then at Acre; but the partition  of Turkey at Tilsit showed that he had not abandoned his design.   To have refrained from seizing Egypt after his withdrawal was a  political blunder on the part of England.

By far the most charming of Kinglake's articles was a paper on the  "Rights of Women," in the "Quarterly Review" of December, 1844.   Grouping together Monckton Milnes's "Palm Leaves," Mrs. Poole's  "Sketch of Egyptian Harems," Mrs. Ellis's "Women and Wives of  England," he produced a playful, lightly touched, yet sincerely  constructed sketch of woman's characteristics, seductions,  attainments; the extent and secret of her fascination and her  deeper influence; her defects, foibles, misconceptions.  He was  greatly vexed to learn that his criticism of "Palm Leaves" was  considered hostile, and begged Warburton to explain.  His praise,  he said, had been looked upon as irony, his bantering taken to  express bitterness.  Warburton added his own conviction that the  notice was tributary to Milnes's fame, and Milnes accepted the  explanation.  But the chief interest of this paper lies in the  beautiful passage which ends it.  "The world must go on its own  way, for all that we can say against it.  Beauty, though it beams  over the organization of a doll, will have its hour of empire; the  most torpid heiress will easily get herself married; but the wife  whose sweet nature can kindle worthy delights is she that brings to  her hearth a joyous, hopeful, ardent spirit, and that subtle power  whose sources we can hardly trace, but which yet so irradiates a  home that all who come near are filled and inspired by a deep sense  of womanly presence.  We best learn the unsuspected might of a  being like this when we try the weight of that sadness which hangs  like lead upon the room, the gallery, the stairs, where once her  footstep sounded, and now is heard no more.  It is not less the  energy than the grace and gentleness of this character that works  the enchantment.  Books can instruct, and books can exalt and  purify; beauty of face and beauty of form will come with bright  pictures and statues, and for the government of a household hired  menials will suffice; but fondness and hate, daring hopes, lively  fears, the lust of glory and the scorn of base deeds, sweet  charity, faithfulness, pride, and, chief over all, the impetuous  will, lending might and power to feeling:- these are the rib of the  man, and from these, deep veiled in the mystery of her very  loveliness, his true companion sprang.  A being thus ardent will  often go wrong in her strenuous course; will often alarm, sometimes  provoke; will now and then work mischief and even perhaps grievous  harm; but she will be our own Eve after all; the sweet-speaking  tempter whom heaven created to be the joy and the trouble of this  pleasing anxious existence; to shame us away from the hiding-places  of a slothful neutrality, and lead us abroad in the world, men  militant here on earth, enduring quiet, content with strife, and  looking for peace hereafter."  (11) Beautiful words indeed! how  came the author of a tribute so caressingly appreciative, so  eloquently sincere, to remain himself outside the gates of  Paradise? how could the pen which in the Crimean chapter on the  Holy Shrines traced so exquisitely the delicate fancifulness of  purest sexual love, perpetrate that elaborate sneer over the  bachelor obsequies of Carrigaholt - "the lowly grave, that is the  end of man's romantic hopes, has closed over all his rich fancies  and all his high aspirations: he is utterly married." (12)

"Gai, gai, mariez vous, Mettez vous dans la misere! Gai, gai, mariez vous, Mettez vous la corde au cou!" (13)


There is generally a good reason for prolonged celibacy, a reason  which the bachelor as generally does not betray: Kinglake remained  single, by his own account, because he had observed that women  always prefer other men to their own husbands.  Yet, although  unmarried, perhaps because unmarried, he heartily admired many  clever women; formed with them sedate but genuine friendships, the  L'AMOUR SANS AILES, sometimes called "Platonic" by persons who have  not read Plato; found in their illogical clear-sightedness, in  their [Greek word which cannot be reproduced], to use the master's  own untranslatable phrase, a titillating stimulus which he missed  in men.  He thought that the Church should ordain priestesses as  well as priests, the former to be the Egerias of men, as the latter  are the Pontiffs of women.  And Lady Gregory tells us, that when  attacked by gout, he wished for the solace of a lady doctor, and  wrote to one asking if gout were beyond her scope.  She answered:  "Dear Sir, - Gout is not beyond my scope, but men are."

In 1854 he accompanied Lord Raglan to the Crimea.  "I had heard,"  writes John Kenyon, "of Kinglake's chivalrous goings on.  We were  saying yesterday that though he might write a book, he was among  the last men to go that he might write a book.  He is wild about  matters military, if so calm a man is ever wild."  He had hoped to  go in an official position as non-combatant, but this was refused  by the authorities.  His friend, Lord Raglan, whose acquaintance he  had made while hunting with the Duke of Beaufort's hounds, took him  as his private guest.  Arrested for a time at Malta by an attack of  fever, he joined our army before hostilities began, rode with Lord  Raglan's staff at the Alma fight, likening the novel sensation to  the excitement of fox-hunting; and accompanied the chief in his  visit of tenderness to the wounded when the fight was over.   Throughout the campaign the two were much together, as we shall  notice more fully later on.  There are often slight but  unmistakable signs of Kinglake's presence as spectator and auditor  of Lord Raglan's deeds and words; (14) his affection and reverence  for the great general animate the whole; in outward composure and  latent strength the two men resembled each other closely.  The book  is, in fact, a history of Lord Raglan's share in the campaign;  begun in 1856 at the request of Lady Raglan, the narrative ends  when the "Caradoc" with the general's body on board steams out of  the bay, "Farewell" flying at her masthead, the Russian batteries,  with generous recognition, ceasing to fire till the ship was out of  sight.  "Lord Raglan is dead," said Kinglake as vol. viii. was sent  to press, "and my work is finished."

Ten years were to elapse before the opening volumes should appear;  and meanwhile he entered parliament for the borough of Bridgewater,  which had rejected him in 1852.  His colleague was Colonel Charles  J. Kemyss Tynte, member of a family which local influence and  lavish expenditure had secured in the representation of the town  for nearly forty years.  Catechized as to his political creed, he  answered: "I call myself an advanced Liberal; but I decline to go  into parliament as the pledged adherent of Lord Palmerston or any  other Liberal."  He adds, in response to a further question: "I am  believed to be the author of 'Eothen.'"  He broke down in his  maiden speech; but recovered himself in a later effort, and spoke,  not unfrequently, on subjects then important, now forgotten; on the  outrage of the "Charles et George"; the capture of the Sardinian  "Cagliari" by the Neapolitans on the high seas; our attitude  towards the Paris Congress of 1857; while in 1858 he led the revolt  against Lord Palmerston's proposal to amend the Conspiracy Laws in  deference to Louis Napoleon; in 1860 vigorously denounced the  annexation of Savoy and Nice; and in 1864 moved the amendment to  Mr. Disraeli's motion in the debate on the Address, which was  carried by 313 to 295.  His feeble voice and unimpressive manner  prevented him from becoming a power in the House; but his speeches  when read are full, fluent, and graceful; the late Sir Robert  Peel's remarkable harangue against the French Emperor in the course  of an earlier debate was taken, as he is said to have owned, mainly  from a speech by Kinglake, delivered so indistinctly that the  reporters failed to catch it, but audible to Sir Robert who sate  close beside him.

With his constituents he was more at ease and more effective.  His  seat for Bridgewater was challenged at a general election by Henry  Padwick, a hanger-on to Disraeli and a well-known bookmaker on the  turf, who, with an Irish Colonel Westbrook, tried to cajole the  electors and their wives by extravagant compliments to the town,  its neighbourhood, its denizens; a place celebrated, as Captain  Costigan said of Chatteris, "for its antiquitee, its hospitalitee,  the beautee of its women, the manly fidelitee, generositee, and  jovialitee of its men."  Kinglake met them on their own ground.  In  his flowery speeches the romance of Sinai and Palestine faded  before the glories of the little Somersetshire town.  What was the  Jordan by comparison with the Parrett?  Could Libanus or Anti- Libanus vie with the Mendip and the Quantock Hills?  The view  surveyed by Monmouth from St. Mary's Tower on the Eve of Sedgemoor  transcended all the panoramas which the Holy Land or Asia Minor  could present!  But his more serious orations were worthy of his  higher fame.  In the panic of 1858, when the address of the French  colonels to the Emperor, beseeching to be led against England, had  created serious alarm on this side the Channel, he went down to  Bridgewater to enlighten the West of England.  "Why," he asked, "do  we fear invasion?  The population of France is peaceful, the  'turnip-soup Jacques Bonhomme' is peaceful, the soldiers of the  line are peaceful.  Why are we anxious?  Because there sits in his  chamber at the Tuileries a solitary moody man.  He is deeply  interested in the science and the art of war; he told me once that  he was contemplating a history of all the great battles ever  fought.  He holds absolute control over vast resources both in men  and money; he has shown that he can attack successfully at a few  weeks' notice the greatest European military power: gout or  indigestion may at any moment convert him into an enemy of  ourselves.  Until France returns to parliamentary government this  danger is imminent and continual.  Our safety lies in our fleet,  and in that alone.  If for twenty-four hours only the Channel were  denuded of our ships in time of war with France, they would hurl  upon our shores a force we could not meet.  Such denudation must be  made impossible; our fleet so augmented and strengthened as to  provide impregnably at all times for home defence no less than for  foreign necessities.  Our danger, I repeat, lies in no hostility on  the part of the French army, in no ferocity on the part of the  French people, in no PRESENT unfriendliness on the part of the  French Emperor: it arises from the fact that a revolutionary  government exists in France, which has armed one man, under the  name of Emperor - Dictator rather, I should say - with a power so  colossal, that until such power is moderated, as all power ought to  be, no neighbour can be entirely safe."  This speech was reproduced  in "The Times."  Montalembert read it with admiration.  "Who," he  asked Sir M. E. Grant Duff, "who is Mr. Kinglake?"  "He is the  author of 'Eothen.'"  "And what is 'Eothen?'  I never heard of it."

He found great enjoyment in parliamentary life, but was in 1868  unseated on petition for bribery on the part of his agents.  Blue- books are not ordinarily light reading; but the Report of the  Commissioners appointed to inquire into the alleged corrupt  practices at Bridgewater is not only a model of terse and vigorous  composition, but to persons with a sense of humour, inclined to  view human irregularities and inconsistencies in a sportive rather  than an indignant light, it is a sustained and diverting comedy.   Of the constituency, both before and after the Reform Bill, three- fourths, the Commissioners artlessly inform us, sought and received  bribes; of the remainder, all but a few individuals negotiated and  gave the bribes.  So in every election, both sides bribed avowedly;  if a luckless Purity Candidate appeared, he was promptly informed  that "Mr. Most" would win the seat: highest bribes decided each  election, further bribes averted petitions.  When once a desperate  riot took place and the ringleaders were tried at Quarter Sessions,  the jury were bribed to acquit, in the teeth of the Chairman's  summing up.  At last, in 1868, the defeated candidate petitioned;  blue-book literature was enriched by a remarkable report, and the  borough was disfranchised.  Of course Kinglake had only himself to  thank; if a gentleman chooses to sit for a venal borough, and to  intrust his interests to a questionable agent, he must, in the  words of Mrs. Gamp, "take the consequences of sech a sitiwation."   The consequences to him were loss of his present seat, and  permanent exclusion from Parliament.

He was keenly mortified by his ostracism, speaking of himself ever  after as "a political corpse."  Thenceforward he gave his whole  energy to literary work, to occasional reviews, mainly to his  "Invasion of the Crimea."  In the "Edinburgh" I think he never  wrote, cordially disliking its then editor.  A fine notice in  "Blackwood" of Madame de Lafayette's life was from his pen.   Surveying the Revolutionary Terror, he points out that  Robespierre's opponents were in numbers overwhelmingly strong, but  lacked cohesion and leaders; while the Mountain, dominated by a  single will, was legally armed with power to kill, and went on  killing.  The Church played into Robespierre's hands by enforcing  Patience and Resignation as the highest Christian virtues,  confusing the idea of submission to Heaven with the idea of  submission to a scoundrel.  Had Hampden been a Papist he would have  paid ship-money.  He wrote also in "The Owl," a brilliant little  magazine edited by his friend Laurence Oliphant; a "Society  Journal," conducted by a set of clever well-to-do young bachelors  living in London, addressed like the "Pall Mall Gazette," in  "Pendennis," "to the higher circles of society, written by  gentlemen for gentlemen."  When the expenses of production were  paid, the balance was spent on a whitebait dinner at Greenwich, and  on offerings of flowers and jewellery to the lady guests invited.   It came to an end, leaving no successor equally brilliant, high- toned, wholesome; its collected numbers figure sometimes at a  formidable price in sales and catalogues. (15)

The first two volumes of his "Crimea" had appeared in 1863.  They  were awaited with eager expectation.  An elaborate history of the  war had been written by a Baron de Bazancourt, condemned as unfair  and unreliable by English statesmen, and severely handled in our  reviews.  So the wish was felt everywhere for some record less  ephemeral, which should render the tale historically, and  counteract Bazancourt's misstatements.  "I hear," wrote the Duke of  Newcastle, "that Kinglake has undertaken the task.  He has a noble  opportunity of producing a text-book for future history, but to  accomplish this it must be STOICALLY impartial."

The beauty of their style, the merciless portraiture of the Second  Empire, the unparalleled diorama of the Alma fight, combined to  gain for these first four-and-twenty chapters an immediate vogue as  emphatic and as widely spread as that which saluted the opening of  Macaulay's "History."  None of the later volumes, though highly  prized as battle narratives, quite came up to these.  The political  and military conclusions drawn provoked no small bitterness; his  cousin, Mrs. Serjeant Kinglake, used to say that she met sometimes  with almost affronting coldness in society at the time, under the  impression that she was A. W. Kinglake's wife.  Russians were,  perhaps unfairly, dissatisfied.  Todleben, who knew and loved  Kinglake well, pronounced the book a charming romance, not a  history of the war.  Individuals were aggrieved by its notice of  themselves or of their regiments; statesmen chafed under the  scientific analysis of their characters, or at the publication of  official letters which they had intended but not required to be  looked upon as confidential, and which the recipients had in all  innocence communicated to the historian.  Palmerstonians, accepting  with their chief the Man of December, were furious at the exposure  of his basenesses.  Lucas in "The Times" pronounced the work  perverse and mischievous; the "Westminster Review" branded it as  reactionary.  "The Quarterly," in an article ascribed to A. H.  Layard, condemned its style as laboured and artificial; as palling  from the sustained pomp and glitter of the language; as wearisome  from the constant strain after minute dissection; declaring it  further to be "in every sense of the word a mischievous book."   "Blackwood," less unfriendly, surrendered itself to the beauty of  the writing; "satire so studied, so polished, so remorseless, and  withal so diabolically entertaining, that we know not where in  modern literature to seek such another philippic."

Reeve, editor of the "Edinburgh," wished Lord Clarendon to attack  the book; he refused, but offered help, and the resulting article  was due to the collaboration of the pair.  It caused a prolonged  coolness between Reeve and Kinglake, who at last ended the quarrel  by a characteristic letter: "I observed yesterday that my malice,  founded perhaps upon a couple of words, and now of three years'  duration, had not engendered corresponding anger in you; and if my  impression was a right one, I trust we may meet for the future on  our old terms."

On the other hand, the "Saturday Review," then at the height of its  repute and influence, vindicated in a powerful article Kinglake's  truth and fairness; and a pamphlet by Hayward, called "Mr. Kinglake  and the Quarterlies," amused society by its furious onslaught upon  the hostile periodicals, laid bare their animus, and exposed their  misstatements.  "If you rise in this tone," he began, in words of  Lord Ellenborough when Attorney-General, "I can speak as loudly and  emphatically: I shall prosecute the case with all the liberality of  a gentleman, but no tone or manner shall put me down."  And the  dissentient voices were drowned in the general chorus of  admiration.  German eulogy was extravagant; French Republicanism  was overjoyed; Englishmen, at home and abroad, read eagerly for the  first time in close and vivid sequence events which, when spread  over thirty months of daily newspapers, few had the patience to  follow, none the qualifications to condense.  Macaulay tells us  that soon after the appearance of his own first volumes, a Mr.  Crump from America offered him five hundred dollars if he would  introduce the name of Crump into his history.  An English gentleman  and lady, from one of our most distant colonies, wrote to Kinglake  a jointly signed pathetic letter, intreating him to cite in his  pages the name of their only son, who had fallen in the Crimea.  He  at once consented, and asked for particulars - manner, time, place  - of the young man's death.  The parents replied that they need not  trouble him with details; these should be left to the historian's  kind inventiveness: whatever he might please to say in  embellishment of their young hero's end they would gratefully  accept.

Unlike most authors, from Moliere down to Dickens, he never read  aloud to friends any portion of the unpublished manuscript; never,  except to closest intimates, spoke of the book, or tolerated  inquiry about it from others.  When asked as to the progress of a  volume he had in hand, he used to say, "That is really a matter on  which it is quite out of my power even to inform myself"; and I  remember how once at a well-selected dinner-party in the country,  whither he came in good spirits and inclined to talk his best, a  second-hand criticism on his book by a conceited parson, the  official and incongruous element in the group, stiffened him into  persistent silence.  All England laughed, when Blackwood's  "Memoirs" saw the light, over his polite repulse of the kindly  officious publisher, who wished, after his fashion, to criticise  and finger and suggest.  "I am almost alarmed, as it were, at the  notion of receiving suggestions.  I feel that hints from you might  be so valuable and so important, it might be madness to ask you  beforehand to abstain from giving me any; but I am anxious for you  to know what the dangers in the way of long delay might be, the  result of even a few slight and possibly most useful suggestions. .  . . You will perhaps (after what I have said) think it best not to  set my mind running in a new path, lest I should take to re- writing."  Note, by the way, the slovenliness of this epistle, as  coming from so great a master of style; that defect characterizes  all his correspondence.  He wrote for the Press "with all his  singing robes about him"; his letters were unrevised and brief.   Mrs. Simpson, in her pleasant "Memories," ascribes to him the  ELOQUENCE DU BILLET in a supreme degree.  I must confess that of  more than five hundred letters from his pen which I have seen only  six cover more than a single sheet of note-paper, all are alike  careless and unstudied in style, though often in matter  characteristic and informing.  "I am not by nature," he would say,  "a letter-writer, and habitually think of the uncertainty as to who  may be the reader of anything that I write.  It is my fate, as a  writer of history, to have before me letters never intended for my  eyes, and this has aggravated my foible, and makes me a wretched  correspondent.  I should like very much to write letters gracefully  and easily, but I can't, because it is contrary to my nature."  "I  have got," he writes so early as 1873, "to shrink from the use of  the pen; to ask me to write letters is like asking a lame man to  walk; it is not, as horse-dealers say, 'the nature of the beast.'   When others TALK to me charmingly, my answers are short, faltering,  incoherent sentences; so it is with my writing."  "You," he says to  another lady correspondent, "have the pleasant faculty of easy,  pleasant letter-writing, in which I am wholly deficient."

In fact, the claims of his Crimean book, which compelled him  latterly to refuse all other literary work, gave little time for  correspondence.  Its successive revisions formed his daily task  until illness struck him down.  Sacks of Crimean notes, labelled  through some fantastic whim with female Christian names - the Helen  bag, the Adelaide bag, etc. - were ranged round his room.  His  working library was very small in bulk, his habit being to cut out  from any book the pages which would be serviceable, and to fling  the rest away.  So, we are told, the first Napoleon, binding  volumes for his travelling library, shore their margins to the  quick, and removed all prefaces,  title-pages, and other  superfluous leaves.  So, too, Edward Fitzgerald used to tear out of  his books all that in his judgment fell below their authors'  highest standard, retaining for his own delectation only the  quintessential remnants.  Vols. III. and IV. appeared in 1868, V.  in 1875, VI. in 1880, VII. and VIII. in 1887; while a Cabinet  Edition of the whole in nine volumes was issued continuously from  1870 to 1887.  Our attempt to appreciate the book shall be reserved  for another chapter.



CHAPTER IV - "THE INVASION OF THE CRIMEA"



WAS the history of the Crimean War worth writing?  Not as a  magnified newspaper report, - that had been already done - but as a  permanent work of art from the pen of a great literary expert?   Very many of us, I think, after the lapse of fifty years, feel  compelled to say that it was not.  The struggle represented no  great principles, begot no far-reaching consequences.  It was not  inspired by the "holy glee" with which in Wordsworth's sonnet  Liberty fights against a tyrant, but by the faltering boldness, the  drifting, purposeless unresolve of statesmen who did not desire it,  and by the irrational violence of a Press which did not understand  it.  It was not a necessary war; its avowed object would have been  attained within a few weeks or months by bloodless European  concert.  It was not a glorious war; crippled by an incompatible  alliance and governed by the Evil Genius who had initiated it for  personal and sordid ends, it brought discredit on baffled generals  in the field, on Crown, Cabinet, populace, at home.  It was not a  fruitful war; the detailed results purchased by its squandered life  and treasure lapsed in swift succession during twenty sequent  years, until the last sheet of the treaty which secured them was  contemptuously torn up by Gortschakoff in 1870.  But a right sense  of historical proportion is in no time the heritage of the many,  and is least of all attainable while the memory of a campaign is  fresh.  On Englishmen who welcomed home their army in 1855, the  strife from which shattered but victorious it had returned, loomed  as epoch-making and colossal, as claiming therefore permanent  record from some eloquent artist of attested descriptive power.   Soon the report gained ground that the destined chronicler was  Kinglake, and all men hailed the selection; yet the sceptic who in  looking back to-day decries the greatness of the campaign may  perhaps no less hesitate to approve the fitness of its chosen  annalist.  His fame was due to the perfection of a single book; he  ranked as a potentate in STYLE.  But literary perfection, whether  in prose or poetry, is a fragile quality, an AFFLATUS irregular,  independent, unamenable to orders; the official tributes of a  Laureate we compliment at their best with the northern farmer's  verdict on the pulpit performances of his parson:


"An' I niver knaw'd wot a mean'd but I thow't a 'ad summut to saay, And I thowt a said wot a owt to 'a said an' I comed awaay."


Set to compile a biography from thirty years of "Moniteurs," the  author of Waverley, like Lord Chesterfield's diamond pencil,  produced one miracle of dulness; it might well be feared that  Kinglake's volatile pen, when linked with forceful feeling and  bound to rigid task-work, might lose the charm of casual epigram,  easy luxuriance, playful egotism, vagrant allusion, which  established "Eothen" as a classic.  On the other hand, he had been  for twenty years conversant with Eastern history, geography,  politics; was, more than most professional soldiers, an adept in  military science; had sate in the centre of the campaign as its  general's guest and comrade; was intrusted, above all, by Lady  Raglan with the entire collection of her husband's papers: her  wish, implied though not expressed, that they should be utilized  for the vindication of the great field-marshal's fame, he accepted  as a sacred charge; her confidence not only governed his decision  to become the historian of the war, but imparted a personal  character to the narrative.

In order, therefore, rightly to appreciate "The Invasion of the  Crimea," we must look upon it as a great prose epic; its argument,  machinery, actors, episodes, subordinate to a predominant ever  present hero.  In its fine preamble Lord Raglan sits enthroned high  above generals, armies, spectators, conflicts; on the quality of  his mind the fate of two great hosts and the fame of two great  nations hang.  He checks St. Arnaud's wild ambition; overrules the  waverings of the Allies; against his own judgment, but in dutiful  obedience to home instruction carries out the descent upon the Old  Fort coast.  The successful achievement of the perilous flank march  is ascribed to the undivided command which, during forty-eight  hours, accident had conferred upon him.  From his presence in  council French and English come away convinced and strengthened;  his calm in action imparts itself to anxious generals and panic- stricken aides-de-camp.  Through Alma fight, from the high knoll to  which happy audacity had carried him he rides the whirlwind and  directs the storm.  In the terrible crisis which sees the Russians  breaking over the crest of Inkerman, in the ill-fated attack on the  Great Redan where Lacy Yea is killed, his apparent freedom from  anxiety infects all around him and achieves redemption from  disaster. (16)  We see him in his moments of vexation and  discomfiture; dissembling pain and anger under the stress of the  French alliance, galled by Cathcart's disobedience, by the loss of  the Light Brigade, by Lord Panmure's insulting, querulous,  unfounded blame.  We read his last despatch, framed with wonted  grace and clearness; then - on the same day - we see the outworn  frame break down, and follow mournfully two days later the  afflicting details of his death.  As the generals and admirals of  the allied forces stand round the dead hero's form, as the palled  bier, draped in the flag of England, is carried from headquarters  to the port, as the "Caradoc," steaming away with her honoured  freight, flies out her "Farewell" signal, the narrative abruptly  ends.  The months of the siege which still remained might be left  to other hands or lapse untold.  Troy had still to be taken when  Hector died; but with his funeral dirge the Iliad closed, the blind  bard's task was over:


"Such honours Ilion to her hero paid, And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade."


If the framework of the narrative is epic, its treatment is  frequently dramatic.  The "Usage of Europe" in the opening pages is  not so much a record as a personification of unwritten Law: the  Great Eltchi tramps the stage with a majesty sometimes bordering on  fustian.  Dramatic is the story of the sleeping Cabinet.  "It was  evening - a summer evening" - one thinks of a world-famous passage  in the "De Corona" - when the Duke of Newcastle carried to Richmond  Lodge the fateful despatch committing England to the war.  "Before  the reading of the Paper had long continued, all the members of the  Cabinet except a small minority were overcome with sleep"; the few  who remained awake were in a quiet, assenting frame of mind, and  the despatch "received from the Cabinet the kind of approval which  is awarded to an unobjectionable Sermon."  Not less dramatic is  Nolan's death; the unearthly shriek of the slain corpse erect in  saddle with sword arm high in air, as the dead horseman rode still  seated through the 13th Light Dragoons; the "Minden Yell" of the  20th driving down upon the Iakoutsk battalion; the sustained and  scathing satire on the Notre Dame Te Deum for the Boulevard  massacre.  A simple dialogue, a commonplace necessary act, is  staged sometimes for effect.  "Then Lord Stratford apprised the  Sultan that he had a private communication to make to him.  The  pale Sultan listened." . . . "Whose was the mind which had freshly  come to bear upon this part of the fight?  Sir Colin Campbell was  sitting in his saddle, the veteran was watching his time." . . .  "The Emperor Nicholas was alone in his accustomed writing-room.  He  took no counsel; he rang a bell.  Presently an officer of his staff  stood before him.  To him he gave his order for the occupation of  the Principalities."  This overpasses drama - it is melodrama.

To the personal element which pervades the volumes great part of  their charm is due.  The writer never obtrudes himself, but leaves  his presence to be discerned by the touches which attest an eye- witness.  Through his observant nearness we watch the Chief's  demeanour and hear his words; see him "turn scarlet with shame and  anger" when the brutal Zouaves carry outrage into the friendly  Crimean village, witness his personal succour of the wounded  Russian after Inkerman, hear his arch acceptance of the French  courtesy, so careful always to yield the post of danger to the  English; his "Go quietly" to the excited aide-de-camp; (17) his  good-humoured reception of the scared and breathless messenger from  D'Aurelle's brigade; the "five words" spoken to Airey commanding  the long delayed advance across the Alma; the "tranquil low voice"  which gave the order rescuing the staff from its unforeseen  encounter with the Russian rear.  He records Codrington's leap on  his grey Arab into the breast-work of the Great Redoubt; Lacy Yea's  passionate energy in forcing his clustered regiment to open out;  Miller's stentorian "Rally" in reforming the Scots Greys after the  Balaclava charge; Clarke losing his helmet in the same charge, and  creating amongst the Russians, as he plunged in bareheaded amongst  their ranks, the belief that he was sheltered by some Satanic  charm.  He notes on the Alma the singular pause of sound maintained  by both armies just before the cannonade began; the first death -  of an artilleryman riding before his gun - a new sight to nine- tenths of those who witnessed it; (18) the weird scream of  exploding shells as they rent the air around.  He crossed the Alma  close behind Lord Raglan, cantering after him to the summit of a  conspicuous hillock in the heart of the enemy's position, whence  the mere sight of plumed English officers scared the Russian  generals, and, followed soon by guns and troops, governed the issue  of the fight.  The general's manner was "the manner of a man  enlivened by the progress of a great undertaking without being  robbed of his leisure.  He spoke to me, I remember, about his  horse.  He seemed like a man who had a clue of his own and knew his  way through the battle."  When the last gun was fired Kinglake  followed the Chief back, witnessed the wild burst of cheering  accorded to him by the whole British army, a manifestation, Lord  Burghersh tells us, which greatly distressed his modesty - and  dined alone with him in his tent on the evening of the eventful  day.

If Lord Raglan was the Hector of the Crimean Iliad, its Agamemnon  was Lord Stratford: "king of men," as Stanley called him in his  funeral sermon at Westminster; king of distrustful home Cabinets,  nominally his masters, of scheming European embassies, of insulting  Russian opponents, of presumptuous French generals, of false and  fleeting Pashas (LE SULTAN, C'EST LORD STRATFORD, said St. Arnaud),  of all men, whatever their degree, who entered his ambassadorial  presence.  Ascendency was native to the man; while yet in his teens  we find Etonian and Cambridge friends writing to him deferentially  as to a critic and superior.  At four and twenty he became Minister  to a Court manageable only by high-handed authority and menace.  He  owned, and for the most part controlled, a violent temper; it broke  bounds sometimes, to our great amusement as we read to-day, to the  occasional discomfiture of ATTACHES or of dependents, (19) to the  abject terror of Turkish Sublimities who had outworn his patience.   But he knew when to be angry; he could pulverize by fiery outbreaks  the Reis Effendi and his master, Abdu-l-Mejid; but as  Plenipotentiary to the United States he could "quench the terror of  his beak, the lightning of his eye," disarming by his formal  courtesy and winning by his obvious sincerity the suspicious and  irritable John Quincy Adams.  When Menschikoff once insulted him,  seeing that a quarrel at that moment would be fatal to his purpose,  he pretended to be deaf, and left the Russian in the belief that  his rude speech had not been heard.  Enthroned for the sixth time  in Constantinople, at the dangerous epoch of 1853, he could point  to an unequalled diplomatic record in the past; to the Treaty of  Bucharest, to reunion of the Helvetic Confederacy shattered by  Napoleon's fall, to the Convention which ratified Greek  independence, to the rescue from Austrian malignity of the  Hungarian refugees.

His conduct of the negotiations preceding the Crimean War is justly  called the cornerstone of his career: at this moment of his  greatness Kinglake encounters and describes him: through the  brilliant chapters in his opening volume, as more fully later on  through Mr. Lane Poole's admirable biography, the Great Eltchi is  known to English readers.  He moves across the stage with a majesty  sometimes bordering on what Iago calls bombast circumstance; drums  and trumpets herald his every entrance; now pacing the shady  gardens of the Bosphorus, now foiling, "in his grand quiet way,"  the Czar's ferocious Christianity, or torturing his baffled  ambassador by scornful concession of the points which he formally  demanded but did not really want; or crushing with "thin, tight,  merciless lips and grand overhanging Canning brow" the presumptuous  French commander who had dared to enter his presence with a plot  for undermining England's influence in the partnership of the  campaign.  Was he, we ask as we end the fascinating description,  was he, what Bright and the Peace Party proclaimed him to be, the  cause of the Crimean War?  The Czar's personal dislike to him - a  caprice which has never been explained (20) - exasperated no doubt  to the mind of Nicholas the repulse of Menschikoff's demands; but  that the precipitation of the prince and his master had put the  Russian Court absolutely in the wrong is universally admitted.  It  has been urged against him that his recommendation of the famous  Vienna Note to the Porte was official merely, and allowed the  watchful Turks to assume his personal approbation of their refusal.   It may be so; his biographer does not admit so much: but it is  obvious that the Turks were out of hand, and that no pressure from  Lord Stratford could have persuaded them to accept the Note.   Further, the "Russian Analysis of the Note," escaping shortly  afterwards from the bag of diplomatic secrecy, revealed to our  Cabinet the necessity of those amendments to the Note on which the  Porte had insisted.  And lastly, the passage of the Dardanelles by  our fleet, which more than any overt act made war inevitable, was  ordered by the Government at home against Lord Stratford's counsel.   Between panic-stricken statesmen and vacillating ambassadors, Lord  Clarendon on one side, M. de la Cour on the other, the Eltchi  stands like Tennyson's promontory of rock,


"Tempest-buffeted, citadel-crowned."


Napoleon at St. Helena attributed much of his success in the field  to the fact that he was not hampered by governments at home.  Every  modern commander, down certainly to the present moment, must have  envied him.  Kinglake's mordant pen depicts with felicity and  compression the men of Downing Street, who without military  experience or definite political aim, thwarted, criticised, over- ruled, tormented, their much-enduring General.  We have Aberdeen,  deficient in mental clearness and propelling force, by his horror  of war bringing war to pass; Gladstone, of too subtle intellect and  too lively conscience, "a good man in the worst sense of the term";  Palmerston, above both in keenness of instinct and in strength of  will, meaning war from the first, and biding his time to insure it;  Newcastle, sanguine to the verge of rashness, loyally adherent to  Lord Raglan while governed by his own judgment, distrustful under  stress of popular clamour; Panmure, ungenerous, rough-tongued,  violent, churlish, yet not malevolent - "a rhinoceros rather than a  tiger" - hurried by subservience to the newspaper Press into  injustice which he afterwards recognized, yet did but sullenly  repair.  We see finally that dominant Press itself, personified in  the all-powerful Delane, a potentate with convictions at once  flexible and vehement; forceful without spite and merciless without  malignity; writing no articles, but evoking, shaping, revising all.   The French commanders were not hampered by the muzzled Paris Press,  which had long since ceased to utter any but dictated sentiments;  they suffered even more disastrously from the imperious  interference of the Tuileries.  Canrobert's inaction, mutability,  sudden alarms, flagrant breaches of faith, were inexplicable until  long afterwards, when the fall of the Empire disclosed the secret  instructions - disloyal to his allies and ruinous to the campaign -  by which Louis Napoleon shackled his unhappy General.  In  Canrobert's successor, Pelissier, he met his match.  For the first  time a strong man headed the French army.  Short of stature, bull- necked and massive in build, with grey hair, long dark moustache,  keen fiery eyes, his coarse rough speech masking tested brain power  and high intellectual culture, he brought new life to the benumbed  French army, new hope to Lord Raglan.  The duel between the  resolute general and the enraged Emperor is narrated with a touch  comedy.  All that Lord Raglan desired, all that the Emperor  forbade, Pelissier was stubbornly determined to accomplish; the  siege should be pressed at once, the city taken at any cost, the  expedition to Kertch resumed.  Once only, under torment of the  Emperor's reproaches and the Minister at War's remonstrances, his  resolution and his nerve gave way; eight days of failing judgment  issued in the Karabelnaya defeat, the severest repulse which the  two armies had sustained; but the paralysis passed away, he showed  himself once more eager to act in concert with the English general;  - when the long-borne strain of disappointment and anxiety sapped  at last Lord Raglan's vital forces, and the hard fierce Frenchman  stood for upwards of an hour beside his dead colleague's bedside,  "crying like a child."

The lieutenants of Lord Raglan in the Crimea have long since passed  away, but in artistic epical presentment they retain their place  around him.  Airey, his right hand from the first disembarkation at  Kalamita Bay, strong-willed, decisive, ardent, thrusting away  suspense and doubt, untying every knot, is vindicated by his Chief  against the Duke of Newcastle's wordy inculpation in the severest  despatch perhaps ever penned to his official superior by a soldier  in the field.  Colin Campbell, with glowing face, grey kindling  eye, light, stubborn, crisping hair, leads his Highland brigade tip  the hill against the Vladimir columns, till "with the sorrowful  wail which bursts from the brave Russian infantry when they have to  suffer loss," eight battalions of the enemy fall back in retreat.   Lord Lucan, tall, lithe, slender, his face glittering and panther- like in moments of strenuous action, wins our hearts as he won  Kinglake's, in spite of the mis-aimed cleverness and presumptuous  self-confidence which always criticised and sometimes disobeyed the  orders of his Chief.  General Pennefather, "the grand old boy," his  exulting radiant face flashing everywhere through the smoke, his  resonant innocuous oaths roaring cheerily down the line, sustains  all day the handful of our troops against the tenfold masses of the  enemy.  Generous and eloquent are the notices of Korniloff and  Todleben, the great sailor and the great engineer, the soul and the  brain of the Sebastopol defence.  The first fell in the siege, the  second lived to write its history, to become a valued friend of  Kinglake, to explore and interpret in his company long afterwards  the scenes of struggle; his book and his personal guidance gave to  the historian what would otherwise have been unattainable, a clear  knowledge of the conflict as viewed from within the town.

The pitched battlefields of the campaign were three, Alma,  Balaclava, Inkerman.  The Alma chapter is the most graphic, for  there the fight was concentrated, offering to a spectator by Lord  Raglan's side a COUP D'OEIL of the entire action.  The French were  by bad generalship virtually wiped out; for Bosquet crossed the  river too far to the right, Canrobert was afraid to move without  artillery, Prince Napoleon and St. Arnaud's reserves were jammed  together in the bottom of the valley.  We see, as though on the  spot, the advance, irregular and unsupported, of Codrington's  brigade, their dash into the Great Redoubt and subsequent  disorderly retreat; the enemy checked by the two guns from Lord  Raglan's knoll and by the steadiness of the Royal Fusiliers; the  repulse of the Scots Fusiliers and the peril which hung over the  event; then the superb advance of Guards and Highlanders up the  hill, thin red line against massive columns, which determined  finally the action.

The interest of the Balaclava fight centres in the two historic  cavalry charges.  Here again, from his position on the hill above,  Kinglake witnessed both; the first, clear in smokeless air, the  second lost in the volleying clouds which filled the valley of  death.  He saw the enormous mass of Russian cavalry, 3,500 sabres,  flooding like an avalanche down the hill with a momentum which  Scarlett's tiny squadron could not for a moment have resisted;  their unexplained halt, the three hundred seizing the opportunity  to strike, digging individually into the Russian ranks, the scarlet  streaks visibly cleaving the dense grey columns.  Inwedged and  surrounded, in their passionate blood frenzy, with ceaseless play  of whirling sword, with impetus of human and equestrian weight and  strength, the red atoms hewed their way to the Russian rear,  turned, worked back, emerged, reformed; while the 4th and 5th  Dragoons, the Royals, the 1st Inniskillings, dashed upon the amazed  column right, left, front, till the close-locked mass headed slowly  up the hill, ranks loosened, horsemen turned and galloped off, a  beaten straggling herd.  Eight minutes elapsed from the time when  Scarlett gave the word to charge, until the moment when the  Russians broke: we turn from the fifty describing pages, breathless  as though we had ridden in the melley; if the episode has no  historical parallel, the narrative is no less unique.  Our greatest  contemporary poet tried to celebrate it; his lines are tame and  unexciting beside Kinglake's passionate pulsing rhapsody.  Its  effect upon the Russian mind was lasting; out of all their vast  array hardly a single squadron was ever after able to keep its  ground against the approach of English cavalry; while but for  Cathcart's obstinacy and Lucan's temper it would have issued in the  immediate recapture of the Causeway Heights.

The Charge of the Light Brigade, on the other hand, while it  stirred the imagination of the poet, shocked the military  conscience of the historian.  He saw in it with agony, as Lord  Raglan saw, as the French spectators saw, no act of heroic  sacrifice, but a needless, fruitless massacre.  "You have lost the  Light Brigade," was his commander's salutation to Lord Lucan.  "C'EST MAGNIFIQUE, MAIS CE N'EST PAS LA GUERRE," was the oft-quoted  reproof of Bosquet.  The "someone's blunder," the sullen perversity  in misconception which destroyed the flower of our cavalry, has  faded from men's memories; the splendour of the deed remains.  It  is well to recover salvage from the irrevocable, to voice and to  prolong the deep human interest attaching to death encountered at  the call of duty; that is the poet's task, and brilliantly it has  been discharged.  Its other side, the paean of sorrow for a self- destructive exploit, the dirge on lives wantonly thrown away, the  deep blame attaching to the untractableness which sent them to  their doom, was the task of the historian, and that too has been  faithfully and lastingly accomplished.

Inkerman was the most complicated of the battles; the chapters  which record it are correspondingly taxing to the reader.  More  than once or twice they must be scanned, with close study of their  lucid maps, before the intricate sequences are fairly and  distinctively grasped; the sixth book of Thucydides, a standing  terror to young Greek students, is light and easy reading compared  with the bulky sixth volume of Kinglake.  The hero of the day was  Pennefather; he maintained on Mount Inkerman a combat of pickets  reinforced from time to time, while around him through nine hours  successive attacks of thousands were met by hundreds.  The  disparity of numbers was appalling.  At daybreak 40,000 Russian  troops advanced against 3,000 English and were repulsed.  Three  hours later 19,000 fresh troops came on, passed through a gap in  our lines, which Cathcart's disobedience, atoned for presently by  his death, had left unoccupied, and seized the heights behind us;  they too were dispossessed, but our numbers were dwindling and our  strength diminishing.  The Home Ridge, key of our position, was  next invaded by 6,000 Russians; the 7th St. Leger, linked with a  few Zouaves and with 200 men of our 77th Regiment, French and  English for once joyously intermingled, hurled them back.  It was  the crisis of the fight; Canrobert's interposition would have  determined it; but he sullenly refused to move.  Finally, led by  two or three daring young officers, 300 of our wearied troops  charged the Russian battery which had tormented us all day; their  artillerymen, already flinching under the galling fire of two 18- pounders, brought up by Lord Raglan's foresight early in the  morning, hastily withdrew their guns, and the battle was won.  It  was a day of Homeric rushes; Burnaby, with only twenty men to  support him, rescuing the Grenadier Guards' colours; the onset of  the 20th with their "Minden Yell"; Colonel Daubeny with two dozen  followers cleaving the Russian trunk column at the barrier; Waddy's  dash at the retreating artillery train, foiled only by the presence  and the readiness of Todleben.  One marvels in reading how the  English held their own; their victory against so tremendous odds is  ascribed by the historian to three conditions; the hampering of the  enemy by his crowded masses; the slaughter amongst his officers  early in the fight, which deprived their men of leadership; above  all, the dense mist which obscured from him the fewness of his  opponents.  If Canrobert with his fresh troops had followed in  pursuit, the Russian's retreat must have been turned into a rout  and his artillery captured; if on the following day he had  assaulted the Flagstaff Bastion, Sebastopol, Todleben owned, must  have fallen.  He would do neither; his hesitancy and apparent  feebleness have already been explained; but to it, and to the  sinister influence which held his hand, were due the subsequent  miseries of the Crimean winter.

But the epic muse exacted from Kinglake, as from Virgil long  before, the portrayal not only of generals and of battles, but of  two great monarchs, each in his own day conspicuously and  absolutely prominent - the Czar Nicholas and the Emperor Napoleon:


"dicam horrida belia, Dicam acies, actosque animis in funera REGES."


His handling of them is characteristic.  Few men living then could  have approached either without a certain awe, their "genius"  rebuked, - like Mark Antony's, in the presence of Caesars so  imposing and so mighty; Kinglake's attitude towards both is the  attitude of cold analysis.

In the opening of the fifties the Czar Nicholas was the most  powerful man then living in the world.  He ruled over sixty million  subjects whose loyalty bordered on worship: he had in arms a  million soldiers, brave and highly trained.  In the troubles of  1848 he had stood scornful and secure amid the overthrow of  surrounding thrones; and the entire impact of his vast and well- organized Empire was subject to his single will; whatever he chose  to do he did.  Of stern and unrelenting nature, of active and  widely ranging capacity for business, of gigantic stature and  commanding presence, he inspired almost universal terror; and yet  his friendliness had when he pleased a glow and frankness  irresistible in its charm.  Readers of Queen Victoria's early life  will recall the alarm she felt at his sudden proposal to visit  Windsor in 1844, the fascination which his presence exercised on  her when he became her guest.  He professed to embody his standard  of conduct in the English word "gentleman"; his ideal of human  grandeur was the character of the Duke of Wellington.  It was an  evil destiny that betrayed this high-minded man into crooked ways;  that made England sacrifice the stateliest among her ancient  friends to an ignoble and crime-stained adventurer; that poured out  blood and treasure for no public advantage and with no permanent  result; that first humiliated, then slew with broken heart the man  who had been so great, and who is still regarded by surviving  Russians who knew his inner life and had seen him in his gentle  mood with passionate reverence and affection.

Kinglake's description of "Prince Louis Bonaparte," of his  character, his accomplices, his policy, his crimes, is perhaps  unequalled in historical literature; I know not where else to look  for a vivisection so scientific and so merciless of a great  potentate in the height of his power.  With scrutiny polite,  impartial, guarded, he lays bare the springs of a conscienceless  nature and the secrets of a crime-driven career; while for the  combination of precise simplicity with exhaustive synopsis, the  masquerading of moral indignation in the guise of mocking laughter,  the loathing of a gentleman for a scoundrel set to the measure not  of indignation but of contempt, we must go back to the refined  insolence, the [Greek text which cannot be reproduced] of Voltaire.   He had well known Prince Napoleon in his London days, had been  attracted by him as a curiosity - "a balloon man who had twice  fallen from the skies and yet was still alive" - had divined the  mental power veiled habitually by his blank, opaque, wooden looks,  had listened to his ambitious talk and gathered up the utterances  of his thoughtful, long-pondering mind, had quarrelled with him  finally and lastingly over rivalry in the good graces of a woman.  (21)  He saw in him a fourfold student; of the art of war, of the  mind of the first Napoleon, of the French people's character, of  the science by which law may lend itself to stratagem and become a  weapon of deceit.

The intellect of this strange being was subject to an uncertainty  of judgment, issuing in ambiguity of enterprise, and giving an  impression of well-kept secrecy, due often to the fact that divided  by mental conflict he had no secret to tell.  He understood truth,  but under the pressure of strong motive would invariably deceive.   He sometimes, out of curiosity, would listen to the voice of  conscience, and could imitate neatly on occasion the scrupulous  language of a man of honour; but the consideration that one of two  courses was honest, and the other not, never entered into his  motives for action.  He was bold in forming plots, and skilful in  conducting them; but in the hour of trial and under the confront of  physical danger he was paralysed by constitutional timidity.  His  great aim in life was to be conspicuous - DIGITO MONSTRARIER -  coupled with a theatric mania which made scenic effects and  surprises essential to the eminence he craved.

Handling this key to his character, Kinglake pursues him into his  December treason, contrasts the consummate cleverness of his  schemes with the faltering cowardice which shrank, like Macbeth's  ambition, from "the illness should attend them," and which, but for  the stronger nerve of those behind him, would have caused his  collapse, at Paris as at Strasburg and Boulogne, in contact with  the shock of action.  It is difficult now to realize the commotion  caused by this fourteenth chapter of Kinglake's book.  The Emperor  was at the summit of his power, fresh from Austrian conquest,  viewed with alarm by England, whose rulers feared his strength and  were distrustful of his friendship.  Our Crown, our government, our  society, had condoned his usurpation; he had kissed the Queen's  cheek, bent her ministers to his will, ridden through her capital a  triumphant and applauded guest.  And now men read not only a  cynical dissection of his character and disclosure of his early  foibles, but the hideous details of his deceit and treachery, the  phases of cold-blooded massacre and lawless deportation by which he  emptied France of all who hesitated to enrol themselves as his  accomplices or his tools.  Forty years have passed since the  terrible indictment was put forth; down to its minutest allegation  it has been proved literally true; the arch criminal has fallen  from his estate to die in disgrace, disease, exile.  When we talk  today with cultivated Frenchmen of that half-forgotten epoch, and  of the book which bared its horrors, we are met by their response  of ardent gratitude to the man who joined to passionate hatred of  iniquity surpassing capacity for denouncing it; their avowal that  with all its frequent exposure of their military shortcomings and  depreciation of their national character, no English chronicle of  the century stands higher in their esteem than the history of the  war in the Crimea.

The close of the book is grim and tragic in the main, the stir of  gallant fights exchanged for the dreary course of siege,  intrenchment, mine and countermine.  We have the awful winter on  the heights, the November hurricane, the foiled bombardments, the  cruel blunder of the Karabelnaya assault, the bitter natural  discontent at home, the weak subservience of our government to  misdirected clamour, the touching help-fraught advent of the Lady  Nurses: then, just as better prospects dawn, the Chief's collapse  and death.  From the morrow of Inkerman to the end, through no  fault of his, the historian's chariot wheels drag.  More and more  one sees how from the nature of the task, except for the flush of  contemporary interest then, except by military students now, it is  not a work to be popularly read; the exhausted interest of its  subject swamps the genius of its narrator.  Scattered through its  more serious matter are gems with the old "Eothen" sparkle, of  periphrasis, aphorism, felicitous phrase and pregnant epithet.   Such is the fine analogy between the worship of holy shrines and  the lover's homage to the spot which his mistress's feet have trod;  such France's tolerance of the Elysee brethren compared to the Arab  laying his verminous burnous upon an ant-hill; the apt quotation  from the Psalms to illustrate the on-coming of the Guards; the  demeanour of horses in action; the course of a flying cannon-ball;  the two ponderous troopers at the Horse Guards; Tom Tower and his  Croats landing stores for our soldiers from the "Erminia."  Or  again, we have the light clear touches of a single line; "the  decisiveness and consistency of despotism" - "the fractional and  volatile interests in trading adventure which go by the name of  Shares" - "the unlabelled, undocketed state of mind which shall  enable a man to encounter the Unknown" - "the qualifying words  which correct the imprudences and derange the grammatical structure  of a Queen's Speech": but these are islets in the sea of narrative,  not, as in "Eothen," woof-threads which cross the warp.

To compare an idyll with an epic, it may be said, is like comparing  a cameo with a Grecian temple: be it so; but the temple falls in  ruins, the cameo is preserved in cabinets; and it is possible that  a century hence the Crimean history will be forgotten, while  "Eothen" is read and enjoyed.  The best judges at the time  pronounced that as a lasting monument of literary force the work  was over refined: "Kinglake," said Sir George Cornewall Lewis,  "tries to write better than he can write"; quoting, perhaps  unconsciously, the epigram of a French art critic a hundred years  before -  IL CHERCHE TOUJOURS A FAIRE MIEUX QU'IL NE FAIT. (22)  He  lavished on it far more pains than on "Eothen": the proof sheets  were a black sea of erasures, intercalations, blots; the original  chaotic manuscript pages had to be disentangled by a calligraphic  Taunton bookseller before they could be sent to press.  This  fastidiousness in part gained its purpose; won temporary success;  gave to his style the glitter, rapidity, point, effectiveness, of a  pungent editorial; went home, stormed, convinced, vindicated,  damaged, triumphed: but it missed by excessive polish the  reposeful, unlaboured, classic grace essential to the highest art.   Over-scrupulous manipulation of words is liable to the "defect of  its qualities"; as with unskilful goldsmiths of whom old Latin  writers tell us, the file goes too deep, trimming away more of the  first fine minting than we can afford to lose.  Ruskin has  explained to us how the decadence of Gothic architecture commenced  through care bestowed on window tracery for itself instead of as an  avenue or vehicle for the admission of light.  Read "words" for  tracery, "thought" for light, and we see how inspiration avenges  itself so soon as diction is made paramount; artifice, which  demands and misses watchful self-concealment, passes into  mannerism; we have lost the incalculable charm of spontaneity.   Comparison of "Eothen" with the "Crimea" will I think exemplify  this truth.  The first, to use Matthew Arnold's imagery, is Attic,  the last has declined to the Corinthian; it remains a great, an  amazingly great production; great in its pictorial force, its  omnipresent survey, verbal eloquence, firm grasp, marshalled  delineation of multitudinous and entangled matter; but it is not  unique amongst martial records as "Eothen" is unique amongst books  of travel: it is through "Eothen" that its author has soared into a  classic, and bids fair to hold his place.  And, apart from the  merit of style, great campaigns lose interest in a third, if not in  a second generation; their historical consequence effaced through  lapse of years; their policy seen to have been nugatory or  mischievous; their chronicles, swallowed greedily at the birth like  Saturn's progeny, returning to vex their parent; relegated finally  to an honourable exile in the library upper shelves, where they  hold a place eyed curiously, not invaded:


"devoured As fast as they are made, forgot as soon As done. . . . To have done, is to hang Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail, In monumental mockery."



CHAPTER V - MADAME NOVIKOFF



THE Cabinet Edition of "The Invasion of the Crimea" appeared in  1877, shortly after the Servian struggle for independence, which  aroused in England universal interest and sympathy.  Kinglake had  heard from the lips of a valued lady friend the tragic death-tale  of her brother Nicholas Kireeff, who fell fighting as a volunteer  on the side of the gallant Servian against the Turk: and, much  moved by the recital, offered to honour the memory of the dead hero  in the Preface to his forthcoming edition.  He kept his word; made  sympathetic reference to M. Kireeff in the opening of his Preface;  but passed in pursuance of his original design to a hostile  impeachment of Russia, its people, its church, its ruler.  This was  an error of judgment and of feeling; and the lady, reading the  manuscript, indignantly desired him to burn the whole rather than  commit the outrage of associating her brother's name with an attack  on causes and personages dear to him as to herself.  Kinglake  listened in silence, then tendered to her a CRAYON ROUGE, begging  her to efface all that pained her.  She did so; and, diminished by  three-fourths of its matter, the Preface appears in Vol. I. of the  Cabinet Edition.  The erasure was no slight sacrifice to an author  of Kinglake's literary sensitiveness, mutilating as it did the  integrity of a carefully schemed composition, and leaving visible  the scar.  He sets forth the strongly sentimental and romantic side  of Russian temperament.  Love of the Holy Shrines begat the war of  1853, racial ardour the war of 1876.  The first was directed by a  single will, the second by national enthusiasm; yet the mind of  Nicholas was no less tossed by a breathless strife of opposing  desires and moods than was Russia at large by the struggle between  Panslavism and statesmanship.  Kinglake paints vividly the imposing  figure of the young Kireeff, his stature, beauty, bravery, the  white robe he wore incarnadined by death-wounds, his body captured  by the hateful foes.  He goes on to tell how myth rose like an  exhalation round his memory: how legends of "a giant piling up  hecatombs by a mighty slaughter" reverberated through mansion and  cottage, town and village, cathedral and church; until thousands of  volunteers rushed to arms that they might go where young Kireeff  had gone.  Alexander's hand was forced, and the war began, which  but for England's intervention would have cleared Europe of the  Turk.  We have the text, but not the sermon; the Preface ends  abruptly with an almost clumsy peroration.

The lady who inspired both the eulogy and the curtailment was  Madame Novikoff, more widely known perhaps as O. K., with whom  Kinglake maintained during the last twenty years of life an  intimate and mutual friendship.  Madame Olga Novikoff, NEE Kireeff,  is a Russian lady of aristocratic rank both by parentage and  marriage.  In a lengthened sojourn at Vienna with her brother-in- law, the Russian ambassador, she learned the current business of  diplomacy.  An eager religious propagandist, she formed alliance  with the "Old Catholics" on the Continent, and with many among the  High Church English clergy; becoming, together with her brother  Alexander, a member of the REUNION NATIONALE, a society for the  union of Christendom.  Her interest in education has led her to  devote extensive help to school and church building and endowment  on her son's estate.  God-daughter to the Czar Nicholas, she is a  devoted Imperialist, nor less in sympathy, as were all her family,  with Russian patriotism: after the death of her brother in Servia  on July 6/18, 1876, she became a still more ardent Slavophile.  The  three articles of her creed are, she says, those of her country,  Orthodoxy, Autocracy, Nationalism.  Her political aspirations have  been guided, and guided right, by her tact and goodness of heart.   Her life's aim has been to bring about a cordial understanding  between England and her native land; there is little doubt that her  influence with leading Liberal politicians, and her vigorous  allocutions in the Press, had much to do with the enthusiasm  manifested by England for the liberation of the Danubian States.   Readers of the Princess Lieven's letters to Earl Grey will recall  the part played by that able ambassadress in keeping this country  neutral through the crisis of 1828-9; to her Madame Novikoff has  been likened, and probably with truth, by the Turkish Press both  English and Continental.  She was accused in 1876 of playing on the  religious side of Mr. Gladstone's character to secure his interest  in the Danubians as members of the Greek Church, while with  unecclesiastical people she was said to be equally skilful on the  political side, converting at the same time Anglophobe Russia by  her letters in the "Moscow Gazette."  Mr. Gladstone's leanings to  Montenegro were attributed angrily in the English "Standard" to  Madame Novikoff: "A serious statesman should know better than to  catch contagion from the petulant enthusiasm of a Russian Apostle."   The contagion was in any case caught, and to some purpose; letter  after letter had been sent by the lady to the great statesman, then  in temporary retirement, without reply, until the last of these, "a  bitter cry of a sister for a sacrificed brother," brought a feeling  answer from Mrs. Gladstone, saying that her husband was deeply  moved by the appeal, and was writing on the subject.  In a few days  appeared his famous pamphlet, "Bulgarian Horrors and the Question  of the East."

Carlyle advised that Madame Novikoff's scattered papers should be  worked into a volume; they appeared under the title "Is Russia  Wrong?" with a preface by Froude, the moderate and ultra-prudent  tone of which infuriated Hayward and Kinglake, as not being  sufficiently appreciative.  Hayward declared some woman had biassed  him; Kinglake was of opinion that by studying the ETAT of Queen  Elizabeth Froude had "gone and turned himself into an old maid."

Froude's Preface to her next work, "Russia and England, a Protest  and an Appeal," by O. K., 1880, was worded in a very different tone  and satisfied all her friends.  The book was also reviewed with  highest praise by Gladstone in "The Nineteenth Century."  Learning  that an assault upon it was contemplated in "The Quarterly,"  Kinglake offered to supply the editor, Dr. Smith, with materials  which might be so used as to neutralize a PERSONAL attack upon O.  K.  Smith entreated him to compose the whole article himself.  "I  could promise you," he writes, "that the authorship should be kept  a profound secret;" but this Kinglake seems to have thought  undesirable.  The article appeared in April, 1880, under the title  of "The Slavonic Menace to Europe."  It opens with a panegyric on  the authoress: "She has mastered our language with conspicuous  success; she expostulates as easily as she reproaches, and she  exhibits as much facility in barbing shafts of satire as in framing  specious excuses for daring acts of diplomacy."  It insists on the  high esteem felt for her by both the Russian and Austrian  governments, telling with much humour an anecdote of Count Beust,  the Prime Minister of Austria during her residence in Vienna.  The  Count, after meeting her at a dinner party at the Turkish Embassy,  composed a set of verses in her honour, and gave them to her, but  she forgot to mention them to her brother-in-law.  The Prime  Minister, encountering the latter, asked his opinion of the verses;  and the ambassador was greatly amazed at knowing nothing of the  matter. (23)  From amenities towards the authoress, the article  passes abruptly to hostile criticism of the book; declares it to be  proscribed in Russia as mischievous, and to have precipitated a  general war by keeping up English interest in Servian rebellion.   It sneers in doubtful taste at the lady's learning:


"sit non doctissima conjux, Sit nox cum somno, sit sine lite dies;"


denounces the Slavs as incapable of being welded into a nation,  urging that their independence must destroy Austria-Hungary, a  consummation desired by Madame Novikoff, with her feline contempt  for "poor dear Austria," but which all must unite to prevent if  they would avert a European war.

How could one clear harp, men asked themselves as they read, have  produced so diverse tones?  The riddle is solved when we learn that  the first part only was from Kinglake's pen: having vindicated his  friend's ability and good faith, her right to speak and to be heard  attentively, he left the survey of her views, with which he  probably disagreed, to the originally assigned reviewer.  The  article, Madame Novikoff tells us in the "Nouvelle Revue," was  received AVEC UNE STUPEFACTION UNANIME.  It formed the general talk  for many days, was attributed to Lord Salisbury, was supposed to  have been inspired by Prince Gortschakoff.  The name standing  against it in Messrs. Murray's books, as they kindly inform me, is  that of a writer still alive, and better known now than then, but  they never heard that Kinglake had a hand in it; the editor would  seem to have kept his secret even from the publishers.  Kinglake  sent the article in proof to the lady; hoped that the facts he had  imparted and the interpolations he had inserted would please her;  he could have made the attack on Russia more pointed had he written  it; she would think the leniency shows a fault on the right side;  he did not know the writer of this latter part.  He begged her to  acquaint her friends in Moscow what an important and majestic organ  is "The Quarterly," how weighty therefore its laudation of herself.   She recalls his bringing her soon afterwards an article on her,  written, he said, in an adoring tone by Laveleye in the "Revue des  Deux Mondes," and directing her to a paper in "Fraser," by Miss  Pauline Irby, a passionate lover of the "Slav ragamuffins," and a  worshipper of Madame Novikoff.  He quotes with delight Chenery's  approbation of her "Life of Skobeleff"; he spoke of you "with a  gleam of kindliness in his eyes which really and truly I had never  observed before."  "The Times" quotes her as the "eloquent  authoress of 'Russia and England'"; "fancy that from your enemy!  you are getting even 'The Times' into your net."  A later article  on O. K. contains some praise, but more abuse.  Hayward is angry  with it; Kinglake thinks it more friendly than could have been  expected "to YOU, a friend of ME, their old open enemy: the sugar- plums were meant for you, the sprinklings of soot for me."

Besides "Russia and England" Madame Novikoff is the author of  "Friends or Foes? - is Russia wrong?" and of a "Life of Skobeleff,"  the hero of Plevna and of Geok Tepe.  From her natural endowments  and her long familiarity with Courts, she has acquired a capacity  for combining, controlling, entertaining social "circles" which  recalls LES SALONS D'AUTREFOIS, the drawing-rooms of an Ancelot, a  Le Brun, a Recamier.  Residing in several European capitals, she  surrounds herself in each with persons intellectually eminent; in  England, where she has long spent her winters, Gladstone, Carlyle  and Froude, Charles Villiers, Bernal Osborne, Sir Robert Morier,  Lord Houghton, and many more of the same high type, formed her  court and owned her influence.

Kinglake first met her at Lady Holland's in 1870, and mutual liking  ripened rapidly into close friendship.  During her residences in  England few days passed in which he did not present himself at her  drawing-room in Claridge's Hotel: when absent in Russia or on the  Continent, she received from him weekly letters, though he used to  complain that writing to a lady through the POSTE RESTANTE was like  trying to kiss a nun through a double grating.  These letters, all  faithfully preserved, I have been privileged to see; they remind  me, in their mixture of personal with narrative charm, of Swift's  "Letters to Stella"; except that Swift's are often coarse and  sometimes prurient, while Kinglake's chivalrous admiration for his  friend, though veiled occasionally by graceful banter, is always  respectful and refined.  They even imitate occasionally the "little  language" of the great satirist; if Swift was Presto, Kinglake is  "Poor dear me"; if Stella was M. D., Madame Novikoff is "My dear  Miss."  This last endearment was due to an incident at a London  dinner table.  A story told by Hayward, seasoned as usual with GROS  SEL, amused the more sophisticated English ladies present, but  covered her with blushes.  Kinglake perceived it, and said to her  afterwards, "I thought you were a hardened married woman; I am glad  that you are not; I shall henceforth call you MISS."  Sometimes he  rushes into verse.  In answer to some pretended rebuff received  from her at Ryde he writes


"There was a young lady of Ryde, so awfully puffed up by pride, She felt grander by far than the Son of the Czar, And when he said, 'Dear, come and walk on the pier, Oh please come and walk by my side;' The answer he got, was 'Much better not,' from that awful young  lady of Ryde."


Oftenest, the letters are serious in their admiring compliments;  they speak of her superb organization of health and life and  strength and joyousness, the delightful sunshine of her presence,  her decision and strength of will, her great qualities and great  opportunities: "away from you the world seems a blank."  He is glad  that his Great Eltchi has been made known to her; the old statesman  will be impressed, he feels sure, by her "intense life,  graciousness and grace, intellect carefully masked, musical faculty  in talk, with that heavenly power of coming to an end."  He sends  playfully affectionate messages from other members of the  GERONTAION, as he calls it, the group of aged admirers who formed  her inner court; echoing their laments over the universality of her  patronage.  "Hayward can pardon your having an ambassador or two at  your FEET, but to find the way to your HEART obstructed by a crowd  of astronomers, Russ-expansionists, metaphysicians, theologians,  translators, historians, poets; - this is more than he can endure.   The crowd reduces him, as Ampere said to Mme. Recamier, to the  qualified blessing of being only CHEZ VOUS, from the delight of  being AVEC VOUS.  He hails and notifies additions to the list of  her admirers; quotes enthusiastic praise of her from Stansfeld and  Charles Villiers, warm appreciation from Morier, Sir Robert Peel,  Violet Fane.  He rallies her on her victims, jests at Froude's  lover-like GALANTERIE - "Poor St. Anthony! how he hovered round the  flame"; - at the devotion of that gay Lothario, Tyndall, whose  approaching marriage will, he thinks, clip his wings for  flirtation.  "It seems that at the Royal Institution, or whatever  the place is called, young women look up to the Lecturers as  priests of Science, and go to them after the lecture in what  churchmen would call the vestry, and express charming little doubts  about electricity, and pretty gentle disquietudes about the solar  system: and then the Professors have to give explanations; - and  then, somehow, at the end of a few weeks, they find they have  provided themselves with chaperons for life."  So he pursues the  list of devotees; her son will tell her that Caesar summarized his  conquests in this country by saying VENI, VIDI, VICI; but to her it  is given to say, VENI, VIDEBAR, VICI.

On two subjects, theology and politics, Madame Novikoff was, as we  have seen, passionately in earnest.  Himself at once an amateur  casuist and a consistent Nothingarian, whose dictum was that  "Important if true" should be written over the doors of churches,  he followed her religious arguments much as Lord Steyne listened to  the contests between Father Mole and the Reverend Mr. Trail.  He  expresses his surprise in all seriousness that the Pharisees, a  thoughtful and cultured set of men, who alone among the Jews  believed in a future state, should have been the very men to whom  our Saviour was habitually antagonistic.  He refers more lightly  and frequently to "those charming talks of ours about our  Churches"; he thinks they both know how to EFFLEURER the surface of  theology without getting drowned in it.  Of existing Churches he  preferred the English, as "the most harmless going"; disliked the  Latin Church, especially when intriguing in the East, as  persecuting and as schismatic, and therefore as no Church at all.   Roman Catholics, he said, have a special horror of being called  "schismatic," and that is, of course, a good reason for so calling  them.  He would not permit the use of the word "orthodox," because,  like a parson in the pulpit, it is always begging the question.  He  refused historical reverence to the Athanasian Creed, and was  delighted when Stanley's review in "The Times" of Mr. Ffoulkes'  learned book showed it to have been written by order of Charles the  Great in 800 A.D. as what Thorold Rogers used to call "an election  squib."  In the "Filioque" controversy, once dear to Liddon and to  Gladstone, now, I suppose, obsolete for the English mind, but which  relates to the chief dividing tenet of East from West, he showed an  interest humorous rather than reverent; took pains to acquaint  himself with the views held on it by Dollinger and the old  Catholics; noted with amusement the perplexity of London ladies as  to the meaning of the word when quoted in the much-read "Quarterly"  article, declaring their belief to be that it was a clergyman's  baby born out of wedlock.

Madame Novikoff's political influence, which he recognized to the  full, he treated in the same mocking spirit.  She is at Berlin,  received by Bismarck; he hopes that though the great man may not  eradicate her Slavophile heresies, he may manifest the weakness of  embroiling nations on mere ethnological grounds.  "Are even nearer  relationships so delightful? would you walk across the street for a  third or fourth cousin? then why for a millionth cousin?"  Madame  Novikoff kindly sends to me an "Imaginary Conversation" between  herself and Gortschakoff, constructed by Kinglake during her stay  in St. Petersburg in 1879.

"G.  Well - you really have done good service to your country and  your Czar by dividing and confusing these absurd English, and  getting us out of the scrape we were in in that - Balkan Peninsula.

"MISS O.  Well, certainly I did my best; but I fear I have ruined  the political reputation of my English partizans, for in order to  make them 'beloved of the Slave,' I of course had to make them,  poor souls! go against their own country; and their country, stupid  as it is, has now I fear found them out.

"G.  TANT PIS POUR EUX!  ENTRE NOUS, if I had been Gladstone, I  should have preferred the love of my own country to the love of  these - Slaves of yours.  But, tell me, how did you get hold of  Gladstone?

"MISS O.  RIEN DE PLUS SIMPLE!  Four or five years ago I asked what  was his weak point, and was told that he had two, 'Effervescence,'  and 'Theology.'  With that knowledge I found it all child's play to  manage him.  I just sent him to Munich, and there boiled him up in  a weak decoction of 'Filioque,' then kept him ready for use, and  impatiently awaited the moment when our plans for getting up the  'Bulgarian atrocities' should be mature.  I say 'impatiently,' for,  Heavens, how slow you all were! at least so it strikes a woman.   The arrangement of the 'atrocities' was begun by our people in  1871, and yet till 1876, though I had Gladstone ready in 1875,  nothing really was done!  I assure you, Prince, it is a trying  thing to a woman to be kept waiting for promised atrocities such an  unconscionable time.

"G.  That brother-in-law of yours was partly the cause of our  slowness.  He was always wanting to have the orders for fire and  blood in neat formal despatches, signed by me, and copied by  clerks.  However, I hope you are satisfied now, with the butcheries  and the flames, and the - ?

"MISS O.  POUR LE MOMENT!"

She is absent during the sudden dissolution of Parliament in 1874.   "London woke yesterday morning and found that your friend Gladstone  had made a COUP-D'ETAT.  He has dissolved Parliament at a moment  when no human being expected it, and my impression is that he has  made a good hit, and that the renovated Parliament will give him a  great majority." The impression was wildly wrong; and he found a  cause for the Conservative majority in Gladstone's tame foreign  policy, and especially in the pusillanimity his government showed  when insulted by Gortschakoff.  He always does justice to her  influence with Gladstone; his great majority at the polls in 1880  is HER victory and HER triumph; but his Turkophobia is no less her  creation: "England is stricken with incapacity because you have  stirred up the seething caldron that boils under Gladstone's skull,  putting in diabolical charms and poisons of theology to overturn  the structure of English polity:" she will be able, he thinks, to  tell her government that Gladstone is doing his best to break up  the British Empire.

He quotes with approbation the newspaper comparison of her to the  Princess Lieven.  She disparages the famous ambassadress; he sets  her right.  Let her read the "Correspondence," by his friend Mr.  Guy Le Strange, and she will see how large a part the Princess  played in keeping England quiet during the war of 1828-29.  She did  not convert her austere admirer, Lord Grey, to approval of the  Russian designs, nor overcome the uneasiness with which the Duke of  Wellington regarded her intrigues; but the Foreign Minister, Lord  Aberdeen, was apparently a fool in her hands; and, whoever had the  merit, the neutrality of England continued.  That was, he repeats  more than once, a most critical time for Russia; it was an object  almost of life and death to the Czar to keep England dawdling in a  state of actual though not avowed neutrality.  It is, he argued, a  matter of fact, that precisely this result was attained, and "I  shall be slow to believe that Madame de Lieven did not deserve a  great share of the glory (as you would think it) of making England  act weakly under such circumstances; more especially since we know  that the Duke did not like the great lady, and may be supposed to  have distinctly traced his painful embarrassment to her power."  So  the letters go, interspersed with news, with criticisms of notable  persons, with comments enlightening or cynical on passing political  events: with personal matters only now and then; as when he notes  the loss of his two sisters; dwells with unwonted feeling on the  death of his eldest nephew by consumption; condoles with her on her  husband's illness; gives council, wise or playful, as to the  education of her son.  "I am glad to hear that he is good at Greek,  Latin, and Mathematics, for that shows his cleverness; glad also to  hear that he is occasionally naughty, for that shows his force.  I  advise you to claim and exercise as much control as possible,  because I am certain that a woman - especially so gifted a one as  you - knows more, or rather feels more, about the right way of  bringing up a boy than any mere man."

Unbrokenly the correspondence continues: the intimacy added charm,  interest, fragrance to his life, brought out in him all that was  genial, playful, humorous.  He fights the admonitions of coming  weakness; goes to Sidmouth with a sore throat, but takes his papers  and his books.  It is, he says, a deserted little sea-coast place.   "Mrs. Grundy has a small house there, but she does not know me by  sight.  If Madame Novikoff were to come, the astonished little  town, dazzled first by her, would find itself invaded by  theologians, bishops, ambassadors of deceased emperors, and an ex- Prime-Minister."  But as time goes on he speaks more often of his  suffering throat; of gout, increasing deafness, only half a voice:  his last letter is written in July, 1890, to condole with his  friend upon her husband's death.  In October his nurse takes the  pen; Madame Novikoff comes back hurriedly from Scotland to find him  in his last illness.  "It is very nice," he told his nurse, "to see  dear Madame Novikoff again, but I am going down hill fast, and  cannot hope to be well enough to see much of her."  This is in  November, 1890; on New Year's Eve came the inexorable, "Terminator  of delights and Separator of friends."



CHAPTER VI - LATER DAYS, AND DEATH



FOR twenty years Kinglake lived in Hyde Park Place, in bright  cheerful rooms looking in one direction across the Park, but on  another side into a churchyard.  The churchyard, Lady Gregory tells  us, gave him pause on first seeing the rooms.  "I should not like  to live here, I should be afraid of ghosts."  "Oh no, sir, there is  always a policeman round the corner." (24)  "Pleaceman X." has not,  perhaps, before been revered as the Shade-compelling son of Maia:


"Tu pias laetis animas reponis Sedibus, VIRGAQUE LEVEM COERCES AUREA TURBAM."


Here he worked through the morning; the afternoon took him to the  "Travellers," where his friends, Sir Henry Bunbury and Mr. Chenery,  usually expected him; then at eight o'clock, if not, as Shylock  says, bid forth, he went to dine at the Athenaeum.  His dinner seat  was in the left-hand corner of the coffee-room, where, in the  thirties, Theodore Hook had been wont to sit, gathering near him so  many listeners to his talk, that at Hook's death in 1841 the  receipts for the club dinners fell off to a large amount.  Here, in  the "Corner," as they called it, round Kinglake would be Hayward,  Drummond Wolff, Massey, Oliphant, Edward Twisleton, Strzelecki,  Storks, Venables, Wyke, Bunbury, Gregory, American Ticknor, and a  few more; Sir W. Stirling Maxwell, when in Scotland, sending  hampers of pheasants to the company.  "Hurried to the Athenaeum for  dinner," says Ticknor in 1857, "and there found Kinglake and Sir  Henry Rawlinson, to whom were soon added Hayward and Stirling.  We  pushed our tables together and had a jolly dinner. . . . To the  Athenaeum; and having dined pleasantly with Merivale, Kinglake, and  Stirling, I hurried off to the House."  In later years, when his  voice grew low and his hearing difficult, he preferred that the  diners should resolve themselves into little groups, assigning to  himself a TETE-A-TETE, with whom at his ease he could unfold  himself.

No man ever fought more gallantly the encroachments of old age - ON  SUT ETRE JEUNE JUSQUE DANS SES VIEUX JOURS.  At seventy-four years  old, staying with a friend at Brighton, he insisted on riding over  to Rottingdean, where Sir Frederick Pollock was staying.  "I  mastered," he said, in answer to remonstrances, "I mastered the  peculiarities of the Brighton screw before you were born, and have  never forgotten them."  Vaulting into his saddle he rode off,  returning with a schoolboy's delight at the brisk trot he had found  practicable when once clear of the King's Road.  Long after his  hearing had failed, his sight become grievously weakened, and his  limbs not always trustworthy, he would never allow a cab to be  summoned for him after dinner, always walking to his lodgings.  But  he had to give up by and by his daily canter in Rotten Row, and  more reluctantly still his continental travel.  Foreign railways  were closed to him by the SALLE D'ATTENTE; he could not stand  incarceration in the waiting-rooms.

The last time he crossed the Channel was at the close of the  Franco-Prussian war, on a visit to his old friend M. Thiers, then  President.  It was a dinner to deputies of the Extreme Left, and  Kinglake was the only Englishman; "so," he said, "among the  servants there was a sort of reasoning process as to my identity,  ending in the conclusion, 'IL DOIT ETRE SIR DILKE.'"  Soon the  inference was treated as a fact; and in due sequence came newspaper  paragraphs declaring that the British Ambassador had gravely  remonstrated with the President for inviting Sir Charles Dilke to  his table.  Then followed articles defending the course taken by  the President, and so for some time the ball was kept up.  The  remonstrance of the Ambassador was a myth, Lord Lyons was a friend  of Sir Charles; but the latter was suspect at the time both in  England and France; in England for his speeches and motion on the  Civil List; in France, because, with Frederic Harrison, he had  helped to get some of the French Communists away from France; and  the French Government was watching him with spies.  In Sir  Charles's motion Kinglake took much interest, refusing to join in  the cry against it as disloyal.  Sir Charles, he said, spoke no  word against the Queen; and only brought the matter before the  House because challenged to repeat in Parliament the statements he  had made in the country.  As a matter of policy he thought it  mistaken: "Move in such a matter openly, and party discipline  compels your defeat; bring pressure to bear on a Cabinet, some of  its members are on your side, and you may gain your point."  Sir  Charles's speech was calmly argumentative, and to many minds  convincing; it provoked a passionate reply from Gladstone; and when  Mr. Auberon Herbert following declared himself a Republican, a  tumult arose such as in those pre-Milesian days had rarely been  witnessed in the House.  But the wisdom of Kinglake's counsel is  sustained by the fact that many years afterwards, as a result of  more private discussion, Mr. Gladstone pronounced his conversion to  the two bases of the motion, publicity, and the giving of the State  allowance to the head of the family rather than, person by person,  to the children and grandchildren of the Sovereign.  Action  pointing in this direction was taken in 1889 and 1901 on the advice  of Tory ministers.

Amongst Frenchmen of the highest class, intellectually and  socially, he had many valued friends, keeping his name on the  "Cosmopolitan" long after he had ceased to visit it, since "one  never knows when the distinguished foreigner may come upon one, and  of such the Cosmo is the London Paradise."  But he used to say that  in the other world a good Frenchman becomes an Englishman, a bad  Englishman becomes a Frenchman.  He saw in the typical Gaul a  compound of the tiger and the monkey; noted their want of  individuality, their tendency to go in flocks, their susceptibility  to panic and to ferocity, to the terror that makes a man kill  people, and "the terror that makes him lie down and beg."  We  remember, too, his dissection of St. Arnaud, as before all things a  type of his nation; "he impersonated with singular exactness the  idea which our forefathers had in their minds when they spoke of  what they called 'a Frenchman;' for although (by cowing the rich  and by filling the poor with envy), the great French Revolution had  thrown a lasting gloom on the national character, it left this one  man untouched.  He was bold, gay, reckless, vain; but beneath the  mere glitter of the surface there was a great capacity for  administrative business, and a more than common willingness to take  away human life."

"I relish," Kinglake said in 1871, "the spectacle of Bismarck  teaching the A B C of Liberal politics to the hapless French.  His  last MOT, they tell me, is this.  Speaking of the extent to which  the French Emperor had destroyed his own reputation and put an end  to the worship of the old Napoleon, he said: 'He has killed himself  and buried his uncle.'"  Again, in 1874, noting the CONTRE COUP  upon France resulting from the Bismarck and Arnim despatches, he  said: "What puzzles the poor dear French is to see that truth and  intrepid frankness consist with sound policy and consummate wisdom.   How funny it would be, if the French some day, as a novelty, or  what they would call a CAPRICE, were to try the effect of truth;  "though not naturally honest," as Autolycus says, "were to become  so by chance."

He thought M. Gallifet DANS SA LOGIQUE in liking the Germans and  hating Bismarck; for the Germans, in having their own way, would  break up into as many fragments as the best Frenchman could desire,  and Bismarck is the real suppressor of France.  Throughout the  Franco-Prussian war he sided strongly with the Prussians, refusing  to dine in houses where the prevailing sympathy with France would  make him unwelcome as its declared opponent; but he felt "as a  nightmare" the attack on prostrate Paris, "as a blow" the  capitulation of Metz; denouncing Gambetta and his colleagues as  meeting their disasters only with slanderous shrieks, "possessed by  the spirit of that awful Popish woman."  Bismarck as a statesman he  consistently admired, and deplored his dismissal.  I see, he said,  all the peril implied by Bismarck's exit, and the advent of his  ambitious young Emperor.  It is a transition from the known to the  unknown, from wisdom, perhaps, to folly.

His Crimean volumes continued to appear; in 1875, 1880, finally in  1887; while the Cabinet Edition was published in 1887-8.  This last  contained three new Prefaces; in Vol. I. as we have seen, the  memorial of Nicholas Kireeff; in Vol. II. the latter half of the  original Preface to Vol. I., cancelled thence at Madame Novikoff's  request, though now carefully modified so as to avoid anything  which might irritate Russia at a moment when troubles seemed to be  clearing away.  In his Preface to Vol. VII. he had three objects,  to set right the position of Sir E. Hamley, who had been neglected  in the despatches; to demolish his friend Lord Bury, who had  "questioned my omniscience" in the "Edinburgh Review"; and to  exonerate England at large from absurd self-congratulations about  the "little Egypt affair," the blame of such exaggeration resting  with those whom he called State Showmen.

Silent to acquaintances about the progress of his work, he was  communicative to his few intimates, though never reading aloud  extracts or allowing them to be seen.  In 1872 he would speak  pathetically of his "Crimean muddle," perplexed, as he well might  be, by the intricacies of Inkerman.  Asked if he will not introduce  a Te Deum on the fall of Louis Napoleon, he answered that to write  without the stimulus of combat would be a task beyond his energy;  "when I took the trouble to compose that fourteenth chapter, the  wretched Emperor and his gang were at the height of their power in  Europe and the world; but now!" He was insatiate as to fresh facts:  utilized his acquaintance with Todleben, whom he had first met on  his visit to England in 1864; sought out Prince Ourusoff at a later  time, and inserted particulars gleaned from him in Vol. IX.,  Chapter V.

In 1875 he told Madame Novikoff that his task was done so far as  Inkerman was concerned, and was proud to think that he had rescued  from oblivion the heroism of the Russian troops in what he calls  the "Third Period" of the great fight, ignored as it was by all  Russian historians of the war.  He made fruitless inquiries after a  paper said to have been left behind him by Skobeleff, explaining  that "India is a cherry to be eaten by Russia, but in two bites";  it was contrary to the general's recorded utterances and probably  apocryphal.  Russophobe as regarded Turkey, he sneered at England's  sentimental support of nationalities as "Platonic": a capital  epithet he called it, and envied the Frenchman who applied it to  us, declaring that it had turned all the women against us.  He was  moved by receiving Korniloff's portrait with a kind message from  the dead hero's family, seeing in the features a confirmation of  the ideal which he had formed in his own mind and had tried to  convey to others.  Readers of his book will recall the fine tribute  to Korniloff's powers, and the description of his death, in  Chapters VI. and XIII. of Vol. IV. (Cabinet Edition).

Many of his comments on current events are preserved in the notes  or in the memories of his friends.  Sometimes these were  characteristically cynical.  He ridiculed the newspaper parade of  national sympathy with the Prince of Wales's illness: "We are  represented as all members of the royal family, and all in family  hysterics."  Dizzy's orientalization of Queen Victoria into an  Empress angered him, as it angered many more.  The last Empress  Regnant, he said, was Catherine II. and it seems to be thought that  by advising the Queen to take that great monarch's title, we shall  exercise a wholesome influence on the morals of our women.  He  would quote Byron's


"Russia's mighty Empress Behaved no better than a common sempstress;"


"there was an old-fashioned sacredness, which, however foolish  intrinsically, was still useful, in our title of 'The Queen'; nor  do we see the policy of adding a SUPREME DE VOLAILLE to the bread  and wine of our Sacrament."

He chuckled over the indignation of the HAUTE VOLEE, when on the  visit to England of President Grant's daughter in 1872, Americans  in London sent out cards of invitation headed "To meet Miss Grant,"  as at a profane imitation of a practice hitherto confined to  royalties; laughing not at the legitimate American mimicry of  European consequence, but at the silly formalists in Society who  fumed over the imagined presumption.  Consulted by an invalid as to  the charm of Ostend for a seaside residence, he limited it to  persons of gregarious habits; "the people are all driven down to  the beach like a flock of sheep in the morning, and in the evening  they are all driven back to their folds."  He reported a feeble  drama written by his ancient idol, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe; "it  is a painful thing to see a man of his quality and of his age  unduly detained in the world; when the Emperor Nicholas died, the  Eltchi lost his RAISON D'ETRE."  He disparaged the wild fit of  morality undergone by the "Pall Mall Gazette" during the scandalous  "Maiden Tribute" revelation, pronouncing its protegees to be  "clever little devils."  He was greatly startled by Gortschakoff's  famous circular, annulling the Black Sea clause in the Treaty of  Paris, and much relieved by Bismarck's dexterous interposition,  which saved the susceptibility of Europe, and especially of  England, by yielding as a favour to the demand of Russia what no  one was in a position to refuse; but he maintained, and Lord  Stratford agreed with him, that Gortschakoff's precipitate act was  governed by circumstances never revealed to mankind.  He learned,  too, that it caused the Chancellor to be DECONSIDERE in high  Russian circles; he was called "UN NARCISSE QUI SE MIRE DANS SON  ENCRIER."  Kinglake used to say that in conceding the right of the  Sultan to exclude any war-flag from the Bosphorus and the  Dardanelles, Russia was treating Turkey as a bag-fox, to be gently  hunted occasionally, but not mangled or killed; and he felt keenly  the ridicule resting on the allies, who were compelled to surrender  the neutralization purchased at the cost of so much blood and  treasure.  He watched with much amusement the restoration of  Turkish self-confidence.  "Turkey believes that he is no longer a  sick man, and is turning all his doctors out of the house, to the  immense astonishment of the English doctor, so conscious of his own  rectitude that he cannot understand being sent off with the quacks.   You know in our beautiful Liturgy we have a prayer for the Turks;  it looks as if our supplications had become successful."  His  interest in Turkey never flagged.  "I am in a great fright," he  said in 1877, "about my dear Turks, because Russia gives virtual  command of the army before Plevna to Todleben, a really great HOMME  DE GUERRE."

Russophobia was at that time so strong in London that Madame  Novikoff hesitated to visit England, and he himself feared that she  might find it uncomfortable.  Her alarm, however, was ridiculed by  Hayward, "most faithful of the Russianisers, ready to do battle for  Russia at any moment, declaring her to be quite virtuous, with no  fault but that of being INCOMPRISE."  But he groaned over the  humiliation of England under Russia's bold stroke, noting  frequently a decay of English character which he ascribed to  chronic causes.  The Englishman taken separately, he said, seems  much the same as he used to be; but there is a softening of the  aggregate brain which affects Englishmen when acting together.  He  hailed the great Liberal victory of 1880, and watched with  interest, as one behind the scenes, the negotiations which led to  Lord Hartington's withdrawal and Mr. Gladstone's resumption of  power; for in these his friend Hayward was an active go-between,  removing by his tact and frankness "hitches" which might otherwise  have been disastrous.  He thought W. E. Forster's attack on Mr.  Gladstone's Irish policy in 1882 ill-managed for his own position,  his famous speech not sufficiently "clenching."  Had he separated  from his chief on broader grounds, refusing complicity with a  Minister who consented to parley with the imprisoned Irishmen, he  would, Kinglake thought, have occupied a highly commanding  position.  At present his difference from his colleagues was one  only of degree.

He was once beguiled, amongst friends very intimate, into telling a  dream.  He dreamed that he was attending an anatomical lecture -  which, as a fact, he had never done - and that his own body, from  which he found himself entirely separated, was the dissected  subject on which the lecturer discoursed.  The body lay on a table  beside the lecturer, but he himself, his entity, was at the other  end of the room, on the furthest or highest of a set of benches  raised one above the other as at a theatre.  He imagined himself in  a vague way to be disagreeing with the lecturer; but the strongest  impression on his mind was annoyance at being so badly placed, so  far from the professor and from his own body that he could not see  or hear without an effort.  The dream, he pointed out, showed this  curious fact, that without any conscious design or effort of the  will a man may conceive himself to be in perfect possession of his  identity, whilst separated from his own body by a distance of  several feet.  "The highest concept," said Jowett, "which man forms  of himself is as detached from the body."  ("Life," ii. 241.)  The  lecture-room which he imagined was one of the lower school-rooms at  Eton, with which he had been familiar in early days.

After Hayward's death in 1884, his own habits began to change.  He  still dined at the Athenaeum "corner," but increasing deafness  began to make society irksome, and, his solitary meal ended, he  spent his evenings reading in the Library.  By-and-by that too  became impossible.  His voice grew weak, throat and tongue were  threatened with disease.  In 1888 he went to Brighton with a nurse,  returned to rooms on Richmond Hill, then to Bayswater Terrace.  An  operation was performed and he seemed to recover, but relapsed.   Old friends tended him: Madame Novikoff, Mr. Froude and Mr. Lecky,  Madame de Quaire and Mrs. Brookfield, Lord Mexborough his ancient  fellow-traveller, Mrs. Craven, Sir William and Lady Gregory, with a  few more, cheered him by their visits so long as he was able to  bear them; and his brother and sister, Dr. and Mrs. Hamilton  Kinglake, were with him at the end.  Patient to the last, kind and  gentle to all about him, he passed away quietly on New Year's Day,  1891:


"being merry-hearted, Shook hands with flesh and blood, and so departed."


His remains were cremated at Woking, after a special service at  Christchurch, Lancaster Gate, attended by Dr. and Mrs. Kinglake  with their son Captain Kinglake, the Duke of Bedford, Mr. and Mrs.  Lecky, Mrs. W. H. Brookfield and her son Charles.


No good portrait of him has been published.  That prefixed to  Blackwood's "Eothen" of 1896 was furnished by Dr. Kinglake, who,  however, looked upon it as unsatisfactory.  The "Not an M.P." of  "Vanity Fair," 1872, is a grotesque caricature.  The photograph  here reproduced (p. 128), by far the best likeness extant, he gave  to Madame Novikoff in 1870, receiving hers in return, but  pronouncing the transaction "an exchange between the personified  months of May and November."  The face gives expression to the shy  aloofness which, amongst strangers, was characteristic of him  through life.  He had even a horror of hearing his name pealed out  by servants, and came early to parties that the proclamation might  be achieved before as few auditors as possible.  Visiting the newly  married husband of his friend Adelaide Kemble, and being the first  guest to arrive, he encountered in Mr. Sartoris a host as  contentedly undemonstrative as himself.  Bows passed, a seat by the  fire was indicated, he sat down, and the pair contemplated one  another for ten minutes in absolute silence, till the lady of the  house came in, like the prince in "The Sleeping Beauty," though not  by the same process, to break the charm.  He gave up calling at a  house where he was warmly appreciated, because father, mother,  daughter, bombarded him with questions.  "I never came away without  feeling sure that I had in some way perjured myself."

On his shyness waited swiftly ensuing boredom; if his neighbour at  table were garrulous or BANALE, his face at once betrayed  conversational prostration; a lady who often watched him used to  say that his pulse ought to be felt after the first course; and  that if it showed languor he should be moved to the side of some  other partner.  "He had great charm," writes to me another old  friend, "in a quiet winning way, but was 'dark' with rough and  noisy people."  So it came to pass that his manner was threefold;  icy and repellent with those who set his nerves on edge; good- humoured, receptive, intermittently responsive in general and  congenial company; while, at ease with friends trusted and beloved,  the lines of the face became gracious, indulgent, affectionate, the  SOURIRE DES YEUX often inexpressibly winning and tender.   "Kinglake," says Eliot Warburton in his unpublished diary, "talked  to us to-day about his travels; pessimistic and cynical to the rest  of the world, he is always gentle and kind to us."  To this dear  friend he was ever faithful, wearing to the day of his death an  octagonal gold ring engraved "Eliot. Jan: 1852."  He would never  play the RACONTEUR in general company, for he had a great horror of  repeating himself, and, latterly, of being looked upon as a bore by  younger men; but he loved to pour out reminiscences of the past to  an audience of one or two at most: "Let an old man gather his  recollections and glance at them under the right angle, and his  life is full of pantomime transformation scenes."  The chief  characteristic of his wit was its unexpectedness; sometimes acrid,  sometimes humorous, his sayings came forth, like Topham Beauclerk's  in Dr. Johnson's day, like Talleyrand's in our own, poignant  without effort.  His calm, gentle voice, contrasted with his  startling caustic utterance, reminded people of Prosper Merimee:  terse epigram, felicitous APROPOS, whimsical presentment of the  topic under discussion, emitted in a low tone, and without the  slightest change of muscle:


"All the charm of all the Muses Often flowering in a lonely word." (25)


Questions he would suavely and often wittily parry or repel: to an  unhistorical lady asking if he remembered Madame Du Barry, he said,  "my memory is very imperfect as to the particulars of my life  during the reign of Lous XV. and the Regency; but I know a lady who  has a teapot which belonged, she says, to Madame Du Barry."  Madame  Novikoff, however, records his discomfiture at the query of a  certain Lady E-, who, when all London was ringing with his first  Crimean volumes, asked him if he were not an admirer of Louis  Napoleon.  "LE PAUVRE KINGLAKE, DECONTENANCE, REPONDIT TOUT BAS  INTIMIDE COMME UN ENFANT QU'ON MET DATES LE COIN: OUI - NON - PAS  PRECISEMENT."

He had no knowledge of or liking for music.  Present once by some  mischance at a MATINEE MUSICALE, he was asked by the hostess what  kind of music he preferred.  His preference, he owned, was for the  drum.  One thinks of the "Bourgeois Gentilhomme," "LA TROMPETTE  MARINE EST UN INSTRUMENT QUI ME PLAIT, EL QUI EST HARMONIEUX"; we  are reminded, too, of Dean Stanley, who, absolutely tone-deaf, and  hurrying away whenever music was performed, once from an adjoining  room in his father's house heard Jenny Lind sing "I know that my  Redeemer liveth."  He went to her shyly, and told her that she had  given him an idea of what people mean by music.  Once before, he  said in all seriousness, the same feeling had come over him, when  before the palace at Vienna he had heard a tattoo rendered by four  hundred drummers.


Kinglake used to regret the disuse of duelling, as having impaired  the higher tone of good breeding current in his younger days, and  even blamed the Duke of Wellington for proscribing it in the army.   He had himself on one occasion sent a cartel, and stood waiting for  his adversary, like Sir Richard Strachan at Walcheren, eight days  on the French coast; but the adversary never came.  Hayward once  referred to him, as a counsellor, and if necessary a second, a  quarrel with Lord R-.  Lord R-'s friend called on him, a Norfolk  squire, "broad-faced and breathing port wine," after the fashion of  uncle Phillips in "Pride and Prejudice," who began in a boisterous  voice, "I am one of those, Mr. Kinglake, who believe R- to be a  gentleman."  In his iciest tones and stoniest manner Kinglake  answered: "That, Sir, I am quite willing to assume."  The effect,  he used to say, as he told and acted the scene, was magical; "I had  frozen him sober, and we settled everything without a fight."  Of  all his friends Hayward was probably the closest; an association of  discrepancies in character, manner, temperament, not complementary,  but opposed and hostile; irreconcilable, one would say, but for the  knowledge that in love and friendship paradox reigns supreme.   Hayward was arrogant, overbearing, loud, insistent, full of strange  oaths and often unpardonably coarse; "our dominant friend,"  Kinglake called him; "odious" is the epithet I have heard commonly  bestowed upon him by less affectionate acquaintances.  Kinglake was  reserved, shy, reticent, with the high breeding, grand manner,  quiet urbanity, GRATA PROTERVITAS, of a waning epoch; restraint,  concentration, tact of omission, dictating alike his silence and  his speech; his well-weighed words "crystallizing into epigrams as  they touched the air." (26)  When Hayward's last illness came upon  him in 1884, Kinglake nursed him tenderly; spending the morning in  his friend's lodgings at 8, St. James's Street, the house which  Byron occupied in his early London days; and bringing on the latest  bulletin to the club.  The patient rambled towards the end; "we  ought to be getting ready to catch the train that we may go to my  sister's at Lyme." Kinglake quieted his sick friend by an assurance  that the servants, whom he would not wish to hurry, were packing.   "On no account hurry the servants, but still let us be off."  The  last thought which he articulated while dying was, "I don't exactly  know what it is, but I feel it is something grand."  "Hayward is  dead," Kinglake wrote to a common friend; "the devotion shown to  him by all sorts and conditions of men, and, what is better, of  women, was unbounded.  Gladstone found time to be with him, and to  engage him in a conversation of singular interest, of which he has  made a memorandum."

Another of Kinglake's life-long familiars was Charles Skirrow,  Taxing Master in Chancery, with his accomplished wife, from whose  memorable fish dinners at Greenwich he was seldom absent, adapting  himself no less readily to their theatrical friends - the  Bancrofts, Burnand, Toole, Irving - than to the literary set with  which he was more habitually at home.  He was religiously loyal to  his friends, speaking of them with generous admiration, eagerly  defending them when attacked.  He lauded Butler Johnstone as the  most gifted of the young men in the House of Commons; would not  allow Bernal Osborne to be called untrue; "he offends people if you  like, but he is never false or hollow."  A clever SOBRIQUET  fathered on him, burlesquing the monosyllabic names of a well-known  diarist and official, he repelled indignantly.  "He is my friend,  and had I been guilty of the JEU, I should have broken two of my  commandments; that which forbids my joking at a friend's expense,  and that which forbids my fashioning a play upon words."  He  entreated Madame Novikoff to visit and cheer Charles Lever, dying  at Trieste; deeply lamented Sir H. Bulwer's death: "I used to think  his a beautiful intellect, and he was wonderfully SIMPATICO to me."   But he was shy of condoling with bereaved mourners, believing words  used on such occasions to be utterly untrue.  He loved to include  husband and wife in the same meed of admiration, as in the case of 

Dean Stanley and Lady Augusta, or of Sir Robert and Lady Emily  Peel.  Peel, he said, has the RADIANT quality not easy to describe;  Lady Emily is always beauteous, bright, attractive.  Lord Stanhope  he praised as a historian, paying him the equivocal compliment that  his books were much better than his conversation.  So, too, he  qualified his admiration of Lady Ashburton, dwelling on her beauty,  silver voice, ready enthusiasm apt to disperse itself by flying at  too many objects.

He was wont to speak admiringly of Lord Acton, relating how, a  Roman Catholic, yet respecting enlightenment and devoted to books,  he once set up and edited a "Quarterly Review," with a notion of  reconciling the Light and the Dark as well as he could; but the  "Prince of Darkness, the Pope," interposed, and ordered him to stop  the "Review."  He was compelled to obey; not, he told people, on  any religious ground, but because relations and others would have  made his life a bore to him if he had been contumacious against the  Holy Father.

Kinglake was strongly attracted by W. E. Forster, a "rough  diamond," spoken of at one time as a possible Prime Minister.   Beginning life, he said, as a Quaker, with narrow opinions, his  vigour of character and brain-power shook them off.  Powerful,  robust, and perfectly honest, yet his honesty inflicted on him a  doubleness of view which caused him to be described as engaging his  two hands in two different pursuits.  His estimate of Sir R. Morier  would have gladdened Jowett's heart; he loved him as a private  friend; eulogized his public qualities; rejoiced over his  appointment as Ambassador at St. Petersburg, seeing in him a  diplomatist with not only a keen intellect and large views, but  vibrating with the warmth, animation, friendliness, that are  charmingly UN-diplomatic.  Of Carlyle, his life-long, though not  always congenial intimate, he used to speak as having great graphic  power, but being essentially a humourist; a man who, with those he  could trust, never pretended to be in earnest, but used to roar  with glorious laughter over the fun of his own jeremiads; "so far  from being a prophet he is a bad Scotch joker, and knows himself to  be a wind-bag."  He blamed Froude's revelations of Carlyle in "The  Reminiscences," as injurious and offensive.  Froude himself he  often likened to Carlyle; the thoughts of both, he said, ran in the  same direction, but of the two, Froude was by far the more  intellectual man.

Staunch friend to the few, polite, though never effusive, to the  many, he also nourished strong antipathies.  The appearance in  Madame Novikoff's rooms of a certain Scotch bishop invariably drove  him out of them, "Peter Paul, Bishop of Claridge's," he called him.   To Von Beust (the Austrian Chancellor), who spoke English in a  rapid half-intelligible falsetto, he gave the name of MIRLITON  (penny trumpet).  His allusions to Mirliton and to the Bishop  frequently mystified Madame Novikoff's guests.  For he loved to  talk in cypher.  Canon Warburton, kindly searching on my behalf his  brother Eliot's journals, tells me that he and Kinglake, meeting  almost daily, lived in a cryptic world of jokes, confidences,  colloquialisms, inexplicable to all but their two selves.

He cordially disliked "The Times" newspaper, alleging instances of  the unfairness with which its columns had been used to spite and  injure persons who had offended it, chuckling over Hayward's  compact anathema, - "'The Times,' which as usual of late supplied  its lack of argument and proof by assumption, misrepresentation,  and personality."  He thought that its attacks upon himself had  helped his popularity.  "One of the main causes," he said in 1875,  "of the interest which people here were good enough to take in my  book was the fight between 'The Times' and me.  In 1863 it raged,  in 1867 it was renewed with great violence, and now I suppose the  flame kindles once more, though probably with diminished strength.   In 1863 the storm of opinion generally waxed fierce against me, but  now, as I hear, 'The Times' is alone, journals of all politics  being loud in my praise.  But I never look at any comment on my  volumes till long afterwards, and I never in my life wrote to a  newspaper."  Once, when Chenery, the editor, came to join the table  at the Athenaeum where he and Mr. Cartwright were dining, Kinglake  rose, and removed to another part of the room.  "The Times" had  inserted a statement that Madame Novikoff was ordered to leave  England, and he thus publicly resented it.  "So unlike me," he  said, relating the story, "but somehow a savagery as of youth came  over me in my ancient days; it was like being twenty years old  again."  It came out, however, that "our indiscreet friend Froude"  had written something which justified the paragraph, and Kinglake  sent his AMENDE to Chenery, with whom ordinarily he was on most  friendly terms.

He disliked Irishmen "in the lump," saying that human nature is the  same everywhere except in Ireland.  Parnell he personally admired,  though hating Home Rule; and stigmatized as gross hypocrisy the  desertion of him by Liberals after the divorce trial.  He was wont  to speak irreverently of Lord Beaconsfield, whom he had known well  at Lady Blessington's in early days.  He would have found himself  in accord with Huxley, who used to thank God, his friend Mr. Fiske  tells us, that he had never bowed the knee either to Louis Napoleon  or Benjamin Disraeli.  He poured scorn on the Treaty of Berlin.   Russia, he said, defeating the Turks in war, has defeated  Beaconsfield in diplomacy.  If Englishmen understood such things  they would see that the Congress was a comedy; anyone who will  satisfy himself as to what Russia was really anxious to obtain, and  then look at the Salisbury-Schouvaloff treaty, will see that,  thanks to Beaconsfield's imbecility, Schouvaloff obtained one of  the most signal diplomatic triumphs that was ever won. (27)  A  sound ENTENTE between Russia and England he thought both possible  and desirable; but conceived it to be rendered difficult by the  want of steadiness and capacity which, for international purposes,  were the real faults of Lord Beaconsfield and Lord Salisbury.  He  repeated with much amusement the current anecdote of Lord  Beaconsfield's conquest of Mrs. Gladstone.  Meeting her in society,  he was said to have inquired with tenderness after Mr. Gladstone's  health, and then after receiving the loving wife's report of her  William, to have rejoined in his most dulcet tones, "Ah! take care  of him, for he is very VERY precious."  He always attributed  Dizzy's popularity to the feeling of Englishmen that he had "shown  them sport," an instinct, he thought, supreme in all departments of  the English mind.

Towards his old schoolfellow Gladstone he never felt quite  cordially, believing, rightly or wrongly, that the great statesman  nourished enmity towards himself.  He called him, as has been said,  "a good man in the worst sense of the term, conscientious with a  diseased conscience."  He watched with much amusement, as  illustrating the moral twist in Gladstone's temperament, the  "Colliery explosion," as it was called, when Sir R. Collier, the  Attorney-General, was appointed to a Puisne Judgeship, which he  held only for a day or two, in order to qualify him for a seat on a  new Court of Appeal; together with a very similar trick, by which  Ewelme Rectory, tenable only by an Oxonian, was given to a  Cambridge man.  The responsibility was divided between Gladstone  and Lord Hatherley the Chancellor, with the mutual idea apparently  that each of the two became thereby individually innocent.  But Sir  F. Pollock, in his amusing "Reminiscences," recalls the amicable  halving of a wicked word between the Abbess of Andouillet and the  Novice Margarita in "Tristram Shandy."  It answered in neither 

case.  "'They do not understand us,' cried Margarita.  'BUT THE  DEVIL DOES,' said the Abbess of Andouillet."  "The Collier scandal  narrowly escaped by two votes in the Lords, twenty-seven in the  Commons, a Parliamentary vote of censure, and gave unquestionably a  downward push to the Gladstone Administration.  Mr. Gladstone, on  the other hand, cordially admired Kinglake's speeches, saying that  few of those he had heard in Parliament could bear so well as his  the test of publication.

To the great Prime Minister's absolute fearlessness he did full  justice, as one of the finest features in his character; and loved  to quote an epigram by Lord Houghton, to whom Gladstone had  complained in a moment of weariness that he led the life of a dog.   "Yes," said Houghton, "but of a St. Bernard dog, ever busied in  saving life."  He loved to contrast the twofold biographical  paradox in the careers of the two famous rivals, Gladstone and  Disraeli; the dreaming Tory mystic, incarnation of Oxford  exclusiveness and Puseyite reserve, passing into the Radical  iconoclast; the Jew clerk in a city lawyer's office, "bad specimen  of an inferior dandy," coming to rule the proudest aristocracy and  lead the most fastidious assembly in the world.

He was not above broad farce when the fancy seized him.  At the  time when a certain kind of nonsense verse was popular, he, with  Sir Noel Paton and others, added not a few facetious sonnets to  Edward Lear's book, which lay on Madame Novikoff's table.  His  authorship is betrayed by the introduction of familiar  Somersetshire names, Taunton, Wellington, Curry Rivel, Creech,  Trull, Wilton:


"There was a young lady of Wilton, Who read all the poems of Milton: And, when she had done, She said, 'What bad fun!' This prosaic young lady of Wilton."


There were many more, but this will perhaps suffice; EX UNGUE  LEONEM.  They were addressed to the "Fair Lady of Claridge's,"  Madame Novikoff's hotel when in London, and were signed "Peter  Paul, Bishop of Claridge's."


"There is a fair lady at Claridge's, Whose smile is more charming to me, Than the rapture of ninety-nine marriages Could possibly, possibly, be; - "


is the final dedicatory stanza.  It is the gracious fooling of a  philosopher who understood his company.  "There are folks," says  Mr. Counsellor Pleydell, "before whom a man should take care how he  plays the fool, because they have either too much malice or too  little wit."  Kinglake knew his associates, and was not ashamed  DESIPERE IN LOCO, to frolic in their presence.


One point there was on which he never touched himself or suffered  others to interrogate him, his conception of and attitude towards  the Unseen.  He wore his religion as Sir William Gull wore the fur  of his coat, INSIDE.  Outwardly he died as he had lived, a Stoic;  that on the most personal and sacred of all topics he should  consult the Silences was in keeping with his idiosyncrasy.  Another  famous man, questioned as to his religious creed, made answer that  he believed what all wise men believe.  And what do all wise men  believe?  "That all wise men keep to themselves?"



Footnotes:


(1) When "Heartsease" first appeared, Percy Fotheringham was  believed to be a portrait; but the accomplished authoress in a  letter written not long before her death told me that the character  was wholly imaginary.

(2) Pedigrees are perplexing unless tabulated; so here is  Kinglake's genealogical tree.

KINGLAKES OF SALTMOOR.      WOODFORDES OF                             CASTLE CARY.           |                       |    +-------------------+          |    |                 WILLIAM=MARY WOODFORDE. ROBERT                      |    |                    +--------------------+ +--------------+        |                    | |              |        |                    | SERJEANT    REV. W.C.    A.W. KING-    DR. HAMILTON JOHN KING-  KINGLAKE     LAKE          KINGLAKE. LAKE.                    ("Eothen.")

(3) "Eothen," p. 33.  Reading "Timbuctoo" to-day one is amazed it  should have gained the prize.  Two short passages adumbrate the  coming Tennyson, the rest is mystic nonsense.  "What do you think  of Tennyson's prize poem?" writes Charles Wordsworth to his brother  Christopher.  "Had it been sent up at Oxford, the author would have  had a better chance of spending a few months at a lunatic asylum  than of obtaining the Prize."  A current Cambridge story at the  time explained the selection.  There were three examiners, the  Vice-Chancellor, a man of arbitrary temper, with whom his juniors  hesitated to disagree; a classical professor unversed in English  Literature; a mathematical professor indifferent to all literature.   The letter G was to signify approval, the letter B to brand it with  rejection.  Tennyson's manuscript came from the Vice-Chancellor  scored all over with G's.  The classical professor failed to see  its merit, but bowed to the Vice-Chancellor, and added his G.  The  mathematical professor could not admire, but since both his  colleagues ordained it, good it must be, and his G made the award  unanimous.  The three met soon after, and the Vice-Chancellor, in  his blatant way, attacked the other two for admiring a trashy poem.   "Why," they remonstrated, "you covered it with G's yourself."   "G's," said he, "they were Q's for queries; I could not understand  a line of it."

(4) "Enoch Arden," p. 34.

(5) "Eothen," p. 169.  Reprint by Bell and Sons, 1898.

(6) "Eothen," p. 17.

(7) His deferential regard for army rank was like that of Johnson  for bishops.  Great was his indignation when the "grotesque  Salvation Army," as he called it, adopted military nomenclature.   "I would let those ragamuffins call themselves saints, angels,  prophets, cherubim, Olympian gods and goddesses if they like; but  their pretension in taking the rank of officers in the army is to  me beyond measure repulsive."

(8) "Eothen," p. 190 in first edition.  It was struck out in the  fourth edition.

(9) "Eothen," p. 18.  Reprint by Bell and Sons, 1898.

(10) He is very fond of this word; it occurs eleven times.

(11) "Quarterly Review," December, 1844.

(12) "Eothen," p. 46.

(13) Poitier's "Vaudeville."

(14) One characteristic anecdote he omits.  Two French officers  were attached to our headquarters; and the staff were partly  embarrassed and partly amused by Lord Raglan's inveterate habit,  due to old Peninsular associations, of calling the enemy "the  French" in the presence of our foreign guests.

(15) Some of us can recall the lines in which Sir G. Trevelyan  commemorated "The Owl's" nocturnal flights:


"When at sunset, chill and dark, Sunset thins the swarming park, Bearing home his social gleaning - Jests and riddles fraught with meaning, Scandals, anecdotes, reports, - Seeks The Owl a maze of courts Which, with aspect towards the west, Fringe the street of Sainted James, Where a warm, secluded nest As his sole domain he claims; From his wing a feather draws, Shapes for use a dainty nib, Pens his parody or squib; Combs his down and trims his claws, And repairs where windows bright Flood the sleepless Square with light."

(16) Greville, vii. 223, quotes from a letter written after  Inkerman to the Prince Consort by Colonel Steele, saying "that he  had no idea how great a mind Raglan really had, but that he now saw  it, for in the midst of distresses and difficulties of every kind  in which the army was involved, he was perfectly serene and  undisturbed."

(17) "Go quietly" might have been his motto: even on horseback he  seemed never to be in a hurry.  Airey used to come in from their  rides round the outposts shuddering with cold, and complaining that  the Chief would never move his horse out of a walk.  "I daresay,"  said Carlyle, "Lord Raglan will rise quite quietly at the last  trump, and remain entirely composed during the whole day, and show  the most perfect civility to both parties."

(18) The first death! out of how many he nowhere reckons: he  shrinks from estimates of carnage, and we thank him for it.  But an  accomplished naturalist tells me that the vulture, a bird unknown  in the Crimea before hostilities began, swarmed there after the  Alma fight, and remained till the war was over, disappearing  meanwhile from the whole North African littoral.

(19) "D-n your eyes!" he said once, in a moment of irritation, to  his ATTACHE, Mr. Hay.  "D-n your Excellency's eyes!" was the  answer, delivered with deep respect but with sufficient emphasis.   Dismissed on the spot, the candid ATTACHE went in great anger to  pack up, but was followed after a time by Lady Canning, habitual  peacemaker in the household, who besought him if not to apologize  at least to bid his Chief good-bye.  After much persuasion he  consented.  "Hardly had he entered the room when Sir Stratford had  him by the hand.  'My dear Hay, this will never do; what a devil of  a temper you have!'  The two were firmer friends than ever after  this" (LANE POOLE'S LIFE OF LORD STRATFORD, chapter xiii.).

(20) The story of an old quarrel between Sir Stratford Canning and  the then Grand Duke Nicholas at St. Petersburg in 1825 is disproved  by Canning's own statement.  The two met once only in their lives,  at a purely formal reception at Paris in 1814.

(21) LA FEMME was a "Miss" or "Mrs." Howard.  She followed Louis  Napoleon to France in 1848, and lived openly with him as his  mistress.  In the once famous "Letters of an Englishman" we are  told how shortly after the December massacre the ELITE of English  visitors in Paris were not ashamed to dine at her house in the  President's company: and in 1860, Mrs. Simpson, in France with her  father, Nassau Senior, found her, decorated with the title of  Madame de Beauregard, inhabiting La Celle, near Versailles, once  the abode of Madame de Pompadour, "with the national flag flying  over it, to the great scandal of the neighbourhood."

(22) Bachaumont's criticism of Latour.  Lady Dilke's "French  Painters," p. 165.

(23) Here is one of the stanzas:

"L'Autriche - dit-on - et la Russie Se brouillent pour la Turquie. Des aujourd'hui il n'en est plus question. En invitant une femme charmante, Le Turc - et je l'en complimente - Est devenu pour nous un trait d'union."

(24) "Blackwood's Magazine," December, 1895, p. 802.

(25)  I inserted this quotation before reading the "Etchingham  Letters."  Sir Richard would wish me to erase it as hackneyed; but  it applies to Kinglake's talk as accurately as to Virgil's writing,  and I refuse to be defrauded of it.

(26) This delightful phrase is Lady Gregory's.  One would wish,  like Lord Houghton, though suppressing his presumptuous rider, to  have been its author.

(27) Of course Kinglake was not alone in this opinion.  It was  voiced in a delightful JEU D'ESPRIT, now forgotten, which it is  worth while to reproduce:


"THE BERLIN CONGRESS.

"The following Latin poem, from the pen of the well-known German  poet, Gustave Schwetschke, was distributed by Prince Bismarck's  special request amongst the Plenipotentiaries immediately after the  last sitting on Saturday:


"'GAUDEAMUS CONGRESSIBILE. "'Gaudeamus igitur Socii congressus, Post dolores bellicosos, Post labores gloriosos, Nobis fit decessus.

"'Ubi sunt, qui ante nos Quondam consedere, Viennenses, Parisienses Tot per annos, tot per menses? Frustra decidere.

"'Mundus heu! vult decipi, Sed non decipiatur, Non plus ultra inter gentes Litigantes et frementes Manus conferatur.

'Vivat Pax! et comitent Dii nunc congressum, Ceu Deus ex machina Ipsa venit Cypria Roborans successum.

"'Pereat discordia! Vincat semper litem Proxenetae probitas, (27a) Fides, spes, et charitas, Gaudeamus item!

"G. S."


"THE OTHER VERSION. (From the "Pall Mall Gazette.")


"A correspondent informs us that the version given in 'The  Standard' of yesterday of the congratulatory ode ('Gaudeamus  igitur,' etc.) addressed to the Congress by 'the well-known German  poet Gustave Schwetschke,' and 'distributed by Prince Bismarck's  request among the Plenipotentiaries,' is incorrect.  The true  version, we are assured, is as follows:

"'Rideamus igitur, Socii Congressus; Post dolores bellicosos, Post labores bumptiosos, Fit mirandus messus.

"Ubi sunt qui apud nos Causas litigare, Moldo-Wallachae frementes, Graeculi esurientes? Heu! absquatulare.

"'Ubi sunt provinciae Quas est laus pacasse? Totae, totae, sunt partitae: Has tulerunt Muscovitae, Illas Count Andrassy.

"'Et quid est quod Angliae Dedit hic Congressus? Jus pro aliis pugnandi, Mortuum vivificandi - Splendidi successus!

"'Vult Joannes decipi Et bamboosulatur. Io Beacche!  Quae majestas! Ostreae reportans testas Domum gloriatur!'"


"This version, which from internal evidence will be seen to be the  true one, may be roughly Englished thus:


"Let us have our hearty laugh, Greatest of Congresses! After days and weeks pugnacious, After labours ostentatious, See how big the mess is!

"'Where are those who at our bar Their demands have stated: Robbed Roumanians rampaging, Greeklings with earth-hunger raging? Where?  Absquatulated!

"'Where the lands we've pacified, With their rebel masses? All are gone; yes, all up-gobbled: These the Muscovite has nobbled, Those are Count Andrassy's.

"'And what does England carry off To add to her possessions? The right to wage another's strife, The right to raise the dead to life - Glorious concessions!

"'Well, let John Bull bamboozled be If he's so fond of sells! Io Beacche!  Hark the cheering! See him home in triumph bearing BOTH (27b) the oyster shells!'"

(27a) "Der ehrlich Miikler."

(27b) Peace and Honour.





End  