


Fisherman's Luck



by Henry van Dyke




 AND SOME OTHER UNCERTAIN THINGS




"Now I conclude that not only in Physicke, but likewise in sundry 

more certaine arts, fortune hath great share in them."

M. DE MONTAIGNE: Divers Events.









DEDICATION TO MY LADY GRAYGOWN





Here is the basket; I bring it home to you.  There are no great fish 

in it.  But perhaps there may be one or two little ones which will 

be to your taste.  And there are a few shining pebbles from the bed 

of the brook, and ferns from the cool, green woods, and wild flowers 

from the places that you remember.  I would fain console you, if I 

could, for the hardship of having married an angler: a man who 

relapses into his mania with the return of every spring, and never 

sees a little river without wishing to fish in it.  But after all, 

we have had good times together as we have followed the stream of 

life towards the sea.  And we have passed through the dark days 

without losing heart, because we were comrades.  So let this book 

tell you one thing that is certain.  In all the life of your 

fisherman the best piece of luck is just YOU.







CONTENTS



   I.  Fisherman's Luck



  II.  The Thrilling Moment



 III.  Talkability



  IV.  A Wild Strawberry



   V.  Lovers and Landscape



  VI.  A Fatal Success



 VII.  Fishing in Books



VIII.  A Norwegian Honeymoon



  IX.  Who Owns the Mountains?



   X.  A Lazy, Idle Brook



  XI.  The Open Fire



 XII.  A Slumber Song







FISHERMAN'S LUCK





Has it ever fallen in your way to notice the quality of the 

greetings that belong to certain occupations?



There is something about these salutations in kind which is 

singularly taking and grateful to the ear.  They are as much better 

than an ordinary "good day" or a flat "how are you?" as a folk-song 

of Scotland or the Tyrol is better than the futile love-ditty of the 

drawing-room.  They have a spicy and rememberable flavour.  They 

speak to the imagination and point the way to treasure-trove.



There is a touch of dignity in them, too, for all they are so free 

and easy--the dignity of independence, the native spirit of one who 

takes for granted that his mode of living has a right to make its 

own forms of speech.  I admire a man who does not hesitate to salute 

the world in the dialect of his calling.



How salty and stimulating, for example, is the sailorman's hail of 

"Ship ahoy!"  It is like a breeze laden with briny odours and a 

pleasant dash of spray.  The miners in some parts of Germany have a 

good greeting for their dusky trade.  They cry to one who is going 

down the shaft, "Gluck auf!"  All the perils of an underground 

adventure and all the joys of seeing the sun again are compressed 

into a word.  Even the trivial salutation which the telephone has 

lately created and claimed for its peculiar use--"Hello, hello"--

seems to me to have a kind of fitness and fascination.  It is like a 

thoroughbred bulldog, ugly enough to be attractive.  There is a 

lively, concentrated, electric air about it.  It makes courtesy wait 

upon dispatch, and reminds us that we live in an age when it is 

necessary to be wide awake.



I have often wished that every human employment might evolve its own 

appropriate greeting.  Some of them would be queer, no doubt; but at 

least they would be an improvement on the wearisome iteration of 

"Good-evening" and "Good-morning," and the monotonous inquiry, "How 

do you do?"--a question so meaningless that it seldom tarries for an 

answer.  Under the new and more natural system of etiquette, when 

you passed the time of day with a man you would know his business, 

and the salutations of the market-place would be full of interest.



As for my chosen pursuit of angling (which I follow with diligence 

when not interrupted by less important concerns), I rejoice with 

every true fisherman that it has a greeting all its own and of a 

most honourable antiquity.  There is no written record of its 

origin.  But it is quite certain that since the days after the 

Flood, when Deucalion





     "Did first this art invent

      Of angling, and his people taught the same,"





two honest and good-natured anglers have never met each other by the 

way without crying out, "What luck?"



Here, indeed, is an epitome of the gentle art.  Here is the spirit 

of it embodied in a word and paying its respects to you with its 

native accent.  Here you see its secret charms unconsciously 

disclosed.  The attraction of angling for all the ages of man, from 

the cradle to the grave, lies in its uncertainty.  'Tis an affair of 

luck.



No amount of preparation in the matter of rods and lines and hooks 

and lures and nets and creels can change its essential character.  

No excellence of skill in casting the delusive fly or adjusting the 

tempting bait upon the hook can make the result secure.  You may 

reduce the chances, but you cannot eliminate them.  There are a 

thousand points at which fortune may intervene.  The state of the 

weather, the height of the water, the appetite of the fish, the 

presence or absence of other anglers--all these indeterminable 

elements enter into the reckoning of your success.  There is no 

combination of stars in the firmament by which you can forecast the 

piscatorial future.  When you go a-fishing, you just take your 

chances; you offer yourself as a candidate for anything that may be 

going; you try your luck.



There are certain days that are favourites among anglers, who regard 

them as propitious for the sport.  I know a man who believes that 

the fish always rise better on Sunday than on any other day in the 

week.  He complains bitterly of this supposed fact, because his 

religious scruples will not allow him to take advantage of it.  He 

confesses that he has sometimes thought seriously of joining the 

Seventh-Day Baptists.



Among the Pennsylvania Dutch, in the Alleghany Mountains, I have 

found a curious tradition that Ascension Day is the luckiest in the 

year for fishing.  On that morning the district school is apt to he 

thinly attended, and you must be on the stream very early if you do 

not wish to find wet footprints on the stones ahead of you.



But in fact, all these superstitions about fortunate days are idle 

and presumptuous.  If there were such days in the calendar, a kind 

and firm Providence would never permit the race of man to discover 

them.  It would rob life of one of its principal attractions, and 

make fishing altogether too easy to be interesting.



Fisherman's luck is so notorious that it has passed into a proverb.  

But the fault with that familiar saying is that it is too short and 

too narrow to cover half the variations of the angler's possible 

experience.  For if his luck should be bad, there is no portion of 

his anatomy, from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, 

that may not be thoroughly wet.  But if it should be good, he may 

receive an unearned blessing of abundance not only in his basket, 

but also in his head and his heart, his memory and his fancy.  He 

may come home from some obscure, ill-named, lovely stream--some Dry 

Brook, or Southwest Branch of Smith's Run--with a creel full of 

trout, and a mind full of grateful recollections of flowers that 

seemed to bloom for his sake, and birds that sang a new, sweet, 

friendly message to his tired soul.  He may climb down to "Tommy's 

Rock" below the cliffs at Newport (as I have done many a day with my 

lady Greygown), and, all unnoticed by the idle, weary promenaders in 

the path of fashion, haul in a basketful of blackfish, and at the 

same time look out across the shining sapphire waters and inherit a 

wondrous good fortune of dreams--





     "Have glimpses that will make him less forlorn;

      Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea,

      Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn."





But all this, you must remember, depends upon something secret and 

incalculable, something that we can neither command nor predict.  It 

is an affair of gift, not of wages.  Fish (and the other good things 

which are like sauce to the catching of them) cast no shadow before.  

Water is the emblem of instability.  No one can tell what he shall 

draw out of it until he has taken in his line.  Herein are found the 

true charm and profit of angling for all persons of a pure and 

childlike mind.



Look at those two venerable gentlemen floating in a skiff upon the 

clear waters of Lake George.  One of them is a successful statesman, 

an ex-President of the United States, a lawyer versed in all the 

curious eccentricities of the "lawless science of the law."  The 

other is a learned doctor of medicine, able to give a name to all 

diseases from which men have imagined that they suffered, and to 

invent new ones for those who are tired of vulgar maladies.  But all 

their learning is forgotten, their cares and controversies are laid 

aside, in "innocuous desuetude."  The Summer School of Sociology is 

assembled.  The Medical Congress is in session.



But they care not--no, not so much as the value of a single live 

bait.  The sun shines upon them with a fervent heat, but it irks 

them not.  The rain descends, and the winds blow and beat upon them, 

but they are unmoved.  They are securely anchored here in the lee of 

Sabbath-Day Point.



What enchantment binds them to that inconsiderable spot?  What magic 

fixes their eyes upon the point of a fishing-rod, as if it were the 

finger of destiny?  It is the enchantment of uncertainty: the same 

natural magic that draws the little suburban boys in the spring of 

the year, with their strings and pin-hooks, around the shallow ponds 

where dace and redfins hide; the same irresistible charm that fixes 

a row of city gamins, like ragged and disreputable fish-crows, on 

the end of a pier where blear-eyed flounders sometimes lurk in the 

muddy water.  Let the philosopher explain it as he will.  Let the 

moralist reprehend it as he chooses.  There is nothing that attracts 

human nature more powerfully than the sport of tempting the unknown 

with a fishing-line.



Those ancient anglers have set out upon an exodus from the tedious 

realm of the definite, the fixed, the must-certainly-come-to-pass.  

They are on a holiday in the free country of peradventure.  They do 

not know at this moment whether the next turn of Fortune's reel will 

bring up a perch or a pickerel, a sunfish or a black bass.  It may 

be a hideous catfish or a squirming eel, or it may be a lake-trout, 

the grand prize in the Lake George lottery.  There they sit, those 

gray-haired lads, full of hope, yet equally prepared for 

resignation; taking no thought for the morrow, and ready to make the 

best of to-day; harmless and happy players at the best of all games 

of chance.



"In other words," I hear some severe and sour-complexioned reader 

say, "in plain language, they are a pair of old gamblers."



Yes, if it pleases you to call honest men by a bad name.  But they 

risk nothing that is not their own; and if they lose, they are not 

impoverished.  They desire nothing that belongs to other men; and if 

they win, no one is robbed.  If all gambling were like that, it 

would be difficult to see the harm in it.  Indeed, a daring moralist 

might even assert, and prove by argument, that so innocent a delight 

in the taking of chances is an aid to virtue.



Do you remember Martin Luther's reasoning on the subject of 

"excellent large pike"?  He maintains that God would never have 

created them so good to the taste, if He had not meant them to be 

eaten.  And for the same reason I conclude that this world would 

never have been left so full of uncertainties, nor human nature 

framed so as to find a peculiar joy and exhilaration in meeting them 

bravely and cheerfully, if it had not been divinely intended that 

most of our amusement and much of our education should come from 

this source.



"Chance" is a disreputable word, I know.  It is supposed by many 

pious persons to be improper and almost blasphemous to use it.  But 

I am not one of those who share this verbal prejudice.  I am 

inclined rather to believe that it is a good word to which a bad 

reputation has been given.  I feel grateful to that admirable 

"psychologist who writes like a novelist," Mr. William James, for 

his brilliant defence of it.  For what does it mean, after all, but 

that some things happen in a certain way which might have happened 

in another way?  Where is the immorality, the irreverence, the 

atheism in such a supposition?  Certainly God must be competent to 

govern a world in which there are possibilities of various kinds, 

just as well as one in which every event is inevitably determined 

beforehand.  St. Peter and the other fishermen-disciples on the Lake 

of Galilee were perfectly free to cast their net on either side of 

the ship.  So far as they could see, so far as any one could see, it 

was a matter of chance where they chose to cast it.  But it was not 

until they let it down, at the Master's word, on the right side that 

they had good luck.  And not the least element of their joy in the 

draft of fishes was that it brought a change of fortune.



Leave the metaphysics of the question on the table for the present.  

As a matter of fact, it is plain that our human nature is adapted to 

conditions variable, undetermined, and hidden from our view.  We are 

not fitted to live in a world where a + b always equals c, and there 

is nothing more to follow.  The interest of life's equation arrives 

with the appearance of x, the unknown quantity.  A settled, 

unchangeable, clearly foreseeable order of things does not suit our 

constitution.  It tends to melancholy and a fatty heart.  Creatures 

of habit we are undoubtedly; but it is one of our most fixed habits 

to be fond of variety.  The man who is never surprised does not know 

the taste of happiness, and unless the unexpected sometimes happens 

to us, we are most grievously disappointed.



Much of the tediousness of highly civilized life comes from its 

smoothness and regularity.  To-day is like yesterday, and we think 

that we can predict to-morrow.  Of course we cannot really do so.  

The chances are still there.  But we have covered them up so deeply 

with the artificialities of life that we lose sight of them.  It 

seems as if everything in our neat little world were arranged, and 

provided for, and reasonably sure to come to pass.  The best way of 

escape from this TAEDIUM VITAE is through a recreation like angling, 

not only because it is so evidently a matter of luck, but also 

because it tempts us into a wilder, freer life.  It leads almost 

inevitably to camping out, which is a wholesome and sanitary 

imprudence.



It is curious and pleasant, to my apprehension, to observe how many 

people in New England, one of whose States is called "the land of 

Steady Habits," are sensible of the joy of changing them,--out of 

doors.  These good folk turn out from their comfortable farm-houses 

and their snug suburban cottages to go a-gypsying for a fortnight 

among the mountains or beside the sea.  You see their white tents 

gleaming from the pine-groves around the little lakes, and catch 

glimpses of their bathing-clothes drying in the sun on the wiry 

grass that fringes the sand-dunes.  Happy fugitives from the bondage 

of routine!  They have found out that a long journey is not 

necessary to a good vacation.  You may reach the Forest of Arden in 

a buckboard.  The Fortunate Isles are within sailing distance in a 

dory.  And a voyage on the river Pactolus is open to any one who can 

paddle a canoe.



I was talking--or rather listening--with a barber, the other day, in 

the sleepy old town of Rivermouth.  He told me, in one of those easy 

confidences which seem to make the razor run more smoothly, that it 

had been the custom of his family, for some twenty years past, to 

forsake their commodious dwelling on Anchor Street every summer, and 

emigrate six miles, in a wagon to Wallis Sands, where they spent the 

month of August very merrily under canvas.  Here was a sensible 

household for you!  They did not feel bound to waste a year's income 

on a four weeks' holiday.  They were not of those foolish folk who 

run across the sea, carefully carrying with them the same tiresome 

mind that worried them at home.  They got a change of air by making 

an alteration of life.  They escaped from the land of Egypt by 

stepping out into the wilderness and going a-fishing.



The people who always live in houses, and sleep on beds, and walk on 

pavements, and buy their food from butchers and bakers and grocers, 

are not the most blessed inhabitants of this wide and various earth.  

The circumstances of their existence are too mathematical and secure 

for perfect contentment.  They live at second or third hand.  They 

are boarders in the world.  Everything is done for them by somebody 

else.



It is almost impossible for anything very interesting to happen to 

them.  They must get their excitement out of the newspapers, reading 

of the hairbreadth escapes and moving accidents that befall people 

in real life.  What do these tame ducks really know of the adventure 

of living?  If the weather is bad, they are snugly housed.  If it is 

cold, there is a furnace in the cellar.  If they are hungry, the 

shops are near at hand.  It is all as dull, flat, stale, and 

unprofitable as adding up a column of figures.  They might as well 

be brought up in an incubator.



But when man abides in tents, after the manner of the early 

patriarchs, the face of the world is renewed.  The vagaries of the 

clouds become significant.  You watch the sky with a lover's look, 

eager to know whether it will smile or frown.  When you lie at night 

upon your bed of boughs and hear the rain pattering on the canvas 

close above your head, you wonder whether it is a long storm or only 

a shower.



The rising wind shakes the tent-flaps.  Are the pegs well driven 

down and the cords firmly fastened?  You fall asleep again and wake 

later, to hear the rain drumming still more loudly on the tight 

cloth, and the big breeze snoring through the forest, and the waves 

plunging along the beach.  A stormy day?  Well, you must cut plenty 

of wood and keep the camp-fire glowing, for it will be hard to start 

it up again, if you let it get too low.  There is little use in 

fishing or hunting in such a storm.  But there is plenty to do in 

the camp: guns to be cleaned, tackle to be put in order, clothes to 

be mended, a good story of adventure to be read, a belated letter to 

be written to some poor wretch in a summer hotel, a game of hearts 

or cribbage to be played, or a hunting-trip to be planned for the 

return of fair weather.  The tent is perfectly dry.  A little trench 

dug around it carries off the surplus water, and luckily it is 

pitched with the side to the lake, so that you get the pleasant heat 

of the fire without the unendurable smoke.  Cooking in the rain has 

its disadvantages.  But how good the supper tastes when it is served 

up on a tin plate, with an empty box for a table and a roll of 

blankets at the foot of the bed for a seat!



A day, two days, three days, the storm may continue, according to 

your luck.  I have been out in the woods for a fortnight without a 

drop of rain or a sign of dust.  Again, I have tented on the shore 

of a big lake for a week, waiting for an obstinate tempest to pass 

by.



Look now, just at nightfall: is there not a little lifting and 

breaking of the clouds in the west, a little shifting of the wind 

toward a better quarter?  You go to bed with cheerful hopes.  A 

dozen times in the darkness you are half awake, and listening 

drowsily to the sounds of the storm.  Are they waxing or waning?  Is 

that louder pattering a new burst of rain, or is it only the 

plumping of the big drops as they are shaken from the trees?  See, 

the dawn has come, and the gray light glimmers through the canvas.  

In a little while you will know your fate.



Look!  There is a patch of bright yellow radiance on the peak of the 

tent.  The shadow of a leaf dances over it.  The sun must be 

shining.  Good luck! and up with you, for it is a glorious morning.



The woods are glistening as fresh and fair as if they had been new-

created overnight.  The water sparkles, and tiny waves are dancing 

and splashing all along the shore.  Scarlet berries of the mountain-

ash hang around the lake.  A pair of kingfishers dart back and forth 

across the bay, in flashes of living blue.  A black eagle swings 

silently around his circle, far up in the cloudless sky.  The air is 

full of pleasant sounds, but there is no noise.  The world is full 

of joyful life, but there is no crowd and no confusion.  There is no 

factory chimney to darken the day with its smoke, no trolley-car to 

split the silence with its shriek and smite the indignant ear with 

the clanging of its impudent bell.  No lumberman's axe has robbed 

the encircling forests of their glory of great trees.  No fires have 

swept over the hills and left behind them the desolation of a 

bristly landscape.  All is fresh and sweet, calm and clear and 

bright.



'Twas rather a rude jest of Nature, that tempest of yesterday.  But 

if you have taken it in good part, you are all the more ready for 

her caressing mood to-day.  And now you must be off to get your 

dinner--not to order it at a shop, but to look for it in the woods 

and waters.  You are ready to do your best with rod or gun.  You 

will use all the skill you have as hunter or fisherman.  But what 

you shall find, and whether you shall subsist on bacon and biscuit, 

or feast on trout and partridges, is, after all, a matter of luck.



I profess that it appears to me not only pleasant, but also 

salutary, to be in this condition.  It brings us home to the plain 

realities of life; it teaches us that a man ought to work before he 

eats; it reminds us that, after he has done all he can, he must 

still rely upon a mysterious bounty for his daily bread.  It says to 

us, in homely and familiar words, that life was meant to be 

uncertain, that no man can tell what a day will bring forth, and 

that it is the part of wisdom to be prepared for disappointments and 

grateful for all kinds of small mercies.



There is a story in that fragrant book, THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF ST. 

FRANCIS, which I wish to transcribe here, without tying a moral to 

it, lest any one should accuse me of preaching.





"Hence [says the quaint old chronicler], having assigned to his 

companions the other parts of the world, St. Francis, taking Brother 

Maximus as his comrade, set forth toward the province of France.  

And coming one day to a certain town, and being very hungry, they 

begged their bread as they went, according to the rule of their 

order, for the love of God.  And St. Francis went through one 

quarter of the town, and Brother Maximus through another.  But 

forasmuch as St. Francis was a man mean and low of stature, and 

hence was reputed a vile beggar by such as knew him not, he only 

received a few scanty crusts and mouthfuls of dry bread.  But to 

Brother Maximus, who was large and well favoured, were given good 

pieces and big, and an abundance of bread, yea, whole loaves.  

Having thus begged, they met together without the town to eat, at a 

place where there was a clear spring and a fair large stone, upon 

which each spread forth the gifts that he had received.  And St. 

Francis, seeing that the pieces of bread begged by Brother Maximus 

were bigger and better than his own, rejoiced greatly, saying, 'Oh, 

Brother Maximus, we are not worthy of so great a treasure.'  As he 

repeated these words many times, Brother Maximus made answer: 

'Father, how can you talk of treasures when there is such great 

poverty and such lack of all things needful?  Here is neither napkin 

nor knife, neither board nor trencher, neither house nor table, 

neither man-servant nor maid-servant.'  St. Francis replied: 'And 

this is what I reckon a great treasure, where naught is made ready 

by human industry, but all that is here is prepared by Divine 

Providence, as is plainly set forth in the bread which we have 

begged, in the table of fair stone, and in the spring of clear 

water.  And therefore I would that we should pray to God that He 

teach us with all our hearts to love the treasure of holy poverty, 

which is so noble a thing, and whose servant is God the Lord.'"





I know of but one fairer description of a repast in the open air; 

and that is where we are told how certain poor fishermen, coming in 

very weary after a night of toil (and one of them very wet after 

swimming ashore), found their Master standing on the bank of the 

lake waiting for them.  But it seems that he must have been busy in 

their behalf while he was waiting; for there was a bright fire of 

coals burning on the shore, and a goodly fish broiling thereon, and 

bread to eat with it.  And when the Master had asked them about 

their fishing, he said, "Come, now, and get your breakfast."  So 

they sat down around the fire, and with his own hands he served them 

with the bread and the fish.



Of all the banquets that have ever been given upon earth, that is 

the one in which I would rather have had a share.



But it is now time that we should return to our fishing.  And let us 

observe with gratitude that almost all of the pleasures that are 

connected with this pursuit--its accompaniments and variations, 

which run along with the tune and weave an embroidery of delight 

around it--have an accidental and gratuitous quality about them.  

They are not to be counted upon beforehand.  They are like something 

that is thrown into a purchase by a generous and open-handed dealer, 

to make us pleased with our bargain and inclined to come back to the 

same shop.



If I knew, for example, before setting out for a day on the brook, 

precisely what birds I should see, and what pretty little scenes in 

the drama of woodland life were to be enacted before my eyes, the 

expedition would lose more than half its charm.  But, in fact, it is 

almost entirely a matter of luck, and that is why it never grows 

tiresome.



The ornithologist knows pretty well where to look for the birds, and 

he goes directly to the places where he can find them, and proceeds 

to study them intelligently and systematically.  But the angler who 

idles down the stream takes them as they come, and all his 

observations have a flavour of surprise in them.



He hears a familiar song,--one that he has often heard at a 

distance, but never identified,--a loud, cheery, rustic cadence 

sounding from a low pine-tree close beside him.  He looks up 

carefully through the needles and discovers a hooded warbler, a 

tiny, restless creature, dressed in green and yellow, with two white 

feathers in its tail, like the ends of a sash, and a glossy little 

black bonnet drawn closely about its golden head.  He will never 

forget that song again.  It will make the woods seem homelike to 

him, many a time, as he hears it ringing through the afternoon, like 

the call of a small country girl playing at hide-and-seek: "See ME; 

here I BE."



Another day he sits down on a mossy log beside a cold, trickling 

spring to eat his lunch.  It has been a barren day for birds.  

Perhaps he has fallen into the fault of pursuing his sport too 

intensely, and tramped along the stream looking for nothing but 

fish.  Perhaps this part of the grove has really been deserted by 

its feathered inhabitants, scared away by a prowling hawk or driven 

out by nest-hunters.  But now, without notice, the luck changes.  A 

surprise-party of redstarts breaks into full play around him.  All 

through the dark-green shadow of the hemlocks they flash like little 

candles--CANDELITAS, the Cubans call them.  Their brilliant markings 

of orange and black, and their fluttering, airy, graceful movements, 

make them most welcome visitors.  There is no bird in the bush 

easier to recognize or pleasanter to watch.  They run along the 

branches and dart and tumble through the air in fearless chase of 

invisible flies and moths.  All the time they keep unfolding and 

furling their rounded tails, spreading them out and waving them and 

closing them suddenly, just as the Cuban girls manage their fans.  

In fact, the redstarts are the tiny fantail pigeons of the forest.



There are other things about the birds, besides their musical 

talents and their good looks, that the fisherman has a chance to 

observe on his lucky days.  He may sea something of their courage 

and their devotion to their young.



I suppose a bird is the bravest creature that lives, in spite of its 

natural timidity.  From which we may learn that true courage is not 

incompatible with nervousness, and that heroism does not mean the 

absence of fear, but the conquest of it.  Who does not remember the 

first time that he ever came upon a hen-partridge with her brood, as 

he was strolling through the woods in June?  How splendidly the old 

bird forgets herself in her efforts to defend and hide her young!



Smaller birds are no less daring.  One evening last summer I was 

walking up the Ristigouche from Camp Harmony to fish for salmon at 

Mowett's Rock, where my canoe was waiting for me.  As I stepped out 

from a thicket on to the shingly bank of the river, a spotted 

sandpiper teetered along before me, followed by three young ones.  

Frightened at first, the mother flew out a few feet over the water.  

But the piperlings could not fly, having no feathers; and they crept 

under a crooked log.  I rolled the log over very gently and took one 

of the cowering creatures into my hand--a tiny, palpitating scrap of 

life, covered with soft gray down, and peeping shrilly, like a 

Liliputian chicken.  And now the mother was transformed.  Her fear 

was changed into fury.  She was a bully, a fighter, an Amazon in 

feathers.  She flew at me with loud cries, dashing herself almost 

into my face.  I was a tyrant, a robber, a kidnapper, and she called 

heaven to witness that she would never give up her offspring without 

a struggle.  Then she changed her tactics and appealed to my baser 

passions.  She fell to the ground and fluttered around me as if her 

wing were broken.  "Look!" she seemed to say, "I am bigger than that 

poor little baby.  If you must eat something, eat me!  My wing is 

lame.  I can't fly.  You can easily catch me.  Let that little bird 

go!"  And so I did; and the whole family disappeared in the bushes 

as if by magic.  I wondered whether the mother was saying to 

herself, after the manner of her sex, that men are stupid things, 

after all, and no match for the cleverness of a female who stoops to 

deception in a righteous cause.



Now, that trivial experience was what I call a piece of good luck--

for me, and, in the event, for the sandpiper.  But it is doubtful 

whether it would be quite so fresh and pleasant in the remembrance, 

if it had not also fallen to my lot to take two uncommonly good 

salmon on that same evening, in a dry season.



Never believe a fisherman when he tells you that he does not care 

about the fish he catches.  He may say that he angles only for the 

pleasure of being out-of-doors, and that he is just as well 

contented when he takes nothing as when he makes a good catch.  He 

may think so, but it is not true.  He is not telling a deliberate 

falsehood.  He is only assuming an unconscious pose, and indulging 

in a delicate bit of self-flattery.  Even if it were true, it would 

not be at all to his credit.



Watch him on that lucky day when he comes home with a full basket of 

trout on his shoulder, or a quartette of silver salmon covered with 

green branches in the bottom of the canoe.  His face is broader than 

it was when he went out, and there is a sparkle of triumph in his 

eye.  "It is naught, it is naught," he says, in modest depreciation 

of his triumph.  But you shall see that he lingers fondly about the 

place where the fish are displayed upon the grass, and does not fail 

to look carefully at the scales when they are weighed, and has an 

attentive ear for the comments of admiring spectators.  You shall 

find, moreover, that he is not unwilling to narrate the story of the 

capture--how the big fish rose short, four times, to four different 

flies, and finally took a small Black Dose, and played all over the 

pool, and ran down a terribly stiff rapid to the next pool below, 

and sulked for twenty minutes, and had to be stirred up with stones, 

and made such a long fight that, when he came in at last, the hold 

of the hook was almost worn through, and it fell out of his mouth as 

he touched the shore.  Listen to this tale as it is told, with 

endless variations, by every man who has brought home a fine fish, 

and you will perceive that the fisherman does care for his luck, 

after all.



And why not?  I am no friend to the people who receive the bounties 

of Providence without visible gratitude.  When the sixpence falls 

into your hat, you may laugh.  When the messenger of an unexpected 

blessing takes you by the hand and lifts you up and bids you walk, 

you may leap and run and sing for joy, even as the lame man, whom 

St. Peter healed, skipped piously and rejoiced aloud as he passed 

through the Beautiful Gate of the Temple.  There is no virtue in 

solemn indifference.  Joy is just as much a duty as beneficence is.  

Thankfulness is the other side of mercy.



When you have good luck in anything, you ought to be glad.  Indeed, 

if you are not glad, you are not really lucky.



But boasting and self-glorification I would have excluded, and most 

of all from the behaviour of the angler.  He, more than other men, 

is dependent for his success upon the favour of an unseen 

benefactor.  Let his skill and industry be never so great, he can do 

nothing unless LA BONNE CHANCE comes to him.



I was once fishing on a fair little river, the P'tit Saguenay, with 

two excellent anglers and pleasant companions, H. E. G---- and C. S. 

D----.  They had done all that was humanly possible to secure good 

sport.  The stream had been well preserved.  They had boxes full of 

beautiful flies, and casting-lines imported from England, and a rod 

for every fish in the river.  But the weather was "dour," and the 

water "drumly," and every day the lumbermen sent a "drive" of ten 

thousand spruce logs rushing down the flooded stream.  For three 

days we had not seen a salmon, and on the fourth, despairing, we 

went down to angle for sea-trout in the tide of the greater 

Saguenay.  There, in the salt water, where men say the salmon never 

take the fly, H. E. G----, fishing with a small trout-rod, a poor, 

short line, and an ancient red ibis of the common kind, rose and 

hooked a lordly salmon of at least five-and-thirty pounds.  Was not 

this pure luck?



Pride is surely the most unbecoming of all vices in a fisherman.  

For though intelligence and practice and patience and genius, and 

many other noble things which modesty forbids him to mention, enter 

into his pastime, so that it is, as Izaak Walton has firmly 

maintained, an art; yet, because fortune still plays a controlling 

hand in the game, its net results should never be spoken of with a 

haughty and vain spirit.  Let not the angler imitate Timoleon, who 

boasted of his luck and lost it.  It is tempting Providence to print 

the record of your wonderful catches in the sporting newspapers; or 

at least, if it must be done, there should stand at the head of the 

column some humble, thankful motto, like "NON NOBIS, DOMINE."  Even 

Father Izaak, when he has a fish on his line, says, with a due sense 

of human limitations, "There is a trout now, and a good one too, IF 

I CAN BUT HOLD HIM!"



This reminds me that we left H. E. G----, a few sentences back, 

playing his unexpected salmon, on a trout-rod, in the Saguenay.  

Four times that great fish leaped into the air; twice he suffered 

the pliant reed to guide him toward the shore, and twice ran out 

again to deeper water.  Then his spirit awoke within him: he bent 

the rod like a willow wand, dashed toward the middle of the river, 

broke the line as if it had been pack-thread, and sailed 

triumphantly away to join the white porpoises that were tumbling in 

the tide.  "WHE-E-EW," they said, "WHE-E-EW! PSHA-A-AW!" blowing out 

their breath in long, soft sighs as they rolled about like huge 

snowballs in the black water.  But what did H. E. G---- say?  He sat 

him quietly down upon a rock and reeled in the remnant of his line, 

uttering these remarkable and Christian words: "Those porpoises, 

said he, "describe the situation rather mildly.  But it was good fun 

while it lasted."



Again I remembered a saying of Walton: "Well, Scholar, you must 

endure worse luck sometimes, or you will never make a good angler."



Or a good man, either, I am sure.  For he who knows only how to 

enjoy, and not to endure, is ill-fitted to go down the stream of 

life through such a world as this.



I would not have you to suppose, gentle reader, that in discoursing 

of fisherman's luck I have in mind only those things which may be 

taken with a hook.  It is a parable of human experience.  I have 

been thinking, for instance, of Walton's life as well as of his 

angling: of the losses and sufferings that he, the firm Royalist, 

endured when the Commonwealth men came marching into London town; of 

the consoling days that were granted to him, in troublous times, on 

the banks of the Lea and the Dove and the New River, and the good 

friends that he made there, with whom he took sweet counsel in 

adversity; of the little children who played in his house for a few 

years, and then were called away into the silent land where he could 

hear their voices no longer.  I was thinking how quietly and 

peaceably he lived through it all, not complaining nor desponding, 

but trying to do his work well, whether he was keeping a shop or 

writing hooks, and seeking to prove himself an honest man and a 

cheerful companion, and never scorning to take with a thankful heart 

such small comforts and recreations as came to him.



It is a plain, homely, old-fashioned meditation, reader, but not 

unprofitable.  When I talk to you of fisherman's luck, I do not 

forget that there are deeper things behind it.  I remember that what 

we call our fortunes, good or ill, are but the wise dealings and 

distributions of a Wisdom higher, and a Kindness greater, than our 

own.  And I suppose that their meaning is that we should learn, by 

all the uncertainties of our life, even the smallest, how to be 

brave and steady and temperate and hopeful, whatever comes, because 

we believe that behind it all there lies a purpose of good, and over 

it all there watches a providence of blessing.



In the school of life many branches of knowledge are taught.  But 

the only philosophy that amounts to anything, after all, is just the 

secret of making friends with our luck.







THE THRILLING MOMENT





"In angling, as in all other recreations into which excitement 

enters, we have to be on our guard, so that we can at any moment 

throw a weight of self-control into the scale against misfortune; 

and happily we can study to some purpose, both to increase our 

pleasure in success and to lessen our distress caused by what goes 

ill.  It is not only in cases of great disasters, however, that the 

angler needs self-control.  He is perpetually called upon to use it 

to withstand small exasperations."--SIR EDWARD GREY: Fly-Fishing.





Every moment of life, I suppose, is more or less of a turning-point.  

Opportunities are swarming around us all the time, thicker than 

gnats at sundown.  We walk through a cloud of chances, and if we 

were always conscious of them they would worry us almost to death.



But happily our sense of uncertainty is soothed and cushioned by 

habit, so that we can live comfortably with it.  Only now and then, 

by way of special excitement, it starts up wide awake.  We perceive 

how delicately our fortune is poised and balanced on the pivot of a 

single incident.  We get a peep at the oscillating needle, and, 

because we have happened to see it tremble, we call our experience a 

crisis.



The meditative angler is not exempt from these sensational periods.  

There are times when all the uncertainty of his chosen pursuit seems 

to condense itself into one big chance, and stand out before him 

like a salmon on the top wave of a rapid.  He sees that his luck 

hangs by a single strand, and he cannot tell whether it will hold or 

break.  This is his thrilling moment, and he never forgets it.



Mine came to me in the autumn of 1894, on the banks of the 

Unpronounceable River, in the Province of Quebec.  It was the last 

day, of the open season for ouananiche, and we had set our hearts on 

catching some good fish to take home with us.  We walked up from the 

mouth of the river, four preposterously long and rough miles, to the 

famous fishing-pool, "LA PLACE DE PECHE A BOIVIN."  It was a noble 

day for walking; the air was clear and crisp, and all the hills 

around us were glowing with the crimson foliage of those little 

bushes which God created to make burned lands look beautiful.  The 

trail ended in a precipitous gully, down which we scrambled with 

high hopes, and fishing-rods unbroken, only to find that the river 

was in a condition which made angling absurd if not impossible.



There must have been a cloud-burst among the mountains, for the 

water was coming down in flood.  The stream was bank-full, gurgling 

and eddying out among the bushes, and rushing over the shoal where 

the fish used to lie, in a brown torrent ten feet deep.  Our last 

day with the land-locked salmon seemed destined to be a failure, and 

we must wait eight months before we could have another.  There were 

three of us in the disappointment, and we shared it according to our 

temperaments.



Paul virtuously resolved not to give up while there was a chance 

left, and wandered down-stream to look for an eddy where he might 

pick up a small fish.  Ferdinand, our guide, resigned himself 

without a sigh to the consolation of eating blueberries, which he 

always did with great cheerfulness.  But I, being more cast down 

than either of my comrades, sought out a convenient seat among the 

rocks, and, adapting my anatomy as well as possible to the 

irregularities of nature's upholstery, pulled from my pocket AN 

AMATEUR ANGLER'S DAYS IN DOVE DALE, and settled down to read myself 

into a Christian frame of mind.



Before beginning, my eyes roved sadly over the pool once more.  It 

was but a casual glance.  It lasted only for an instant.  But in 

that fortunate fragment of time I distinctly saw the broad tail of a 

big ouananiche rise and disappear in the swift water at the very 

head of the pool.



Immediately the whole aspect of affairs was changed.  Despondency 

vanished, and the river glittered with the beams of rising hope.



Such is the absurd disposition of some anglers.  They never see a 

fish without believing that they can catch him; but if they see no 

fish, they are inclined to think that the river is empty and the 

world hollow.



I said nothing to my companions.  It would have been unkind to 

disturb them with expectations which might never be realized.  My 

immediate duty was to get within casting distance of that salmon as 

soon as possible.



The way along the shore of the pool was difficult.  The bank was 

very steep, and the rocks by the river's edge were broken and 

glibbery.  Presently I came to a sheer wall of stone, perhaps thirty 

feet high, rising directly from the deep water.



There was a tiny ledge or crevice running part of the way across the 

face of this wall, and by this four-inch path I edged along, holding 

my rod in one hand, and clinging affectionately with the other to 

such clumps of grass and little bushes as I could find.  There was 

one small huckleberry plant to which I had a particular attachment.  

It was fortunately a firm little bush, and as I held fast to it I 

remembered Tennyson's poem which begins





"Flower in the crannied wall,"





and reflected that if I should succeed in plucking out this flower, 

"root and all," it would probably result in an even greater increase 

of knowledge than the poet contemplated.



The ledge in the rock now came to an end.  But below me in the pool 

there was a sunken reef; and on this reef a long log had caught, 

with one end sticking out of the water, within jumping distance.  It 

was the only chance.  To go back would have been dangerous.  An 

angler with a large family dependent upon him for support has no 

right to incur unnecessary perils.



Besides, the fish was waiting for me at the upper end of the pool!



So I jumped; landed on the end of the log; felt it settle slowly 

down; ran along it like a small boy on a seesaw, and leaped off into 

shallow water just as the log rolled from the ledge and lunged out 

into the stream.



It went wallowing through the pool and down the rapid like a playful 

hippopotamus.  I watched it with interest and congratulated myself 

that I was no longer embarked upon it.  On that craft a voyage down 

the Unpronounceable River would have been short but far from merry.  

The "all ashore" bell was not rung early enough.  I just got off, 

with not half a second to spare.



But now all was well, for I was within reach of the fish.  A little 

scrambling over the rocks brought me to a point where I could easily 

cast over him.  He was lying in a swift, smooth, narrow channel 

between two large stones.  It was a snug resting-place, and no doubt 

he would remain there for some time.  So I took out my fly-book and 

prepared to angle for him according to the approved rules of the 

art.



Nothing is more foolish in sport than the habit of precipitation.  

And yet it is a fault to which I am singularly subject.  As a boy, 

in Brooklyn, I never came in sight of the Capitoline Skating Pond, 

after a long ride in the horse-cars, without breaking into a run 

along the board walk, buckling on my skates in a furious hurry, and 

flinging myself impetuously upon the ice, as if I feared that it 

would melt away before I could reach it.  Now this, I confess, is a 

grievous defect, which advancing years have not entirely cured; and 

I found it necessary to take myself firmly, as it were, by the 

mental coat-collar, and resolve not to spoil the chance of catching 

the only ouananiche in the Unpronounceable River by undue haste in 

fishing for him.



I carefully tested a brand-new leader, and attached it to the line 

with great deliberation and the proper knot.  Then I gave my whole 

mind to the important question of a wise selection of flies.



It is astonishing how much time and mental anxiety a man can spend 

on an apparently simple question like this.  When you are buying 

flies in a shop it seems as if you never had half enough.  You keep 

on picking out a half-dozen of each new variety as fast as the 

enticing salesman shows them to you.  You stroll through the streets 

of Montreal or Quebec and drop in at every fishing-tackle dealer's 

to see whether you can find a few more good flies.  Then, when you 

come to look over your collection at the critical moment on the bank 

of a stream, it seems as if you had ten times too many.  And, spite 

of all, the precise fly that you need is not there.



You select a couple that you think fairly good, lay them down beside 

you in the grass, and go on looking through the book for something 

better.  Failing to satisfy yourself, you turn to pick up those that 

you have laid out, and find that they have mysteriously vanished 

from the face of the earth.



Then you struggle with naughty words and relapse into a condition of 

mental palsy.



Precipitation is a fault.  But deliberation, for a person of 

precipitate disposition, is a vice.



The best thing to do in such a case is to adopt some abstract theory 

of action without delay, and put it into practice without 

hesitation.  Then if you fail, you can throw the responsibility on 

the theory.



Now, in regard to flies there are two theories.  The old, 

conservative theory is, that on a bright day you should use a dark, 

dull fly, because it is less conspicuous.  So I followed that theory 

first and put on a Great Dun and a Dark Montreal.  I cast them 

delicately over the fish, but he would not look at them.



Then I perverted myself to the new, radical theory which says that 

on a bright day you must use a light, gay fly, because it is more in 

harmony with the sky, and therefore less noticeable.  Accordingly I 

put on a Professor and a Parmacheene Belle; but this combination of 

learning and beauty had no attraction for the ouananiche.



Then I fell back on a theory of my own, to the effect that the 

ouananiche have an aversion to red, and prefer yellow and brown.  So 

I tried various combinations of flies in which these colours 

predominated.



Then I abandoned all theories and went straight through my book, 

trying something from every page, and winding up with that lure 

which the guides consider infallible,--"a Jock o' Scott that cost 

fifty cents at Quebec."  But it was all in vain.  I was ready to 

despair.



At this psychological moment I heard behind me a voice of hope,--the 

song of a grasshopper: not one of those fat-legged, green-winged 

imbeciles that feebly tumble in the summer fields, but a game 

grasshopper,--one of those thin-shanked, brown-winged fellows that 

leap like kangaroos, and fly like birds, and sing KRI-KAREE-KAREE-

KRI in their flight.



It is not really a song, I know, but it sounds like one; and, if you 

had heard that Kri-karee carolling as I chased him over the rocks, 

you would have been sure that he was mocking me.



I believed that he was the predestined lure for that ouananiche; but 

it was hard to persuade him to fulfill his destiny.  I slapped at 

him with my hat, but he was not there.  I grasped at him on the 

bushes, and brought away "nothing but leaves."  At last he made his 

way to the very edge of the water and poised himself on a stone, 

with his legs well tucked in for a long leap and a bold flight to 

the other side of the river.  It was my final opportunity.  I made a 

desperate grab at it and caught the grasshopper.



My premonition proved to be correct.  When that Kri-karee, invisibly 

attached to my line, went floating down the stream, the ouananiche 

was surprised.  It was the fourteenth of September, and he had 

supposed the grasshopper season was over.  The unexpected temptation 

was too strong for him.  He rose with a rush, and in an instant I 

was fast to the best land-locked salmon of the year.



But the situation was not without its embarrassments.  My rod 

weighed only four and a quarter ounces; the fish weighed between six 

and seven pounds.  The water was furious and headstrong.  I had only 

thirty yards of line and no landing-net.



"HOLA!  FERDINAND!" I cried.  "APPORTE LA NETTE, VITE!  A BEAUTY!  

HURRY UP!"



I thought it must be an hour while he was making his way over the 

hill, through the underbrush, around the cliff.  Again and again the 

fish ran out my line almost to the last turn.  A dozen times he 

leaped from the water, shaking his silvery sides.  Twice he tried to 

cut the leader across a sunken ledge.  But at last he was played 

out, and came in quietly towards the point of the rock.  At the same 

moment Ferdinand appeared with the net.



Now, the use of the net is really the most difficult part of 

angling.  And Ferdinand is the best netsman in the Lake St. John 

country.  He never makes the mistake of trying to scoop a fish in 

motion.  He does not grope around with aimless, futile strokes as if 

he were feeling for something in the dark.  He does not entangle the 

dropper-fly in the net and tear the tail-fly out of the fish's 

mouth.  He does not get excited.



He quietly sinks the net in the water, and waits until he can see 

the fish distinctly, lying perfectly still and within reach.  Then 

he makes a swift movement, like that of a mower swinging the scythe, 

takes the fish into the net head-first, and lands him without a 

slip.



I felt sure that Ferdinand was going to do the trick in precisely 

this way with my ouananiche.  Just at the right instant he made one 

quick, steady swing of the arms, and--the head of the net broke 

clean off the handle and went floating away with the fish in it!



All seemed to be lost.  But Ferdinand was equal to the occasion.  He 

seized a long, crooked stick that lay in a pile of driftwood on the 

shore, sprang into the water up to his waist, caught the net as it 

drifted past, and dragged it to land, with the ultimate ouananiche, 

the prize of the season, still glittering through its meshes.



This is the story of my most thrilling moment as an angler.



But which was the moment of the deepest thrill?



Was it when the huckleberry bush saved me from a watery grave, or 

when the log rolled under my feet and started down the river?  Was 

it when the fish rose, or when the net broke, or when the long stick 

captured it?



No, it was none of these.  It was when the Kri-karee sat with his 

legs tucked under him on the brink of the stream.  That was the 

turning-point.  The fortunes of the day depended on the comparative 

quickness of the reflex action of his neural ganglia and mine.  That 

was the thrilling moment.



I see it now.  A crisis is really the commonest thing in the world.  

The reason why life sometimes seems dull to us is because we do not 

perceive the importance and the excitement of getting bait.







TALKABILITY



A PRELUDE AND THEME WITH VARIATIONS





"He praises a meditative life, and with evident sincerity: but we 

feel that he liked nothing so well as good talk."--JAMES RUSSELL 

LOWELL: Walton.





I



PRELUDE--ON AN OLD, FOOLISH MAXIM





The inventor of the familiar maxim that "fishermen must not talk" is 

lost in the mists of antiquity, and well deserves his fate.  For a 

more foolish rule, a conventionality more obscure and aimless in its 

tyranny, was never imposed upon an innocent and honourable 

occupation, to diminish its pleasure and discount its profits.  Why, 

in the name of all that is genial, should anglers go about their 

harmless sport in stealthy silence like conspirators, or sit 

together in a boat, dumb, glum, and penitential, like naughty 

schoolboys on the bench of disgrace?  'Tis an Omorcan superstition; 

a rule without a reason; a venerable, idiotic fashion invented to 

repress lively spirits and put a premium on stupidity.



For my part, I incline rather to the opinion of the Neapolitan 

fishermen who maintain that a certain amount of noise, of certain 

kinds, is likely to improve the fishing, and who have a particular 

song, very sweet and charming, which they sing to draw the fishes 

around them.  It is narrated, likewise, of the good St. Brandan, 

that on his notable voyage from Ireland in search of Paradise, he 

chanted the service for St. Peter's day so pleasantly that a 

subaqueous audience of all sorts and sizes was attracted, insomuch 

that the other monks began to be afraid, and begged the abbot that 

he would sing a little lower, for they were not quite sure of the 

intention of the congregation.  Of St. Anthony of Padua it is said 

that he even succeeded in persuading the fishes, in great 

multitudes, to listen to a sermon; and that when it was ended (it 

must be noted that it was both short and cheerful) they bowed their 

heads and moved their bodies up and down with every mark of fondness 

and approval of what the holy father had spoken.



If we can believe this, surely we need not be incredulous of things 

which seem to be no less, but rather more, in harmony with the 

course of nature.  Creatures who are sensible to the attractions of 

a sermon can hardly be indifferent to the charm of other kinds of 

discourse.  I can easily imagine a company of grayling wishing to 

overhear a conversation between I. W. and his affectionate (but 

somewhat prodigal) son and servant, Charles Cotton; and surely every 

intelligent salmon in Scotland might have been glad to hear 

Christopher North and the Ettrick Shepherd bandy jests and swap 

stories.  As for trout,--was there one in Massachusetts that would 

not have been curious to listen to the intimate opinions of Daniel 

Webster as he loafed along the banks of the Marshpee,--or is there 

one in Pennsylvania to-day that might not be drawn with interest and 

delight to the feet of Joseph Jefferson, telling how he conceived 

and wrote RIP VAN WINKLE on the banks of a trout-stream?



Fishermen must be silent?  On the contrary, it is far more likely 

that good talk may promote good fishing.



All this, however, goes upon the assumption that fish can hear, in 

the proper sense of the word.  And this, it must be confessed, is an 

assumption not yet fully verified.  Experienced anglers and students 

of fishy ways are divided upon the question.  It is beyond a doubt 

that all fishes, except the very lowest forms, have ears.  But then 

so have all men; and yet we have the best authority for believing 

that there are many who "having ears, hear not."



The ears of fishes, for the most part, are inclosed in their skull, 

and have no outward opening.  Water conveys sound, as every country 

boy knows who has tried the experiment of diving to the bottom of 

the swimming-hole and knocking two big stones together.  But I doubt 

whether any country boy, engaged in this interesting scientific 

experiment, has heard the conversation of his friends on the bank 

who were engaged in hiding his clothes.



There are many curious and more or less venerable stories to the 

effect that fishes may be trained to assemble at the ringing of a 

bell or the beating of a drum.  Lucian, a writer of the second 

century, tells of a certain lake wherein many sacred fishes were 

kept, of which the largest had names given to them, and came when 

they were called.  But Lucian was not a man of especially good 

reputation, and there is an air of improbability about his statement 

that the LARGEST fishes came.  This is not the custom of the largest 

fishes.



In the present century there was a tale of an eel in a garden-well, 

in Scotland, which would come to be fed out of a spoon when the 

children called him by his singularly inappropriate name of Rob Roy.  

This seems a more likely story than Lucian's; at all events it comes 

from a more orthodox atmosphere.  But before giving it full 

credence, I should like to know whether the children, when they 

called "Rob Roy!" stood where the eel could see the spoon.



On the other side of the question, we may quote Mr. Ronalds, also a 

Scotchman, and the learned author of THE FLY-FISHER'S ENTOMOLOGY, 

who conducted a series of experiments which proved that even trout, 

the most fugacious of fish, are not in the least disturbed by the 

discharge of a gun, provided the flash is concealed.  Mr. Henry P. 

Wells, the author of THE AMERICAN SALMON ANGLER, says that he has 

"never been able to make a sound in the air which seemed to produce 

the slightest effect upon trout in the water."



So the controversy on the hearing of fishes continues, and the 

conclusion remains open.  Every man is at liberty to embrace that 

side which pleases him best.  You may think that the finny tribes 

are as sensitive to sound as Fine Ear, in the German fairy-tale, who 

could hear the grass grow.  Or you may hold the opposite opinion, 

that they are





     "Deafer than the blue-eyed cat."





But whichever theory you adopt, in practice, if you are a wise 

fisherman, you will steer a middle course, between one thing which 

must be left undone and another thing which should be done.  You 

will refrain from stamping on the bank, or knocking on the side of 

the boat, or dragging the anchor among the stones on the bottom; for 

when the water vibrates the fish are likely to vanish.  But you will 

indulge as freely as you please in pleasant discourse with your 

comrade; for it is certain that fishing is never hindered, and may 

even be helped, in one way or another, by good talk.



I should therefore have no hesitation in advising any one to choose, 

for companionship on an angling expedition, long or short, a person 

who has the rare merit of being TALKABLE.







II



THEME--ON A SMALL, USEFUL VIRTUE





"Talkable" is not a new adjective.  But it needs a new definition, 

and the complement of a corresponding noun.  I would fain set down 

on paper some observations and reflections which may serve to make 

its meaning clear, and render due praise to that most excellent 

quality in man or woman,--especially in anglers,--the small but 

useful virtue of TALKABILITY.



Robert Louis Stevenson uses the word "talkable" in one of his essays 

to denote a certain distinction among the possible subjects of human 

speech.  There are some things, he says in effect, about which you 

can really talk; and there are other things about which you cannot 

properly talk at all, but only dispute, or harangue, or prose, or 

moralize, or chatter.



After mature consideration I have arrived at the opinion that this 

distinction among the themes of speech is an illusion.  It does not 

exist.  All subjects, "the foolish things of the world, and the weak 

things of the world, and base things of the world, yea, and things 

that are not," may provide matter for good talk, if only the right 

people are engaged in the enterprise.  I know a man who can make a 

description of the weather as entertaining as a tune on the violin; 

and even on the threadbare theme of the waywardness of domestic 

servants, I have heard a discreet woman play the most diverting and 

instructive variations.



No, the quality of talkability does not mark a distinction among 

things; it denotes a difference among people.  It is not an 

attribute unequally distributed among material objects and abstract 

ideas.  It is a virtue which belongs to the mind and moral character 

of certain persons.  It is a reciprocal human quality; active as 

well as passive; a power of bestowing and receiving.



An amiable person is one who has a capacity for loving and being 

loved.  An affable person is one who is ready to speak and to be 

spoken to,--as, for example, Milton's "affable archangel" Raphael; 

though it must be confessed that he laid the chief emphasis on the 

active side of his affability.  A "clubable" person (to use a word 

which Dr. Samuel Johnson invented but did not put into his 

dictionary) is one who is fit for the familiar give and take of 

club-life.  A talkable person, therefore, is one whose nature and 

disposition invite the easy interchange of thoughts and feelings, 

one in whose company it is a pleasure to talk or to be talked to.



Now this good quality of talkability is to be distinguished, very 

strictly and inflexibly, from the bad quality which imitates it and 

often brings it into discredit.  I mean the vice of talkativeness.  

That is a selfish, one-sided, inharmonious affair, full of 

discomfort, and productive of most unchristian feelings.



You may observe the operations of this vice not only in human 

beings, but also in birds.  All the birds in the bush can make some 

kind of a noise; and most of them like to do it; and some of them 

like it a great deal and do it very much.  But it is not always for 

edification, nor are the most vociferous and garrulous birds 

commonly the most pleasing.  A parrot, for instance, in your 

neighbour's back yard, in the summer time, when the windows are 

open, is not an aid to the development of Christian character.  I 

knew a man who had to stay in the city all summer, and in the autumn 

was asked to describe the character and social standing of a new 

family that had moved into his neighbourhood.  Were they "nice 

people," well-bred, intelligent, respectable?  "Well," said he, "I 

don't know what your standards are, and would prefer not to say 

anything libellous; but I'll tell you in a word,--they are the kind 

of people that keep a parrot."



Then there is the English Sparrow!  What an insufferable chatterbox, 

what an incurable scold, what a voluble and tiresome blackguard is 

this little feathered cockney.  There is not a sweet or pleasant 

word in all his vocabulary.



I am convinced that he talks altogether of scandals and fights and 

street-sweepings.



The kingdom of ornithology is divided into two departments,--real 

birds and English sparrows.  English sparrows are not real birds; 

they are little beasts.



There was a church in Brooklyn which was once covered with a great 

and spreading vine, in which the sparrows built innumerable nests.  

These ungodly little birds kept up such a din that it was impossible 

to hear the service of the sanctuary.  The faithful clergy strained 

their voices to the verge of ministerial sore throat, but the people 

had no peace in their devotions until the vine was cut down, and the 

Anglican intruders were evicted.



A talkative person is like an English sparrow,--a bird that cannot 

sing, and will sing, and ought to be persuaded not to try to sing.  

But a talkable person has the gift that belongs to the wood thrush 

and the veery and the wren, the oriole and the white-throat and the 

rose-breasted grosbeak, the mockingbird and the robin (sometimes); 

and the brown thrush; yes, the brown thrush has it to perfection, if 

you can catch him alone,--the gift of being interesting, charming, 

delightful, in the most off-hand and various modes of utterance.



Talkability is not at all the same thing as eloquence.  The eloquent 

man surprises, overwhelms, and sometimes paralyzes us by the display 

of his power.  Great orators are seldom good talkers.  Oratory in 

exercise is masterful and jealous, and intolerant of all 

interruptions.  Oratory in preparation is silent, self-centred, 

uncommunicative.  The painful truth of this remark may he seen in 

the row of countenances along the president's table at a public 

banquet about nine o'clock in the evening.  The bicycle-face seems 

unconstrained and merry by comparison with the after-dinner-speech-

face.  The flow of table-talk is corked by the anxious conception of 

post-prandial oratory.



Thackeray, in one of his ROUNDABOUT PAPERS, speaks of "the sin of 

tall-talking," which, he says, "is the sin of schoolmasters, 

governesses, critics, sermoners, and instructors of young or old 

people."  But this is not in accord with my observation.  I should 

say it was rather the sin of dilettanti who are ambitious of that 

high-stepping accomplishment which is called "conversational 

ability."



This has usually, to my mind, something set and artificial about it, 

although in its most perfect form the art almost succeeds in 

concealing itself.  But, at all events, ''conversation'' is talk in 

evening dress, with perhaps a little powder and a touch of rouge.  

'T is like one of those wise virgins who are said to look their best 

by lamplight.  And doubtless this is an excellent thing, and not 

without its advantages.  But for my part, commend me to one who 

loses nothing by the early morning illumination,--one who brings all 

her attractions with her when she comes down to breakfast,--she is a 

very pleasant maid.



Talk is that form of human speech which is exempt from all duties, 

foreign and domestic.  It is the nearest thing in the world to 

thinking and feeling aloud.  It is necessarily not for publication,--

solely an evidence of good faith and mutual kindness.  You tell me 

what you have seen and what you are thinking about, because you take 

it for granted that it will interest and entertain me; and you 

listen to my replies and the recital of my adventures and opinions, 

because you know I like to tell them, and because you find something 

in them, of one kind or another, that you care to hear.  It is a 

nice game, with easy, simple rules, and endless possibilities of 

variation.  And if we go into it with the right spirit, and play it 

for love, without heavy stakes, the chances are that if we happen to 

be fairly talkable people we shall have one of the best things in 

the world,--a mighty good talk.



What is there in this anxious, hide-bound, tiresome existence of 

ours, more restful and remunerative?  Montaigne says, "The use of it 

is more sweet than of any other action of life; and for that reason 

it is that, if I were compelled to choose, I should sooner, I think, 

consent to lose my sight than my hearing and speech."  The very 

aimlessness with which it proceeds, the serene disregard of all 

considerations of profit and propriety with which it follows its 

wandering course, and brings up anywhere or nowhere, to camp for the 

night, is one of its attractions.  It is like a day's fishing, not 

valuable chiefly for the fish you bring home, but for the pleasant 

country through which it leads you, and the state of personal well-

being and health in which it leaves you, warmed, and cheered, and 

content with life and friendship.



The order in which you set out upon a talk, the path which you 

pursue, the rules which you observe or disregard, make but little 

difference in the end.  You may follow the advice of Immanuel Kant 

if you like, and begin with the weather and the roads, and go on to 

current events, and wind up with history, art, and philosophy.  Or 

you may reverse the order if you prefer, like that admirable talker 

Clarence King, who usually set sail on some highly abstract paradox, 

such as "Civilization is a nervous disease," and landed in a tale of 

adventure in Mexico or the Rocky Mountains.  Or you may follow the 

example of Edward Eggleston, who started in at the middle and worked 

out at either end, and sometimes at both.  It makes no difference.  

If the thing is in you at all, you will find good matter for talk 

anywhere along the route.  Hear what Montaigne says again: "In our 

discourse all subjects are alike to me; let there be neither weight 

nor depth, 't is all one; there is yet grace and pertinence; all 

there is tented with a mature and constant judgment, and mixed with 

goodness, freedom, gayety, and friendship."



How close to the mark the old essayist sends his arrow!  He is right 

about the essential qualities of good talk.  They are not merely 

intellectual.  They are moral.  Goodness of heart, freedom of 

spirit, gayety of temper, and friendliness of disposition,--these 

are four fine things, and doubtless as acceptable to God as they are 

agreeable to men.  The talkability which springs out of these 

qualities has its roots in a good soil.  On such a plant one need 

not look for the poison berries of malign discourse, nor for the 

Dead Sea apples of frivolous mockery.  But fair fruit will be there, 

pleasant to the sight and good for food, brought forth abundantly 

according to the season.







III



VARIATIONS--ON A PLEASANT PHRASE FROM MONTAIGNE





Montaigne has given as our text, "Goodness, freedom, gayety, and 

friendship,"--these are the conditions which produce talkability.  

And on this fourfold theme we may embroider a few variations, by way 

of exposition and enlargement.



GOODNESS is the first thing and the most needful.  An ugly, envious, 

irritable disposition is not fitted for talk.  The occasions for 

offence are too numerous, and the way into strife is too short and 

easy.  A touch of good-natured combativeness, a fondness for brisk 

argument, a readiness to try a friendly bout with any comer, on any 

ground, is a decided advantage in a talker.  It breaks up the 

offensive monotony of polite concurrence, and makes things lively.  

But quarrelsomeness is quite another affair, and very fatal.



I am always a little uneasy in a discourse with the Reverend 

Bellicosus Macduff.  It is like playing golf on links liable to 

earthquakes.  One never knows when the landscape will be thrown into 

convulsions.  Macduff has a tendency to regard a difference of 

opinion as a personal insult.  If he makes a bad stroke he seems to 

think that the way to retrieve it is to deliver the next one on the 

head of the other player.  He does not tarry for the invitation to 

lay on; and before you know what has happened you find yourself in a 

position where you are obliged to cry, "Hold, enough!" and to be 

liberally damned without any bargain to that effect.  This is 

discouraging, and calculated to make one wish that human intercourse 

might be put, as far as Macduff is concerned, upon the gold basis of 

silence.



On the other hand, what a delight it was to talk with that old 

worthy, Chancellor Howard Crosby.  He was a fighting man for four or 

five generations hack, Dutch on one side, English on the other.  But 

there was not one little drop of gall in his blood.  His opinions 

were fixed to a degree; he loved to do battle for them; he never 

changed them--at least never in the course of the same discussion.  

He admired and respected a gallant adversary, and urged him on, with 

quips and puns and daring assaults and unqualified statements, to do 

his best.  Easy victories were not to his taste.  Even if he joined 

with you in laying out some common falsehood for burial, you might 

be sure that before the affair was concluded there would be every 

prospect of what an Irishman would call "an elegant wake."  If you 

stood up against him on one of his favorite subjects of discussion 

you must be prepared for hot work.  You would have to take off your 

coat.  But when the combat was over he would be the man to help you 

on with it again; and you would walk home together arm in arm, 

through the twilight, smoking the pipe of peace.  Talk like that 

does good.  It quickens the beating of the heart, and leaves no 

scars upon it.



But this manly spirit, which loves





     "To drink delight of battle with its peers,"





is a very different thing from that mean, bad, hostile temper which 

loves to inflict wounds and injuries just for the sake of showing 

power, and which is never so happy as when it is making some one 

wince.  There are such people in the world, and sometimes their 

brilliancy tempts us to forget their malignancy.  But to have much 

converse with them is as if we should make playmates of rattlesnakes 

for their grace of movement and swiftness of stroke.



I knew a man once (I will not name him even with an initial) who was 

malignant to the core.  Learned, industrious, accomplished, he kept 

all his talents at the service of a perfect genius for hatred.  If 

you crossed his path but once, he would never cease to curse you.  

The grave might close over you, but he would revile your epitaph and 

mock at your memory.  It was not even necessary that you should do 

anything to incur his enmity.  It was enough to be upright and 

sincere and successful, to waken the wrath of this Shimei.  

Integrity was an offence to him, and excellence of any kind filled 

him with spleen.  There was no good cause within his horizon that he 

did not give a bad word to, and no decent man in the community whom 

he did not try either to use or to abuse.  To listen to him or to 

read what he had written was to learn to think a little worse of 

every one that he mentioned, and worst of all of him.  He had the 

air of a gentleman, the vocabulary of a scholar, the style of a 

Junius, and the heart of a Thersites.



Talk, in such company, is impossible.  The sense of something evil, 

lurking beneath the play of wit, is like the knowledge that there 

are snakes in the grass.  Every step must be taken with fear.  But 

the real pleasure of a walk through the meadow comes from the 

feeling of security, of ease, of safe and happy abandon to the mood 

of the moment.  This ungirdled and unguarded felicity in mutual 

discourse depends, after all, upon the assurance of real goodness in 

your companion.  I do not mean a stiff impeccability of conduct.  

Prudes and Pharisees are poor comrades.  I mean simply goodness of 

heart, the wholesome, generous, kindly quality which thinketh no 

evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, hopeth all things, endureth all 

things, and wisheth well to all men.  Where you feel this quality 

you can let yourself go, in the ease of hearty talk.



FREEDOM is the second note that Montaigne strikes, and it is 

essential to the harmony of talking.  Very careful, prudent, precise 

persons are seldom entertaining in familiar speech.  They are like 

tennis players in too fine clothes.  They think more of their 

costume than of the game.



A mania for absolutely correct pronunciation is fatal.  The people 

who are afflicted with this painful ailment are as anxious about 

their utterance as dyspeptics about their diet.  They move through 

their sentences as delicately as Agag walked.  Their little airs of 

nicety, their starched cadences and frilled phrases seem as if they 

had just been taken out of a literary bandbox.  If perchance you 

happen to misplace an accent, you shall see their eyebrows curl up 

like an interrogation mark, and they will ask you what authority you 

have for that pronunciation.  As if, forsooth, a man could not talk 

without book-license!  As if he must have a permit from some dusty 

lexicon before he can take a good word into his mouth and speak it 

out like the people with whom he has lived!



The truth is that the man who is very particular not to commit 

himself, in pronunciation or otherwise, and talks as if his remarks 

were being taken down in shorthand, and shudders at the thought of 

making a mistake, will hardly be able to open your heart or let out 

the best that is in his own.



Reserve and precision are a great protection to overrated 

reputations; but they are death to talk.



In talk it is not correctness of grammar nor elegance of enunciation 

that charms us; it is spirit, VERVE, the sudden turn of humour, the 

keen, pungent taste of life.  For this reason a touch of dialect, a 

flavour of brogue, is delightful.  Any dialect is classic that has 

conveyed beautiful thoughts.  Who that ever talked with the poet 

Tennyson, when he let himself go, over the pipes, would miss the 

savour of his broad-rolling Lincolnshire vowels, now heightening the 

humour, now deepening the pathos, of his genuine manly speech?  

There are many good stories lingering in the memories of those who 

knew Dr. James McCosh, the late president of Princeton University,--

stories too good, I fear, to get into a biography; but the best of 

them, in print, would not have the snap and vigour of the poorest of 

them, in talk, with his own inimitable Scotch-Irish brogue to set it 

forth.



A brogue is not a fault.  It is a beauty, an heirloom, a 

distinction.  A local accent is like a landed inheritance; it marks 

a man's place in the world, tells where he comes from.  Of course it 

is possible to have too much of it.  A man does not need to carry 

the soil of his whole farm around with him on his boots.  But, 

within limits, the accent of a native region is delightful.  'T is 

the flavour of heather in the grouse, the taste of wild herbs and 

evergreen-buds in the venison.  I like the maple-sugar tang of the 

Vermonter's sharp-edged speech; the round, full-waisted r's of 

Pennsylvania and Ohio; the soft, indolent vowels of the South.  One 

of the best talkers now living is a schoolmaster from Virginia, 

Colonel Gordon McCabe.  I once crossed the ocean with him on a 

stream of stories that reached from Liverpool to New York.  He did 

not talk in the least like a book.  He talked like a Virginian.



When Montaigne mentions GAYETY as the third clement of satisfying 

discourse, I fancy he does not mean mere fun, though that has its 

value at the right time and place.  But there is another quality 

which is far more valuable and always fit.  Indeed it underlies the 

best fun and makes it wholesome.  It is cheerfulness, the temper 

which makes the best of things and squeezes the little drops of 

honey even out of thistle-blossoms.  I think this is what Montaigne 

meant.  Certainly it is what he had.



Cheerfulness is the background of all good talk.  A sense of humour 

is a means of grace.  With it I have heard a pleasant soul make even 

that most perilous of all subjects, the description of a long 

illness, entertaining.  The various physicians moved through the 

recital as excellent comedians, and the medicines appeared like a 

succession of timely jests.



There is no occasion upon which this precious element of talkability 

comes out stronger than when we are on a journey.  Travel with a 

cheerless and easily discouraged companion is an unadulterated 

misery.  But a cheerful comrade is better than a waterproof coat and 

a foot-warmer.



I remember riding once with my lady Graygown fifteen miles through a 

cold rainstorm, in an open buckboard, over the worst road in the 

world, from LAC A LA BELLE RIVIERE to the Metabetchouan River.  Such 

was the cheerfulness of her ejaculations (the only possible form of 

talk) that we arrived at our destination as warm and merry as if we 

had been sitting beside a roaring camp-fire.





But after all, the very best thing in good talk, and the thing that 

helps it most, is FRIENDSHIP.  How it dissolves the barriers that 

divide us, and loosens all constraint, and diffuses itself like some 

fine old cordial through all the veins of life--this feeling that we 

understand and trust each other, and wish each other heartily well!  

Everything into which it really comes is good.  It transforms 

letter-writing from a task into a pleasure.  It makes music a 

thousand times more sweet.  The people who play and sing not at us, 

but TO us,--how delightful it is to listen to them!  Yes, there is a 

talkability that can express itself even without words.  There is an 

exchange of thought and feeling which is happy alike in speech and 

in silence.  It is quietness pervaded with friendship.





Having come thus far in the exposition of Montaigne, I shall 

conclude with an opinion of my own, even though I cannot quote a 

sentence of his to back it.



The one person of all the world in whom talkability is most 

desirable, and talkativeness least endurable, is a wife.







A WILD STRAWBERRY





"Such is the story of the Boblink; once spiritual, musical, admired, 

the joy of the meadows, and the favourite bird of spring; finally a 

gross little sensualist who expiates his sensuality in the larder.  

His story contains a moral, worthy the attention of all little birds 

and little boys; warning them to keep to those refined and 

intellectual pursuits which raised him to so high a pitch of 

popularity during the early part of his career; but to eschew all 

tendency to that gross and dissipated indulgence, which brought this 

mistaken little bird to an untimely end."--WASHINGTON IRVING: 

Wolfert's Roost.





The Swiftwater brook was laughing softly to itself as it ran through 

a strip of hemlock forest on the edge of the Woodlings' farm.  Among 

the evergreen branches overhead the gayly-dressed warblers,--little 

friends of the forest,--were flitting to and fro, lisping their June 

songs of contented love: milder, slower, lazier notes than those in 

which they voiced the amourous raptures of May.  Prince's Pine and 

golden loose-strife and pink laurel and blue hare-bells and purple-

fringed orchids, and a score of lovely flowers were all abloom.  The 

late spring had hindered some; the sudden heats of early summer had 

hastened others; and now they seemed to come out all together, as if 

Nature had suddenly tilted up her cornucopia and poured forth her 

treasures in spendthrift joy.



I lay on a mossy bank at the foot of a tree, filling my pipe after a 

frugal lunch, and thinking how hard it would be to find in any 

quarter of the globe a place more fair and fragrant than this hidden 

vale among the Alleghany Mountains.  The perfume of the flowers of 

the forest is more sweet and subtle than the heavy scent of tropical 

blossoms.  No lily-field in Bermuda could give a fragrance half so 

magical as the fairy-like odour of these woodland slopes, soft 

carpeted with the green of glossy vines above whose tiny leaves, in 

delicate profusion,





     "The slight Linnaea hangs its twin-born heads."





Nor are there any birds in Africa, or among the Indian Isles, more 

exquisite in colour than these miniature warblers, showing their 

gold and green, their orange and black, their blue and white, 

against the dark background of the rhododendron thicket.



But how seldom we put a cup of pleasure to our lips without a dash 

of bitters, a touch of faultfinding.  My drop of discontent, that 

day, was the thought that the northern woodland, at least in June, 

yielded no fruit to match its beauty and its fragrance.



There is good browsing among the leaves of the wood and the grasses 

of the meadow, as every well-instructed angler knows.  The bright 

emerald tips that break from the hemlock and the balsam like verdant 

flames have a pleasant savour to the tongue.  The leaves of the 

sassafras are full of spice, and the bark of the black-birch twigs 

holds a fine cordial.  Crinkle-root is spicy, but you must partake 

of it delicately, or it will bite your tongue.  Spearmint and 

peppermint never lose their charm for the palate that still 

remembers the delights of youth.  Wild sorrel has an agreeable, 

sour, shivery flavour.  Even the tender stalk of a young blade of 

grass is a thing that can be chewed by a person of childlike mind 

with much contentment.



But, after all, these are only relishes.  They whet the appetite 

more than they appease it.  There should be something to eat, in the 

June woods, as perfect in its kind, as satisfying to the sense of 

taste, as the birds and the flowers are to the senses of sight and 

hearing and smell.  Blueberries are good, but they are far away in 

July.  Blackberries are luscious when they are fully ripe, but that 

will not be until August.  Then the fishing will be over, and the 

angler's hour of need will be past.  The one thing that is lacking 

now beside this mountain stream is some fruit more luscious and 

dainty than grows in the tropics, to melt upon the lips and fill the 

mouth with pleasure.



But that is what these cold northern woods will not offer.  They are 

too reserved, too lofty, too puritanical to make provision for the 

grosser wants of humanity.  They are not friendly to luxury.



Just then, as I shifted my head to find a softer pillow of moss 

after this philosophic and immoral reflection, Nature gave me her 

silent answer.  Three wild strawberries, nodding on their long 

stems, hung over my face.  It was an invitation to taste and see 

that they were good.



The berries were not the round and rosy ones of the meadow, but the 

long, slender, dark crimson ones of the forest.  One, two, three; no 

more on that vine; but each one as it touched my lips was a drop of 

nectar and a crumb of ambrosia, a concentrated essence of all the 

pungent sweetness of the wildwood, sapid, penetrating, and 

delicious.  I tasted the odour of a hundred blossoms and the green 

shimmering of innumerable leaves and the sparkle of sifted sunbeams 

and the breath of highland breezes and the song of many birds and 

the murmur of flowing streams,--all in a wild strawberry.





Do you remember, in THE COMPLEAT ANGLER, a remark which Isaak Walton 

quotes from a certain "Doctor Boteler" about strawberries?  

"Doubtless," said that wise old man, "God could have made a better 

berry, but doubtless God never did."



Well, the wild strawberry is the one that God made.



I think it would have been pleasant to know a man who could sum up 

his reflections upon the important question of berries in such a 

pithy saying as that which Walton repeats.  His tongue must have 

been in close communication with his heart.  He must have had a fair 

sense of that sprightly humour without which piety itself is often 

insipid.



I have often tried to find out more about him, and some day I hope I 

shall.  But up to the present, all that the books have told me of 

this obscure sage is that his name was William Butler, and that he 

was an eminent physician, sometimes called "the Aesculapius of his 

age."  He was born at Ipswich, in l535, and educated at Clare Hall, 

Cambridge; in the neighbourhood of which town he appears to have 

spent the most of his life, in high repute as a practitioner of 

physic.  He had the honour of doctoring King James the First after 

an accident on the hunting field, and must have proved himself a 

pleasant old fellow, for the king looked him up at Cambridge the 

next year, and spent an hour in his lodgings.  This wise physician 

also invented a medicinal beverage called "Doctor Butler's Ale."  I 

do not quite like the sound of it, but perhaps it was better than 

its name.  This much is sure, at all events: either it was really a 

harmless drink, or else the doctor must have confined its use 

entirely to his patients; for he lived to the ripe age of eighty-

three years.



Between the time when William Butler first needed the services of a 

physician, in 1535, and the time when he last prescribed for a 

patient, in 1618, there was plenty of trouble in England.  Bloody 

Queen Mary sat on the throne; and there were all kinds of quarrels 

about religion and politics; and Catholics and Protestants were 

killing one another in the name of God.  After that the red-haired 

Elizabeth, called the Virgin Queen, wore the crown, and waged 

triumphant war and tempestuous love.  Then fat James of Scotland was 

made king of Great Britain; and Guy Fawkes tried to blow him up with 

gunpowder, and failed; and the king tried to blow out all the pipes 

in England with his COUNTERBLAST AGAINST TOBACCO; but he failed too.  

Somewhere about that time, early in the seventeenth century, a very 

small event happened.  A new berry was brought over from Virginia,--

FRAGRARIA VIRGINIANA,--and then, amid wars and rumours of wars, 

Doctor Butler's happiness was secure.  That new berry was so much 

richer and sweeter and more generous than the familiar FRAGRARIA 

VESCA of Europe, that it attracted the sincere interest of all 

persons of good taste.  It inaugurated a new era in the history of 

the strawberry.  The long lost masterpiece of Paradise was restored 

to its true place in the affections of man.



Is there not a touch of merry contempt for all the vain 

controversies and conflicts of humanity in the grateful ejaculation 

with which the old doctor greeted that peaceful, comforting gift of 

Providence?



"From this time forward," he seems to say, "the fates cannot beggar 

me, for I have eaten strawberries.  With every Maytime that visits 

this distracted island, the white blossoms with hearts of gold will 

arrive.  In every June the red drops of pleasant savour will hang 

among the scalloped leaves.  The children of this world may wrangle 

and give one another wounds that even my good ale cannot cure.  

Nevertheless, the earth as God created it is a fair dwelling and 

full of comfort for all who have a quiet mind and a thankful heart.  

Doubtless God might have made a better world, but doubtless this is 

the world He made for us; and in it He planted the strawberry."



Fine old doctor!  Brave philosopher of cheerfulness!  The Virginian 

berry should have been brought to England sooner, or you should have 

lived longer, at least to a hundred years, so that you might have 

welcomed a score of strawberry-seasons with gratitude and an 

epigram.



Since that time a great change has passed over the fruit which 

Doctor Butler praised so well.  That product of creative art which 

Divine wisdom did not choose to surpass, human industry has laboured 

to improve.  It has grown immensely in size and substance.  The 

traveller from America who steams into Queenstown harbour in early 

summer is presented (for a consideration) with a cabbage-leaf full 

of pale-hued berries, sweet and juicy, any one of which would 

outbulk a dozen of those that used to grow in Virginia when 

Pocahontas was smitten with the charms of Captain John Smith.  They 

are superb, those light-tinted Irish strawberries.  And there are 

wonderful new varieties developed in the gardens of New Jersey and 

Rhode Island, which compare with the ancient berries of the woods 

and meadows as Leviathan with a minnow.  The huge crimson cushions 

hang among the plants so thick that they seem like bunches of fruit 

with a few leaves attached for ornament.  You can satisfy your 

hunger in such a berry-patch in ten minutes, while out in the field 

you must pick for half an hour, and in the forest thrice as long, 

before you can fill a small tin cup.



Yet, after all, it is questionable whether men have really bettered 

God's CHEF D'OEUVRE in the berry line.  They have enlarged it and 

made it more plentiful and more certain in its harvest.  But 

sweeter, more fragrant, more poignant in its flavour?  No.  The wild 

berry still stands first in its subtle gusto.



Size is not the measure of excellence.  Perfection lies in quality, 

not in quantity.  Concentration enhances pleasure, gives it a point 

so that it goes deeper.



Is not a ten-inch trout better than a ten-foot sturgeon?  I would 

rather read a tiny essay by Charles Lamb than a five-hundred page 

libel on life by a modern British novelist who shall be nameless.  

Flavour is the priceless quality.  Style is the thing that counts 

and is remembered, in literature, in art, and in berries.



No JOCUNDA, nor TRIUMPH, nor VICTORIA, nor any other high-titled 

fruit that ever took the first prize at an agricultural fair, is 

half so delicate and satisfying as the wild strawberry that dropped 

into my mouth, under the hemlock tree, beside the Swiftwater.



A touch of surprise is essential to perfect sweetness.



To get what you have been wishing for is pleasant; but to get what 

you have not been sure of, makes the pleasure tingle.  A new door of 

happiness is opened when you go out to hunt for something and 

discover it with your own eyes.  But there is an experience even 

better than that.  When you have stupidly forgotten (or despondently 

forgone) to look about you for the unclaimed treasures and unearned 

blessings which are scattered along the by-ways of life, then, 

sometimes by a special mercy, a small sample of them is quietly laid 

before you so that you cannot help seeing it, and it brings you back 

to a sense of the joyful possibilities of living.



How full of enjoyment is the search after wild things,--wild birds, 

wild flowers, wild honey, wild berries!  There was a country club on 

Storm King Mountain, above the Hudson River, where they used to 

celebrate a festival of flowers every spring.  Men and women who had 

conservatories of their own, full of rare plants and costly orchids, 

came together to admire the gathered blossoms of the woodlands and 

meadows.  But the people who had the best of the entertainment were 

the boys and girls who wandered through the thickets and down the 

brooks, pushed their way into the tangled copses and crept 

venturesomely across the swamps, to look for the flowers.  Some of 

the seekers may have had a few gray hairs; but for that day at least 

they were all boys and girls.  Nature was as young as ever, and they 

were all her children.  Hand touched hand without a glove.  The 

hidden blossoms of friendship unfolded.  Laughter and merry shouts 

and snatches of half-forgotten song rose to the lips.  Gay adventure 

sparkled in the air.  School was out and nobody listened for the 

bell.  It was just a day to live, and be natural, and take no 

thought for the morrow.



There is great luck in this affair of looking for flowers.  I do not 

see how any one who is prejudiced against games of chance can 

consistently undertake it.



For my own part, I approve of garden flowers because they are so 

orderly and so certain; but wild flowers I love, just because there 

is so much chance about them.  Nature is all in favour of certainty 

in great laws and of uncertainty in small events.  You cannot 

appoint the day and the place for her flower-shows.  If you happen 

to drop in at the right moment she will give you a free admission.  

But even then it seems as if the table of beauty had been spread for 

the joy of a higher visitor, and in obedience to secret orders which 

you have not heard.



Have you ever found the fringed gentian?





          "Just before the snows,

     There came a purple creature

      That lavished all the hill:

     And summer hid her forehead,

      And mockery was still.



     The frosts were her condition:

      The Tyrian would not come

     Until the North evoked her,--

      'Creator, shall I bloom?'"





There are strange freaks of fortune in the finding of wild flowers, 

and curious coincidences which make us feel as if some one were 

playing friendly tricks on us.  I remember reading, one evening in 

May, a passage in a good book called THE PROCESSION OF THE FLOWERS, 

in which Colonel Higginson describes the singular luck that a friend 

of his enjoyed, year after year, in finding the rare blossoms of the 

double rueanemone.  It seems that this man needed only to take a 

walk in the suburbs of any town, and he would come upon a bed of 

these flowers, without effort or design.  I envied him his good 

fortune, for I had never discovered even one of them.  But the next 

morning, as I strolled out to fish the Swiftwater, down below Billy 

Lerns's spring-house I found a green bank in the shadow of the wood 

all bespangled with tiny, trembling, twofold stars,--double 

rueanemones, for luck!  It was a favourable omen, and that day I 

came home with a creel full of trout.



The theory that Adam lived out in the woods for some time before he 

was put into the garden of Eden "to dress it and to keep it" has an 

air of probability.  How else shall we account for the arboreal 

instincts that cling to his posterity?



There is a wilding strain in our blood that all the civilization in 

the world will not eradicate.  I never knew a real boy--or, for that 

matter, a girl worth knowing--who would not rather climb a tree, any 

day, than walk up a golden stairway.



It is a touch of this instinct, I suppose, that makes it more 

delightful to fish in the most insignificant of free streams than in 

a carefully stocked and preserved pond, where the fish are brought 

up by hand and fed on minced liver.  Such elaborate precautions to 

ensure good luck extract all the spice from the sport of angling.  

Casting the fly in such a pond, if you hooked a fish, you might 

expect to hear the keeper say, "Ah, that is Charles, we will play 

him and put him back, if you please, sir; for the master is very 

fond of him,"--or, "Now you have got hold of Edward; let us land him 

and keep him; he is three years old this month, and just ready to be 

eaten."  It would seem like taking trout out of cold storage.



Who could find any pleasure in angling for the tame carp in the 

fish-pool of Fontainebleau?  They gather at the marble steps, those 

venerable, courtly fish, to receive their rations; and there are 

veterans among them, in ancient livery, with fringes of green moss 

on their shoulders, who could tell you pretty tales of being fed by 

the white hands of maids of honour, or even of nibbling their crumbs 

of bread from the jewelled fingers of a princess.



There is no sport in bringing pets to the table.  It may be 

necessary sometimes; but the true sportsman would always prefer to 

leave the unpleasant task of execution to menial hands, while he 

goes out into the wild country to capture his game by his own 

skill,--if he has good luck.  I would rather run some risk in this 

enterprise (even as the young Tobias did, when the voracious pike 

sprang at him from the waters of the Tigris, and would have devoured 

him but for the friendly instruction of the piscatory Angel, who 

taught Tobias how to land the monster),--I would far rather take any 

number of chances in my sport than have it domesticated to the point 

of dulness.



The trim plantations of trees which are called "forests" in certain 

parts of Europe--scientifically pruned and tended, counted every 

year by uniformed foresters, and defended against all possible 

depredations--are admirable and useful in their way; but they lack 

the mystic enchantment of the fragments of native woodland which 

linger among the Adirondacks and the White Mountains, or the vast, 

shaggy, sylvan wildernesses which hide the lakes and rivers of 

Canada.  These Laurentian Hills lie in No Man's Land.  Here you do 

not need to keep to the path, for there is none.  You may make your 

own trail, whithersoever fancy leads you; and at night you may pitch 

your tent under any tree that looks friendly and firm.



Here, if anywhere, you shall find Dryads, and Naiads, and Oreads.  

And if you chance to see one, by moonlight, combing her long hair 

beside the glimmering waterfall, or slipping silently, with gleaming 

shoulders, through the grove of silver birches, you may call her by 

the name that pleases you best.  She is all your own discovery.  

There is no social directory in the wilderness.



One side of our nature, no doubt, finds its satisfaction in the 

regular, the proper, the conventional.  But there is another side of 

our nature, underneath, that takes delight in the strange, the free, 

the spontaneous.  We like to discover what we call a law of Nature, 

and make our calculations about it, and harness the force which lies 

behind it for our own purposes.  But we taste a different kind of 

joy when an event occurs which nobody has foreseen or counted upon.  

It seems like an evidence that there is something in the world which 

is alive and mysterious and untrammelled.



The weather-prophet tells us of an approaching storm.  It comes 

according to the programme.  We admire the accuracy of the 

prediction, and congratulate ourselves that we have such a good 

meteorological service.  But when, perchance, a bright, crystalline 

piece of weather arrives instead of the foretold tempest, do we not 

feel a secret sense of pleasure which goes beyond our mere comfort 

in the sunshine?  The whole affair is not as easy as a sum in simple 

addition, after all,--at least not with our present knowledge.  It 

is a good joke on the Weather Bureau.  "Aha, Old Probabilities!" we 

say, "you don't know it all yet; there are still some chances to be 

taken!"



Some day, I suppose, all things in the heavens above, and in the 

earth beneath, and in the hearts of the men and women who dwell 

between, will be investigated and explained.  We shall live a 

perfectly ordered life, with no accidents, happy or unhappy.  

Everybody will act according to rule, and there will be no dotted 

lines on the map of human existence, no regions marked "unexplored."  

Perhaps that golden age of the machine will come, but you and I will 

hardly live to see it.  And if that seems to you a matter for tears, 

you must do your own weeping, for I cannot find it in my heart to 

add a single drop of regret.



The results of education and social discipline in humanity are fine.  

It is a good thing that we can count upon them.  But at the same 

time let us rejoice in the play of native traits and individual 

vagaries.  Cultivated manners are admirable, yet there is a sudden 

touch of inborn grace and courtesy that goes beyond them all.  No 

array of accomplishments can rival the charm of an unsuspected gift 

of nature, brought suddenly to light.  I once heard a peasant girl 

singing down the Traunthal, and the echo of her song outlives, in 

the hearing of my heart, all memories of the grand opera.



The harvest of the gardens and the orchards, the result of prudent 

planting and patient cultivation, is full of satisfaction.  We 

anticipate it in due season, and when it comes we fill our mouths 

and are grateful.  But pray, kind Providence, let me slip over the 

fence out of the garden now and then, to shake a nut-tree that grows 

untended in the wood.  Give me liberty to put off my black coat for 

a day, and go a-fishing on a free stream, and find by chance a wild 

strawberry.







LOVERS AND LANDSCAPE





"He insisted that the love that was of real value in the world was 

n't interesting, and that the love that was interesting was n't 

always admirable.  Love that happened to a person like the measles 

or fits, and was really of no particular credit to itself or its 

victims, was the sort that got into the books and was made much of; 

whereas the kind that was attained by the endeavour of true souls, 

and that had wear in it, and that made things go right instead of 

tangling them up, was too much like duty to make satisfactory 

reading for people of sentiment."--E. S. MARTIN: My Cousin Anthony.





The first day of spring is one thing, and the first spring day is 

another.  The difference between them is sometimes as great as a 

month.



The first day of spring is due to arrive, if the calendar does not 

break down, about the twenty-first of March, when the earth turns 

the corner of Sun Alley and starts for Summer Street.  But the first 

spring day is not on the time-table at all.  It comes when it is 

ready, and in the latitude of New York this is usually not till 

after All Fools' Day.



About this time,--





     "When chinks in April's windy dome

      Let through a day of June,

      And foot and thought incline to roam,

      And every sound's a tune,"--





it is the habit of the angler who lives in town to prepare for the 

labours of the approaching season by longer walks or bicycle-rides 

in the parks, or along the riverside, or in the somewhat demoralized 

Edens of the suburbs.  In the course of these vernal peregrinations 

and circumrotations, I observe that lovers of various kinds begin to 

occupy a notable place in the landscape.



The burnished dove puts a livelier iris around his neck, and 

practises fantastic bows and amourous quicksteps along the verandah 

of the pigeon-house and on every convenient roof.  The young male of 

the human species, less gifted in the matter of rainbows, does his 

best with a gay cravat, and turns the thoughts which circulate above 

it towards the securing or propitiating of a best girl.



The objects of these more or less brilliant attentions, doves and 

girls, show a becoming reciprocity, and act in a way which leads us 

to infer (so far as inferences hold good in the mysterious region of 

female conduct) that they are not seriously displeased.  To a 

rightly tempered mind, pleasure is a pleasant sight.  And the 

philosophic observer who could look upon this spring spectacle of 

the lovers with any but friendly feelings would be indeed what the 

great Dr. Samuel Johnson called "a person not to be envied."



Far be it from me to fall into such a desiccated and supercilious 

mood.  My small olive-branch of fancy will be withered, in truth, 

and ready to drop budless from the tree, when I cease to feel a mild 

delight in the billings and cooings of the little birds that 

separate from the flocks to fly together in pairs, or in the 

uninstructive but mutually satisfactory converse which Strephon 

holds with Chloe while they dally along the primrose path.



I am glad that even the stony and tumultuous city affords some 

opportunities for these amiable observations.  In the month of April 

there is hardly a clump of shrubbery in the Central Park which will 

not serve as a trysting-place for yellow warblers and catbirds just 

home from their southern tours.  At the same time, you shall see 

many a bench, designed for the accommodation of six persons, 

occupied at the sunset hour by only two, and apparently so much too 

small for them that they cannot avoid a little crowding.



These are infallible signs.  Taken in conjunction with the eruption 

of tops and marbles among the small boys, and the purchase of 

fishing-tackle and golf-clubs by the old boys, they certify us that 

the vernal equinox has arrived, not only in the celestial regions, 

but also in the heart of man.





I have been reflecting of late upon the relation of lovers to the 

landscape, and questioning whether art has given it quite the same 

place as that which belongs to it in nature.  In fiction, for 

example, and in the drama, and in music, I have some vague 

misgivings that romantic love has come to hold a more prominent and 

a more permanent position than it fills in real life.



This is dangerous ground to venture upon, even in the most modest 

and deprecatory way.  The man who expresses an opinion, or even a 

doubt, on this subject, contrary to the ruling traditions, will have 

a swarm of angry critics buzzing about him.  He will be called a 

heretic, a heathen, a cold-blooded freak of nature.  As for the 

woman who hesitates to subscribe all the thirty-nine articles of 

romantic love, if such a one dares to put her reluctance into words, 

she is certain to be accused either of unwomanly ambition or of 

feminine disappointment.



Let us make haste, then, to get back for safety to the 

ornithological aspect of the subject.  Here there can be no 

penalties for heresy.  And here I make bold to avow my conviction 

that the pairing season is not the only point of interest in the 

life of the birds; nor is the instinct by which they mate altogether 

and beyond comparison the noblest passion that stirs their feathered 

breasts.



'T is true, the time of mating is their prettiest season; but it is 

very short.  How little we should know of the drama of their airy 

life if we had eyes only for this brief scene!  Their finest 

qualities come out in the patient cares that protect the young in 

the nest, in the varied struggles for existence through the changing 

year, and in the incredible heroisms of the annual migrations.  

Herein is a parable.



It may be observed further, without fear of rebuke, that the 

behaviour of the different kinds of birds during the prevalence of 

romantic love is not always equally above reproach.  The courtship 

of English sparrows--blustering, noisy, vulgar--is a sight to offend 

the taste of every gentle on-looker.  Some birds reiterate and 

vociferate their love-songs in a fashion that displays their 

inconsiderateness as well as their ignorance of music.  This trait 

is most marked in domestic fowls.  There was a guinea-cock, once, 

that chose to do his wooing close under the window of a farm-house 

where I was lodged.  He had no regard for my hours of sleep or 

meditation.  His amatory click-clack prevented the morning and 

wrecked the tranquillity of the evening.  It was odious, brutal,--

worse, it was absolutely thoughtless.  Herein is another parable.



Let us admit cheerfully that lovers have a place in the landscape 

and lend a charm to it.  This does not mean that they are to take up 

all the room there is.  Suppose, for example, that a pair of them, 

on Goat Island, put themselves in such a position as to completely 

block out your view of Niagara.  You cannot regard them with 

gratitude.  They even become a little tedious.  Or suppose that you 

are visiting at a country-house, and you find that you must not 

enjoy the moonlight on the verandah because Augustus and Amanda are 

murmuring in one corner, and that you must not go into the garden 

because Louis and Lizzie are there, and that you cannot have a sail 

on the lake because Richard and Rebecca have taken the boat.



Of course, unless you happen to be a selfish old curmudgeon, you 

rejoice, by sympathy, in the happiness of these estimable young 

people.  But you fail to see why it should cover so much ground.



Why should they not pool their interests, and all go out in the 

boat, or all walk in the garden, or all sit on the verandah?  Then 

there would be room for somebody else about the place.



In old times you could rely upon lovers for retirement.  But 

nowadays their role seems to be a bold ostentation of their 

condition.  They rely upon other people to do the timid, shrinking 

part.  Society, in America, is arranged principally for their 

convenience; and whatever portion of the landscape strikes their 

fancy, they preempt and occupy.  All this goes upon the presumption 

that romantic love is really the only important interest in life.



This train of thought was illuminated, the other night, by an 

incident which befell me at a party.  It was an assembly of men, 

drawn together by their common devotion to the sport of canoeing.  

There were only three or four of the gentler sex present (as 

honorary members), and only one of whom it could be suspected that 

she was at that time a victim or an object of the tender passion.  

In the course of the evening, by way of diversion to our 

disputations on keels and centreboards, canvas and birch-bark, 

cedar-wood and bass-wood, paddles and steering-gear, a fine young 

Apollo, with a big, manly voice, sang us a few songs.  But he did 

not chant the joys of weathering a sudden squall, or running a rapid 

feather-white with foam, or floating down a long, quiet, elm-bowered 

river.  Not all.  His songs were full of sighs and yearnings, 

languid lips and sheep's-eyes.  His powerful voice informed us that 

crowns of thorns seemed like garlands of roses, and kisses were as 

sweet as samples of heaven, and various other curious sensations 

were experienced; and at the end of every stanza the reason was 

stated, in tones of thunder--





     "Because I love you, dear."





Even if true, it seemed inappropriate.  How foolish the average 

audience in a drawing-room looks while it is listening to passionate 

love-ditties!  And yet I suppose the singer chose these songs, not 

from any malice aforethought, but simply because songs of this kind 

are so abundant that it is next to impossible to find anything else 

in the shops.



In regard to novels, the situation is almost as discouraging.  Ten 

love-stories are printed to one of any other kind.  We have a 

standing invitation to consider the tribulations and difficulties of 

some young man or young woman in finding a mate.  It must be 

admitted that the subject has its capabilities of interest.  Nature 

has her uses for the lover, and she gives him an excellent part to 

play in the drama of life.  But is this tantamount to saying that 

his interest is perennial and all-absorbing, and that his role on 

the stage is the only one that is significant and noteworthy?



Life is much too large to be expressed in the terms of a single 

passion.  Friendship, patriotism, parental tenderness, filial 

devotion, the ardour of adventure, the thirst for knowledge, the 

ecstasy of religion,--these all have their dwelling in the heart of 

man.  They mould character.  They control conduct.  They are stars 

of destiny shining in the inner firmament.  And if art would truly 

hold the mirror up to nature, it must reflect these greater and 

lesser lights that rule the day and the night.



How many of the plays that divert and misinform the modern theatre-

goer turn on the pivot of a love-affair, not always pure, but 

generally simple!  And how many of those that are imported from 

France proceed upon the theory that the Seventh is the only 

Commandment, and that the principal attraction of life lies in the 

opportunity of breaking it!  The matinee-girl is not likely to have 

a very luminous or truthful idea of existence floating around in her 

pretty little head.



But, after all, the great plays, those that take the deepest hold 

upon the heart, like HAMLET and KING LEAR, MACBETH and OTHELLO, are 

not love-plays.  And the most charming comedies, like THE WINTER'S 

TALE, and THE RIVALS, and RIP VAN WINKLE, are chiefly memorable for 

other things than love-scenes.



Even in novels, love shows at its best when it does not absorb the 

whole plot.  LORNA DOONE is a lovers' story, but there is a blessed 

minimum of spooning in it, and always enough of working and fighting 

to keep the air clear and fresh.  THE HEART OF MIDLOTHIAN, and 

HYPATIA, and ROMOLA, and THE CLOISTER AND THE HEARTH, and JOHN 

INGLESANT, and THE THREE MUSKETEERS, and NOTRE DAME, and PEACE AND 

WAR, and QUO VADIS,--these are great novels because they are much 

more than tales of romantic love.  As for HENRY ESMOND, (which seems 

to me the best of all,) certainly "love at first sight" does not 

play the finest role in that book.



There are good stories of our own day--pathetic, humourous, 

entertaining, powerful--in which the element of romantic love is 

altogether subordinate, or even imperceptible.  THE RISE OF SILAS 

LAPHAM does not owe its deep interest to the engagement of the very 

charming young people who enliven it.  MADAME DELPHINE and OLE 

'STRACTED are perfect stories of their kind.  I would not barter THE 

JUNGLE BOOKS for a hundred of THE BRUSHWOOD BOY.



The truth is that love, considered merely as the preference of one 

person for another of the opposite sex, is not "the greatest thing 

in the world."  It becomes great only when it leads on, as it often 

does, to heroism and self-sacrifice and fidelity.  Its chief value 

for art (the interpreter) lies not in itself, but in its quickening 

relation to the other elements of life.  It must be seen and shown 

in its due proportion, and in harmony with the broader landscape.



Do you believe that in all the world there is only one woman 

specially created for each man, and that the order of the universe 

will be hopelessly askew unless these two needles find each other in 

the haystack?  You believe it for yourself, perhaps; but do you 

believe it for Tom Johnson?  You remember what a terrific 

disturbance he made in the summer of 189-, at Bar Harbor, about 

Ellinor Brown, and how he ran away with her in September.  You have 

also seen them together (occasionally) at Lenox and Newport, since 

their marriage.  Are you honestly of the opinion that if Tom had not 

married Ellinor, these two young lives would have been a total 

wreck?



Adam Smith, in his book on THE MORAL SENTIMENTS, goes so far as to 

say that "love is not interesting to the observer because it is AN 

AFFECTION OF THE IMAGINATION, into which it is difficult for a third 

party to enter."  Something of the same kind occurred to me in 

regard to Tom and Ellinor.  Yet I would not have presumed to suggest 

this thought to either of them.  Nor would I have quoted in their 

hearing the melancholy and frigid prediction of Ralph Waldo Emerson, 

to the effect that they would some day discover "that all which at 

first drew them together--those once sacred features, that magical 

play of charm--was deciduous."



DECIDUOUS, indeed?  Cold, unpleasant, botanical word!  Rather would 

I prognosticate for the lovers something perennial,





     "A sober certainty of waking bliss,common about it.  It was his habit to succeed, and all the 

rest of us were hardened to it.



When he married Cornelia Cochrane, we were consoled for our partial 

loss by the apparent fitness and brilliancy of the match.  If 

Beekman was a masterful man, Cornelia was certainly what you might 

call a mistressful woman.  She had been the head of her house since 

she was eighteen years old.  She carried her good looks like the 

family plate; and when she came into the breakfast-room and said 

good-morning, it was with an air as if she presented every one with 

a check for a thousand dollars.  Her tastes were accepted as 

judgments, and her preferences had the force of laws.  Wherever she 

wanted to go in the summer-time, there the finger of household 

destiny pointed.  At Newport, at Bar Harbour, at Lenox, at 

Southampton, she made a record.  When she was joined in holy wedlock 

to Beekman De Peyster, her father and mother heaved a sigh of 

satisfaction, and settled down for a quiet vacation in Cherry 

Valley.



It was in the second summer after the wedding that Beekman admitted 

to a few of his ancient Petrine cronies, in moments of confidence 

(unjustifiable, but natural), that his wife had one fault.



"It is not exactly a fault," he said, "not a positive fault, you 

know.  It is just a kind of a defect, due to her education, of 

course.  In everything else she's magnificent.  But she does n't 

care for fishing.  "





to survive the evanescence of love's young dream.  Ellinor should 

turn out to be a woman like the Lady Elizabeth Hastings, of whom 

Richard Steele wrote that "to love her was a liberal education."  

Tom should prove that he had in him the lasting stuff of a true man 

and a hero.  Then it would make little difference whether their 

conjunction had been eternally prescribed in the book of fate or 

not.  It would be evidently a fit match, made on earth and 

illustrative of heaven.



But even in the making of such a match as this, the various stages 

of attraction, infatuation, and appropriation should not be 

displayed too prominently before the world, nor treated as events of 

overwhelming importance and enduring moment.  I would not counsel 

Tom and Ellinor, in the midsummer of their engagement, to have their 

photographs taken together in affectionate attitudes.



The pictures of an imaginary kind which deal with the subject of 

romantic love are, almost without exception, fatuous and futile.  

The inanely amatory, with their languishing eyes, weary us.  The 

endlessly osculatory, with their protracted salutations, are 

sickening.  Even when an air of sentimental propriety is thrown 

about them by some such title as "Wedded" or "The Honeymoon," they 

fatigue us.  For the most part, they remind me of the remark which 

the Commodore made upon a certain painting of Jupiter and lo which 

hangs in the writing-room of the Contrary Club.



"Sir," said that gently piercing critic, "that picture is equally 

unsatisfactory to the artist, to the moralist, and to the 

voluptuary."





Nevertheless, having made a clean breast of my misgivings and 

reservations on the subject of lovers and landscape, I will now 

confess that the whole of my doubts do not weigh much against my 

unreasoned faith in romantic love.  At heart I am no infidel, but a 

most obstinate believer and devotee.  My seasons of skepticism are 

transient.  They are connected with a torpid liver and aggravated by 

confinement to a sedentary life and enforced abstinence from 

angling.  Out-of-doors, I return to a saner and happier frame of 

mind.



As my wheel rolls along the Riverside Drive in the golden glow of 

the sunset, I rejoice that the episode of Charles Henry and Matilda 

Jane has not been omitted from the view.  This vast and populous 

city, with all its passing show of life, would be little better than 

a waste, howling wilderness if we could not catch a glimpse, now and 

then, of young people falling in love in the good old-fashioned way.  

Even on a trout-stream, I have seen nothing prettier than the sight 

upon which I once came suddenly as I was fishing down the Neversink.



A boy was kneeling beside the brook, and a girl was giving him a 

drink of water out of her rosy hands.  They stared with wonder and 

compassion at the wet and solitary angler, wading down the stream, 

as if he were some kind of a mild lunatic.  But as I glanced 

discreetly at their small tableau, I was not unconscious of the new 

joy that came into the landscape with the presence of





     "A lover and his lass."





I knew how sweet the water tasted from that kind of a cup.  I also 

have lived in Arcadia, and have not forgotten the way back.







A FATAL SUCCESS





"What surprises me in her behaviour," said he, "is its thoroughness.  

Woman seldom does things by halves, but often by doubles."--SOLOMON 

SINGLEWITZ: The Life of Adam.





Beekman De Peyster was probably the most passionate and triumphant 

fisherman in the Petrine Club.  He angled with the same dash and 

confidence that he threw into his operations in the stock-market.  

He was sure to be the first man to get his flies on the water at the 

opening of the season.  And when we came together for our fall 

meeting, to compare notes of our wanderings on various streams and 

make up the fish-stories for the year, Beekman was almost always 

"high hook."  We expected, as a matter of course, to hear that he 

had taken the most and the largest fish.



It was so with everything that he undertook.  He was a masterful 

man.  If there was an unusually large trout in a river, Beekman knew 

about it before any one else, and got there first, and came home 

with the fish.  It did not make him unduly proud, because there was 

nothing unShe says it 's stupid,--can't see why any one 

should like the woods,--calls camping out the lunatic's diversion.  

It 's rather awkward for a man with my habits to have his wife take 

such a view.  But it can be changed by training.  I intend to 

educate her and convert her.  I shall make an angler of her yet."



And so he did.



The new education was begun in the Adirondacks, and the first lesson 

was given at Paul Smith's.  It was a complete failure.



Beekman persuaded her to come out with him for a day on Meacham 

River, and promised to convince her of the charm of angling.  She 

wore a new gown, fawn-colour and violet, with a picture-hat, very 

taking.  But the Meacham River trout was shy that day; not even 

Beekman could induce him to rise to the fly.  What the trout lacked 

in confidence the mosquitoes more than made up.  Mrs. De Peyster 

came home much sunburned, and expressed a highly unfavourable 

opinion of fishing as an amusement and of Meacham River as a resort.



"The nice people don't come to the Adirondacks to fish," said she; 

"they come to talk about the fishing twenty years ago.  Besides, 

what do you want to catch that trout for?  If you do, the other men 

will say you bought it, and the hotel will have to put in a new one 

for the rest of the season."



The following year Beekman tried Moosehead Lake.  Here he found an 

atmosphere more favourable to his plan of education.  There were a 

good many people who really fished, and short expeditions in the 

woods were quite fashionable.  Cornelia had a camping-costume of the 

most approved style made by Dewlap on Fifth Avenue,--pearl-gray with 

linings of rose-silk,--and consented to go with her husband on a 

trip up Moose River.  They pitched their tent the first evening at 

the mouth of Misery Stream, and a storm came on.  The rain sifted 

through the canvas in a fine spray, and Mrs. De Peyster sat up all 

night in a waterproof cloak, holding an umbrella.  The next day they 

were back at the hotel in time for lunch.



"It was horrid," she told her most intimate friend, "perfectly 

horrid.  The idea of sleeping in a shower-bath, and eating your 

breakfast from a tin plate, just for sake of catching a few silly 

fish!  Why not send your guides out to get them for you?"



But, in spite of this profession of obstinate heresy, Beekman 

observed with secret joy that there were signs, before the end of 

the season, that Cornelia was drifting a little, a very little but 

still perceptibly, in the direction of a change of heart.  She began 

to take an interest, as the big trout came along in September, in 

the reports of the catches made by the different anglers.  She would 

saunter out with the other people to the corner of the porch to see 

the fish weighed and spread out on the grass.  Several times she 

went with Beekman in the canoe to Hardscrabble Point, and showed 

distinct evidences of pleasure when he caught large trout.  The last 

day of the season, when he returned from a successful expedition to 

Roach River and Lily Bay, she inquired with some particularity about 

the results of his sport; and in the evening, as the company sat 

before the great open fire in the hall of the hotel, she was heard 

to use this information with considerable skill in putting down Mrs. 

Minot Peabody of Boston, who was recounting the details of her 

husband's catch at Spencer Pond.  Cornelia was not a person to be 

contented with the back seat, even in fish-stories.



When Beekman observed these indications he was much encouraged, and 

resolved to push his educational experiment briskly forward to his 

customary goal of success.



"Some things can be done, as well as others," he said in his 

masterful way, as three of us were walking home together after the 

autumnal dinner of the Petrine Club, which he always attended as a 

graduate member.  "A real fisherman never gives up.  I told you I'd 

make an angler out of my wife; and so I will.  It has been rather 

difficult.  She is 'dour' in rising.  But she's beginning to take 

notice of the fly now.  Give me another season, and I'll have her 

landed."



Good old Beekman!  Little did he think--  But I must not interrupt 

the story with moral reflections.



The preparations that he made for his final effort at conversion 

were thorough and prudent.  He had a private interview with Dewlap 

in regard to the construction of a practical fishing-costume for a 

lady, which resulted in something more reasonable and workmanlike 

than had ever been turned out by that famous artist.  He ordered 

from Hook and Catchett a lady's angling-outfit of the most enticing 

description,--a split-bamboo rod, light as a girl's wish, and strong 

as a matron's will; an oxidized silver reel, with a monogram on one 

side, and a sapphire set in the handle for good luck; a book of 

flies, of all sizes and colours, with the correct names inscribed in 

gilt letters on each page.  He surrounded his favourite sport with 

an aureole of elegance and beauty.  And then he took Cornelia in 

September to the Upper Dam at Rangeley.



She went reluctant.  She arrived disgusted.  She stayed incredulous.  

She returned--  Wait a bit, and you shall hear how she returned.



The Upper Dam at Rangeley is the place, of all others in the world, 

where the lunacy of angling may be seen in its incurable stage.  

There is a cosy little inn, called a camp, at the foot of a big 

lake.  In front of the inn is a huge dam of gray stone, over which 

the river plunges into a great oval pool, where the trout assemble 

in the early fall to perpetuate their race.  From the tenth of 

September to the thirtieth, there is not an hour of the day or night 

when there are no boats floating on that pool, and no anglers 

trailing the fly across its waters.  Before the late fishermen are 

ready to come in at midnight, the early fishermen may be seen 

creeping down to the shore with lanterns in order to begin before 

cock-crow.  The number of fish taken is not large,--perhaps five or 

six for the whole company on an average day,--but the size is 

sometimes enormous,--nothing under three pounds is counted,--and 

they pervade thought and conversation at the Upper Dam to the 

exclusion of every other subject.  There is no driving, no dancing, 

no golf, no tennis.  There is nothing to do but fish or die.



At first, Cornelia thought she would choose the latter alternative.  

But a remark of that skilful and morose old angler, McTurk, which 

she overheard on the verandah after supper, changed her mind.



"Women have no sporting instinct," said he.  "They only fish because 

they see men doing it.  They are imitative animals."



That same night she told Beekman, in the subdued tone which the 

architectural construction of the house imposes upon all 

confidential communications in the bedrooms, but with resolution in 

every accent, that she proposed to go fishing with him on the 

morrow.



"But not on that pool, right in front of the house, you understand.  

There must be some other place, out on the lake, where we can fish 

for three or four days, until I get the trick of this wobbly rod.  

Then I'll show that old bear, McTurk, what kind of an animal woman 

is.



Beekman was simply delighted.  Five days of diligent practice at the 

mouth of Mill Brook brought his pupil to the point where he 

pronounced her safe.



"Of course," he said patronizingly, "you have 'nt learned all about 

it yet.  That will take years.  But you can get your fly out thirty 

feet, and you can keep the tip of your rod up.  If you do that, the 

trout will hook himself, in rapid water, eight times out of ten.  

For playing him, if you follow my directions, you 'll be all right.  

We will try the pool tonight, and hope for a medium-sized fish."



Cornelia said nothing, but smiled and nodded.  She had her own 

thoughts.



At about nine o'clock Saturday night, they anchored their boat on 

the edge of the shoal where the big eddy swings around, put out the 

lantern and began to fish.  Beekman sat in the bow of the boat, with 

his rod over the left side; Cornelia in the stern, with her rod over 

the right side.  The night was cloudy and very black.  Each of them 

had put on the largest possible fly, one a "Bee-Pond" and the other 

a "Dragon;" but even these were invisible.  They measured out the 

right length of line, and let the flies drift back until they hung 

over the shoal, in the curly water where the two currents meet.



There were three other boats to the left of them.  McTurk was their 

only neighbour in the darkness on the right.  Once they heard him 

swearing softly to himself, and knew that he had hooked and lost a 

fish.



Away down at the tail of the pool, dimly visible through the gloom, 

the furtive fisherman, Parsons, had anchored his boat.  No noise 

ever came from that craft.  If he wished to change his position, he 

did not pull up the anchor and let it down again with a bump.  He 

simply lengthened or shortened his anchor rope.  There was no click 

of the reel when he played a fish.  He drew in and paid out the line 

through the rings by hand, without a sound.  What he thought when a 

fish got away, no one knew, for he never said it.  He concealed his 

angling as if it had been a conspiracy.  Twice that night they heard 

a faint splash in the water near his boat, and twice they saw him 

put his arm over the side in the darkness and bring it back again 

very quietly.



"That 's the second fish for Parsons," whispered Beekman, "what a 

secretive old Fortunatus he is!  He knows more about fishing than 

any man on the pool, and talks less."



Cornelia did not answer.  Her thoughts were all on the tip of her 

own rod.  About eleven o'clock a fine, drizzling rain set in.  The 

fishing was very slack.  All the other boats gave it up in despair; 

but Cornelia said she wanted to stay out a little longer, they might 

as well finish up the week.



At precisely fifty minutes past eleven, Beekman reeled up his line, 

and remarked with firmness that the holy Sabbath day was almost at 

hand and they ought to go in.



"Not till I 've landed this trout," said Cornelia.



"What?  A trout!  Have you got one?"



"Certainly; I 've had him on for at least fifteen minutes.  I 'm 

playing him Mr. Parsons' way.  You might as well light the lantern 

and get the net ready; he 's coming in towards the boat now."



Beekman broke three matches before he made the lantern burn; and 

when he held it up over the gunwale, there was the trout sure 

enough, gleaming ghostly pale in the dark water, close to the boat, 

and quite tired out.  He slipped the net over the fish and drew it 

in,--a monster.



"I 'll carry that trout, if you please," said Cornelia, as they 

stepped out of the boat; and she walked into the camp, on the last 

stroke of midnight, with the fish in her hand, and quietly asked for 

the steelyard.



Eight pounds and fourteen ounces,--that was the weight.  Everybody 

was amazed.  It was the "best fish" of the year.  Cornelia showed no 

sign of exultation, until just as John was carrying the trout to the 

ice-house.  Then she flashed out:--"Quite a fair imitation, Mr. 

McTurk,--is n't it?"



Now McTurk's best record for the last fifteen years was seven pounds 

and twelve ounces.



So far as McTurk is concerned, this is the end of the story.  But 

not for the De Peysters.  I wish it were.  Beekman went to sleep 

that night with a contented spirit.  He felt that his experiment in 

education had been a success.  He had made his wife an angler.



He had indeed, and to an extent which he little suspected.  That 

Upper Dam trout was to her like the first taste of blood to the 

tiger.  It seemed to change, at once, not so much her character as 

the direction of her vital energy.  She yielded to the lunacy of 

angling, not by slow degrees, (as first a transient delusion, then a 

fixed idea, then a chronic infirmity, finally a mild insanity,) but 

by a sudden plunge into the most violent mania.  So far from being 

ready to die at Upper Dam, her desire now was to live there--and to 

live solely for the sake of fishing--as long as the season was open.



There were two hundred and forty hours left to midnight on the 

thirtieth of September.  At least two hundred of these she spent on 

the pool; and when Beekman was too exhausted to manage the boat and 

the net and the lantern for her, she engaged a trustworthy guide to 

take Beekman's place while he slept.  At the end of the last day her 

score was twenty-three, with an average of five pounds and a 

quarter.  His score was nine, with an average of four pounds.  He 

had succeeded far beyond his wildest hopes.



The next year his success became even more astonishing.  They went 

to the Titan Club in Canada.  The ugliest and most inaccessible 

sheet of water in that territory is Lake Pharaoh.  But it is famous 

for the extraordinary fishing at a certain spot near the outlet, 

where there is just room enough for one canoe.  They camped on Lake 

Pharaoh for six weeks, by Mrs. De Peyster's command; and her canoe 

was always the first to reach the fishing-ground in the morning, and 

the last to leave it in the evening.



Some one asked him, when he returned to the city, whether he had 

good luck.



"Quite fair," he tossed off in a careless way; "we took over three 

hundred pounds."



"To your own rod?" asked the inquirer, in admiration.



"No-o-o," said Beekman, "there were two of us."



There were two of them, also, the following year, when they joined 

the Natasheebo Salmon Club and fished that celebrated river in 

Labrador.  The custom of drawing lots every night for the water that 

each member was to angle over the next day, seemed to be especially 

designed to fit the situation.  Mrs. De Peyster could fish her own 

pool and her husband's too.  The result of that year's fishing was 

something phenomenal.  She had a score that made a paragraph in the 

newspapers and called out editorial comment.  One editor was so 

inadequate to the situation as to entitle the article in which he 

described her triumph "The Equivalence of Woman."  It was well-

meant, but she was not at all pleased with it.



She was now not merely an angler, but a "record" angler of the most 

virulent type.  Wherever they went, she wanted, and she got, the 

pick of the water.  She seemed to be equally at home on all kinds of 

streams, large and small.  She would pursue the little mountain-

brook trout in the early spring, and the Labrador salmon in July, 

and the huge speckled trout of the northern lakes in September, with 

the same avidity and resolution.  All that she cared for was to get 

the best and the most of the fishing at each place where she angled.  

This she always did.



And Beekman,--well, for him there were no more long separations from 

the partner of his life while he went off to fish some favourite 

stream.  There were no more home-comings after a good day's sport to 

find her clad in cool and dainty raiment on the verandah, ready to 

welcome him with friendly badinage.  There was not even any casting 

of the fly around Hardscrabble Point while she sat in the canoe 

reading a novel, looking up with mild and pleasant interest when he 

caught a larger fish than usual, as an older and wiser person looks 

at a child playing some innocent game.  Those days of a divided 

interest between man and wife were gone.  She was now fully 

converted, and more.  Beekman and Cornelia were one; and she was the 

one.



The last time I saw the De Peysters he was following her along the 

Beaverkill, carrying a landing-net and a basket, but no rod.  She 

paused for a moment to exchange greetings, and then strode on down 

the stream.  He lingered for a few minutes longer to light a pipe.



"Well, old man," I said, "you certainly have succeeded in making an 

angler of Mrs. De Peyster."



"Yes, indeed," he answered,--"have n't I?"  Then he continued, after 

a few thoughtful puffs of smoke, "Do you know, I 'm not quite so 

sure as I used to be that fishing is the best of all sports.  I 

sometimes think of giving it up and going in for croquet."







FISHING IN BOOKS





"SIMPSON.--Have you ever seen any American books on angling, Fisher?"

"FISHER.--No, I do not think there are any published.  Brother 

Jonathan is not yet sufficiently civilized to produce anything 

original on the gentle art.  There is good trout-fishing in America, 

and the streams, which are all free, are much less fished than in 

our Island, 'from the small number of gentlemen,' as an American 

writer says, 'who are at leisure to give their time to it.'"

--WILLIAM ANDREW CHATTO: The Angler's Souvenir (London, 1835).





That wise man and accomplished scholar, Sir Henry Wotton, the friend 

of Izaak Walton and ambassador of King James I to the republic of 

Venice, was accustomed to say that "he would rather live five May 

months than forty Decembers."  The reason for this preference was no 

secret to those who knew him.  It had nothing to do with British or 

Venetian politics.  It was simply because December, with all its 

domestic joys, is practically a dead month in the angler's calendar.



His occupation is gone.  The better sort of fish are out of season.  

The trout are lean and haggard: it is no trick to catch them and no 

treat to eat them.  The salmon, all except the silly kelts, have run 

out to sea, and the place of their habitation no man kno his goings, that only three 

other writers, so far as I know, have ever spoken ill of him.



weth.  There 

is nothing for the angler to do but wait for the return of spring, 

and meanwhile encourage and sustain his patience with such small 

consolations in kind as a friendly Providence may put within his 

reach.





Some solace may be found, on a day of crisp, wintry weather, in the 

childish diversion of catching pickerel through the ice.  This 

method of taking fish is practised on a large scale and with 

elaborate machinery by men who supply the market.  I speak not of 

their commercial enterprise and its gross equipage, but of ice-

fishing in its more sportive and desultory form, as it is pursued by 

country boys and the incorrigible village idler.



You choose for this pastime a pond where the ice is not too thick, 

lest the labour of cutting through should be discouraging; nor too 


thin, lest the chance of breaking in should be embarrassing.  You 

then chop out, with almost any kind of a hatchet or pick, a number 

of holes in the ice, making each one six or eight inches in 

diameter, and placing them about five or six feet apart.  If you 

happen to know the course of a current flowing through the pond, or 

the location of a shoal frequented by minnows, you will do well to 

keep near it.  Over each hole you set a small contrivance called a 

"tilt-up."  It consists of two sticks fastened in the middle, at 

right angles to each other.  The stronger of the two is laid across 

the opening in the ice.  The other is thus balanced above the 

aperture, with a baited hook and line attached to one end, while the 

other end is adorned with a little flag.  For choice, I would have 

the flags red.  They look gayer, and I imagine they are more lucky.



When you have thus baited and set your tilt-ups,--twenty or thirty 

of them,--you may put on your skates and amuse yourself by gliding 

to and fro on the smooth surface of the ice, cutting figures of 

eight and grapevines and diamond twists, while you wait for the 

pickerel to begin their part of the performance.  They will let you 

know when they are ready.



A fish, swimming around in the dim depths under the ice, sees one of 

your baits, fancies it, and takes it in.  The moment he tries to run 

away with it he tilts the little red flag into the air and waves it 

backward and forward.  "Be quick!" he signals all unconsciously; 

"here I am; come and pull me up!"



When two or three flags are fluttering at the same moment, far apart 

on the pond, you must skate with speed and haul in your lines 

promptly.



How hard it is, sometimes, to decide which one you will take first!  

That flag in the middle of the pond has been waving for at least a 

minute; but the other, in the corner of the bay, is tilting up and 

down more violently: it must be a larger fish.  Great Dagon! There's 

another red signal flying, away over by the point!  You hesitate, 

you make a few strokes in one direction, then you whirl around and 

dart the other way.  Meantime one of the tilt-ups, constructed with 

too short a cross-stick, has been pulled to one side, and disappears 

in the hole.  One pickerel in the pond carries a flag.  Another 

tilt-up ceases to move and falls flat upon the ice.  The bait has 

been stolen.  You dash desperately toward the third flag and pull in 

the only fish that is left,--probably the smallest of them all!



A surplus of opportunities does not insure the best luck.



A room with seven doors--like the famous apartment in Washington's 

headquarters at Newburgh--is an invitation to bewilderment.  I would 

rather see one fair opening in life than be confused by three 

dazzling chances.



There was a good story about fishing through the ice which formed 

part of the stock-in-conversation of that ingenious woodsman, Martin 

Moody, Esquire, of Big Tupper Lake.  "'T was a blame cold day," he 

said, "and the lines friz up stiffer 'n a fence-wire, jus' as fast 

as I pulled 'em in, and my fingers got so dum' frosted I could n't 

bait the hooks.  But the fish was thicker and hungrier 'n flies in 

June.  So I jus' took a piece of bait and held it over one o' the 

holes.  Every time a fish jumped up to git it, I 'd kick him out on 

the ice.  I tell ye, sir, I kicked out more 'n four hundred pounds 

of pick'rel that morning.  Yaas, 't was a big lot, I 'low, but then 

't was a cold day!  I jus' stacked 'em up solid, like cordwood."



Let us now leave this frigid subject!  Iced fishing is but a 

chilling and unsatisfactory imitation of real sport.  The angler 

will soon turn from it with satiety, and seek a better consolation 

for the winter of his discontent in the entertainment of fishing in 

books.





Angling is the only sport that boasts the honour of having given a 

classic to literature.



Izaak Walton's success with THE COMPLEAT ANGLER was a fine 

illustration of fisherman's luck.  He set out, with some aid from an 

adept in fly-fishing and cookery, named Thomas Barker, to produce a 

little "discourse of fish and fishing" which should serve as a 

useful manual for quiet persons inclined to follow the contemplative 

man's recreation.  He came home with a book which has made his name 

beloved by ten generations of gentle readers, and given him a secure 

place in the Pantheon of letters,--not a haughty eminence, but a 

modest niche, all his own, and ever adorned with grateful offerings 

of fresh flowers.



This was great luck.  But it was well-deserved, and therefore it has 

not been grudged or envied.



Walton was a man so peaceful and contented, so friendly in his 

disposition, and so innocent in allOne was that sour-complexioned Cromwellian trooper, Richard Franck, 

who wrote in 1658 an envious book entitled NORTHERN MEMOIRS, 

CALCULATED FOR THE MERIDIAN OF SCOTLAND, ETC., TO WHICH IS ADDED THE 

CONTEMPLATIVE AND PRACTICAL ANGLER.  In this book the furious Franck 

first pays Walton the flattery of imitation, and then further adorns 

him with abuse, calling THE COMPLEAT ANGLER "an indigested octavo, 

stuffed with morals from Dubravius and others," and more than 

hinting that the father of anglers knew little or nothing of "his 

uncultivated art."  Walton was a Churchman and a Loyalist, you see, 

while Franck was a Commonwealth man and an Independent.



The second detractor of Walton was Lord Byron, who wrote





     "The quaint, old, cruel coxcomb in his gullet

      Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it."





But Byron is certainly a poor authority on the quality of mercy.  

His contempt need not cause an honest man overwhelming distress.  I 

should call it a complimentary dislike.



The third author who expressed unpleasant sentiments in regard to 

Walton was Leigh Hunt.  Here, again, I fancy that partizan prejudice 

had something to do with the dislike.  Hunt was a radical in 

politics and religion.  Moreover there was a feline strain in his 

character, which made it necessary for him to scratch somebody now 

and then, as a relief to his feelings.



Walton was a great quoter.  His book is not "stuffed," as Franck 

jealously alleged, but it is certainly well sauced with piquant 

references to other writers, as early as the author of the Book of 

Job, and as late as John Dennys, who betrayed to the world THE 

SECRETS OF ANGLING in 1613.  Walton further seasoned his book with 

fragments of information about fish and fishing, more or less 

apocryphal, gathered from Aelian, Pliny, Plutarch, Sir Francis 

Bacon, Dubravius, Gesner, Rondeletius, the learned Aldrovandus, the 

venerable Bede, the divine Du Bartas, and many others.  He borrowed 

freely for the adornment of his discourse, and did not scorn to make 

use of what may he called LIVE QUOTATIONS,--that is to say, the 

unpublished remarks of his near contemporaries, caught in friendly 

conversation, or handed down by oral tradition.



But these various seasonings did not disguise, they only enhanced, 

the delicate flavour of the dish which he served up to his readers.  

This was all of his own taking, and of a sweetness quite 

incomparable.



I like a writer who is original enough to water his garden with 

quotations, without fear of being drowned out.  Such men are Charles 

Lamb and James Russell Lowell and John Burroughs.



Walton's book is as fresh as a handful of wild violets and sweet 

lavender.  It breathes the odours of the green fields and the woods.  

It tastes of simple, homely, appetizing things like the "syllabub of 

new verjuice in a new-made haycock" which the milkwoman promised to 

give Piscator the next time he came that way.  Its music plays the 

tune of A CONTENTED HEART over and over again without dulness, and 

charms us into harmony with





     "A noise like the sound of a hidden brook

      In the leafy month of June,

      That to the sleeping woods all night

      Singeth a quiet tune."





Walton has been quoted even more than any of the writers whom he 

quotes.  It would be difficult, even if it were not ungrateful, to 

write about angling without referring to him.  Some pretty saying, 

some wise reflection from his pages, suggests itself at almost every 

turn of the subject.



And yet his book, though it be the best, is not the only readable 

one that his favourite recreation has begotten.  The literature of 

angling is extensive, as any one may see who will look at the list 

of the collection presented by Mr. John Bartlett to Harvard 

University, or study the catalogue of the piscatorial library of Mr. 

Dean Sage, of Albany, who himself has contributed an admirable book 

on THE RISTIGOUCHE.



Nor is this literature altogether composed of dry and technical 

treatises, interesting only to the confirmed anglimaniac, or to the 

young novice ardent in pursuit of practical information.  There is a 

good deal of juicy reading in it.





Books about angling should be divided (according to De Quincey's 

method) into two classes,--the literature of knowledge, and the 

literature of power.



The first class contains the handbooks on rods and tackle, the 

directions how to angle for different kinds of fish, and the guides 

to various fishing-resorts.  The weakness of these books is that 

they soon fall out of date, as the manufacture of tackle is 

improved, the art of angling refined, and the fish in once-famous 

waters are educated or exterminated.



Alas, how transient is the fashion of this world, even in angling!  

The old manuals with their precise instruction for trimming and 

painting trout-rods eighteen feet long, and their painful 

description of "oyntments" made of nettle-juice, fish-hawk oil, 

camphor, cat's fat, or assafoedita, (supposed to allure the fish,) 

are altogether behind the age.  Many of the flies described by 

Charles Cotton and Thomas Barker seem to have gone out of style 

among the trout.  Perhaps familiarity has bred contempt.  Generation 

after generation of fish have seen these same old feathered 

confections floating on the water, and learned by sharp experience 

that they do not taste good.  The blase trout demand something new, 

something modern.  It is for this reason, I suppose, that an 

altogether original fly, unheard of, startling, will often do great 

execution in an over-fished pool.



Certain it is that the art of angling, in settled regions, is 

growing more dainty and difficult.  You must cast a longer, lighter 

line; you must use finer leaders; you must have your flies dressed 

on smaller hooks.



And another thing is certain: in many places (described in the 

ancient volumes) where fish were once abundant, they are now like 

the shipwrecked sailors in Vergil his Aeneid,--





     "rari nantes in gurgite vasto."





The floods themselves are also disappearing.  Mr. Edmund Clarence 

Stedman was telling me, the other day, of the trout-brook that used 

to run through the Connecticut village when he nourished a poet's 

youth.  He went back to visit the stream a few years since, and it 

was gone, literally vanished from the face of earth, stolen to make 

a watersupply for the town, and used for such base purposes as the 

washing of clothes and the sprinkling of streets.



I remember an expedition with my father, some twenty years ago, to 

Nova Scotia, whither we set out to realize the hopes kindled by an 

ANGLER'S GUIDE written in the early sixties.  It was like looking 

for tall clocks in the farmhouses around Boston.  The harvest had 

been well gleaned before our arrival, and in the very place where 

our visionary author located his most famous catch we found a summer 

hotel and a sawmill.



'T is strange and sad, how many regions there are where "the fishing 

was wonderful forty years ago"!





The second class of angling books--the literature of power--includes 

all (even those written with some purpose of instruction) in which 

the gentle fascinations of the sport, the attractions of living out-

of-doors, the beauties of stream and woodland, the recollections of 

happy adventure, and the cheerful thoughts that make the best of a 

day's luck, come clearly before the author's mind and find some fit 

expression in his words.  Of such books, thank Heaven, there is a 

plenty to bring a Maytide charm and cheer into the fisherman's dull 

December.  I will name, by way of random tribute from a grateful but 

unmethodical memory, a few of these consolatory volumes.



First of all comes a family of books that were born in Scotland and 

smell of the heather.



Whatever a Scotchman's conscience permits him to do, is likely to be 

done with vigour and a fiery mind.  In trade and in theology, in 

fishing and in fighting, he is all there and thoroughly kindled.



There is an old-fashioned book called THE MOOR AND THE LOCH, by John 

Colquhoun, which is full of contagious enthusiasm.  Thomas Tod 

Stoddart was a most impassioned angler, (though over-given to strong 

language,) and in his ANGLING REMINISCENCES he has touched the 

subject with a happy hand,--happiest when he breaks into poetry and 

tosses out a song for the fisherman.  Professor John Wilson of the 

University of Edinburgh held the chair of Moral Philosophy in that 

institution, but his true fame rests on his well-earned titles of A. 

M. and F. R. S.,--Master of Angling, and Fisherman Royal of 

Scotland.  His RECREATIONS OF CHRISTOPHER NORTH, albeit their humour 

is sometimes too boisterously hammered in, are genial and generous 

essays, overflowing with passages of good-fellowship and pedestrian 

fancy.  I would recommend any person in a dry and melancholy state 

of mind to read his paper on "Streams," in the first volume of 

ESSAYS CRITICAL AND IMAGINATIVE.  But it must be said, by way of 

warning to those with whom dryness is a matter of principle, that 

all Scotch fishing-books are likely to be sprinkled with Highland 

Dew.



Among English anglers, Sir Humphry Davy is one of whom Christopher 

North speaks rather slightingly.  Nevertheless his SALMONIA is well 

worth reading, not only because it was written by a learned man, but 

because it exhales the spirit of cheerful piety and vital wisdom.  

Charles Kingsley was another great man who wrote well about angling.  

His CHALK-STREAM STUDIES are clear and sparkling.  They cleanse the 

mind and refresh the heart and put us more in love with living.  Of 

quite a different style are the MAXIMS AND HINTS FOR AN ANGLER, AND 

MISERIES OF FISHING, which were written by Richard Penn, a grandson 

of the founder of Pennsylvania.  This is a curious and rare little 

volume, professing to be a compilation from the "Common Place Book 

of the Houghton Fishing Club," and dealing with the subject from a 

Pickwickian point of view.  I suppose that William Penn would have 

thought his grandson a frivolous writer.



But he could not have entertained such an opinion of the Honourable 

Robert Boyle, of whose OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS no less than twelve 

discourses treat "of Angling Improved to Spiritual Uses."  The 

titles of some of these discourses are quaint enough to quote.  

"Upon the being called upon to rise early on a very fair morning."  

"Upon the mounting, singing, and lighting of larks."  "Upon fishing 

with a counterfeit fly."  "Upon a danger arising from an 

unseasonable contest with the steersman."  "Upon one's drinking 

water out of the brim of his hat."  With such good texts it is easy 

to endure, and easier still to spare, the sermons.



Englishmen carry their love of travel into their anglimania, and 

many of their books describe fishing adventures in foreign parts.  

RAMBLES WITH A FISHING-ROD, by E. S. Roscoe, tells of happy days in 

the Salzkammergut and the Bavarian Highlands and Normandy.  FISH-

TAILS AND A FEW OTHERS, by Bradnock Hall, contains some delightful 

chapters on Norway.  THE ROD IN INDIA, by H. S. Thomas, narrates 

wonderful adventures with the Mahseer and the Rohu and other pagan 

fish.



But, after all, I like the English angler best when he travels at 

home, and writes of dry-fly fishing in the Itchen or the Test, or of 

wet-fly fishing in Northumberland or Sutherlandshire.  There is a 

fascinating booklet that appeared quietly, some years ago, called AN 

AMATEUR ANGLER'S DAYS IN DOVE DALE.  It runs as easily and merrily 

and kindly as a little river, full of peace and pure enjoyment.  

Other books of the same quality have since been written by the same 

pen,--DAYS IN CLOVER, FRESH WOODS, BY MEADOW AND STREAM.  It is no 

secret, I believe, that the author is Mr. Edward Marston, the senior 

member of a London publishing-house.  But he still clings to his 

retiring pen-name of "The Amateur Angler," and represents himself, 

by a graceful fiction, as all unskilled in the art.  An instance of 

similar modesty is found in Mr. Andrew Lang, who entitles the first 

chapter of his delightful ANGLING SKETCHES (without which no 

fisherman's library is complete), "Confessions of a Duffer."  This 

an engaging liberty which no one else would dare to take.



The best English fish-story pure and simple, that I know, is 

"Crocker's Hole," by H. D. Black-more, the creator of LORNA DOONE.



Let us turn now to American books about angling.  Of these the 

merciful dispensations of Providence have brought forth no small 

store since Mr. William Andrew Chatto made the ill-natured remark 

which is pilloried at the head of this chapter.  By the way, it 

seems that Mr. Chatto had never heard of "The Schuylkill Fishing 

Company," which was founded on that romantic stream near 

Philadelphia in 1732, nor seen the AUTHENTIC HISTORICAL MEMOIR of 

that celebrated and amusing society.



I am sorry for the man who cannot find pleasure in reading the 

appendix of THE AMERICAN ANGLER'S BOOK, by Thaddeus Norris; or the 

discursive pages of Frank Forester's FISH AND FISHING; or the 

introduction and notes of that unexcelled edition of Walton which 

was made by the Reverend Doctor George W. Bethune; or SUPERIOR 

FISHING and GAME FISH OF THE NORTH, by Mr. Robert B. Roosevelt; or 

Henshall's BOOK OF THE BLACK BASS; or the admirable disgressions of 

Mr. Henry P. Wells, in his FLY-RODS AND FLY-TACKLE, and THE AMERICAN 

SALMON ANGLER.  Dr. William C. Prime has never put his profound 

knowledge of the art of angling into a manual of technical 

instruction; but he has written of the delights of the sport in OWL 

CREEK LETTERS, and in I GO A-FISHING, and in some of the chapters of 

ALONG NEW ENGLAND ROADS and AMONG NEW ENGLAND HILLS, with a 

persuasive skill that has created many new anglers, and made many 

old ones grateful.  It is a fitting coincidence of heredity that his 

niece, Mrs. Annie Trumbull Slosson, is the author of the most tender 

and pathetic of all angling stories, FISHIN' JIMMY.





But it is not only in books written altogether from his peculiar 

point of view and to humour his harmless insanity, that the angler 

may find pleasant reading about his favourite pastime.  There are 

excellent bits of fishing scattered all through the field of good 

literature.  It seems as if almost all the men who could write well 

had a friendly feeling for the contemplative sport.



Plutarch, in THE LIVES OF THE NOBLE GRECIANS AND ROMANS, tells a 

capital fish-story of the manner in which the Egyptian Cleopatra 

fooled that far-famed Roman wight, Marc Antony, when they were 

angling together on the Nile.  As I recall it, from a perusal in 

early boyhood, Antony was having very bad luck indeed; in fact he 

had taken nothing, and was sadly put out about it.  Cleopatra, 

thinking to get a rise out of him, secretly told one of her 

attendants to dive over the opposite side of the barge and fasten a 

salt fish to the Roman general's hook.  The attendant was much 

pleased with this commission, and, having executed it, proceeded to 

add a fine stroke of his own; for when he had made the fish fast on 

the hook, he gave a great pull to the line and held on tightly.  

Antony was much excited and began to haul violently at his tackle.



"By Jupiter!" he exclaimed, "it was long in coming, but I have a 

colossal bite now."



"Have a care," said Cleopatra, laughing behind her sunshade, "or he 

will drag you into the water.  You must give him line when he pulls 

hard."



"Not a denarius will I give!" rudely responded Antony.  "I mean to 

have this halibut or Hades!"



At this moment the man under the boat, being out of breath, let the 

line go, and Antony, falling backward, drew up the salted herring.



"Take that fish off the hook, Palinurus," he proudly said.  "It is 

not as large as I thought, but it looks like the oldest one that has 

been caught to-day."



Such, in effect, is the tale narrated by the veracious Plutarch.  

And if any careful critic wishes to verify my quotation from memory, 

he may compare it with the proper page of Langhorne's translation; I 

think it is in the second volume, near the end.



Sir Walter Scott, who once described himself as





     "No fisher,

      But a well-wisher

      To the game,"





has an amusing passage of angling in the third chapter of 

REDGAUNTLET.  Darsie Latimer is relating his adventures in 

Dumfriesshire.  "By the way," says he, "old Cotton's instructions, 

by which I hoped to qualify myself for the gentle society of 

anglers, are not worth a farthing for this meridian.  I learned this 

by mere accident, after I had waited four mortal hours.  I shall 

never forget an impudent urchin, a cowherd, about twelve years old, 

without either brogue or bonnet, barelegged, with a very indifferent 

pair of breeches,--how the villain grinned in scorn at my landing-

net, my plummet, and the gorgeous jury of flies which I had 

assembled to destroy all the fish in the river.  I was induced at 

last to lend the rod to the sneering scoundrel, to see what he would 

make of it; and he not only half-filled my basket in an hour, but 

literally taught me to kill two trouts with my own hand."



Thus ancient and well-authenticated is the superstition of the 

angling powers of the barefooted country-boy,--in fiction.



Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, in that valuable but over-capitalized 

book, MY NOVEL, makes use of Fishing for Allegorical Purposes.  The 

episode of John Burley and the One-eyed Perch not only points a 

Moral but adorns the Tale.



In the works of R. D. Blackmore, angling plays a less instructive 

but a pleasanter part.  It is closely interwoven with love.  There 

is a magical description of trout-fishing on a meadow-brook in ALICE 

LORRAINE.  And who that has read LORNA DOONE, (pity for the man or 

woman that knows not the delight of that book!) can ever forget how 

young John Ridd dared his way up the gliddery water-slide, after 

loaches, and found Lorna in a fair green meadow adorned with 

flowers, at the top of the brook?



I made a little journey into the Doone Country once, just to see 

that brook and to fish in it.  The stream looked smaller, and the 

water-slide less terrible, than they seemed in the book.  But it was 

a mighty pretty place after all; and I suppose that even John Ridd, 

when he came back to it in after years, found it shrunken a little.



All the streams were larger in our boyhood than they are now, 

except, perhaps, that which flows from the sweetest spring of all, 

the fountain of love, which John Ridd discovered beside the 

Bagworthy River,--and I, on the willow-shaded banks of the Patapsco, 

where the Baltimore girls fish for gudgeons,--and you?  Come, gentle 

reader, is there no stream whose name is musical to you, because of 

a hidden spring of love that you once found on its shore?  The 

waters of that fountain never fail, and in them alone we taste the 

undiminished fulness of immortal youth.



The stories of William Black are enlivened with fish, and he knew, 

better than most men, how they should be taken.  Whenever he wanted 

to get two young people engaged to each other, all other devices 

failing, he sent them out to angle together.  If it had not been for 

fishing, everything in A PRINCESS OF THULE and WHITE HEATHER would 

have gone wrong.



But even men who have been disappointed in love may angle for solace 

or diversion.  I have known some old bachelors who fished 

excellently well; and others I have known who could find, and give, 

much pleasure in a day on the stream, though they had no skill in 

the sport.  Of this class was Washington Irving, with an extract 

from whose SKETCH BOOK I will bring this rambling dissertation to an 

end.



"Our first essay," says he, was along a mountain brook among the 

highlands of the Hudson; a most unfortunate place for the execution 

of those piscatory tactics which had been invented along the velvet 

margins of quiet English rivulets.  It was one of those wild streams 

that lavish, among our romantic solitudes, unheeded beauties enough 

to fill the sketch-book of a hunter of the picturesque.  Sometimes 

it would leap down rocky shelves, making small cascades, over which 

the trees threw their broad balancing sprays, and long nameless 

weeds hung in fringes from the impending banks, dripping with 

diamond drops.  Sometimes it would brawl and fret along a ravine in 

the matted shade of a forest, filling it with murmurs; and, after 

this termagant career, would steal forth into open day, with the 

most placid, demure face imaginable; as I have seen some pestilent 

shrew of a housewife, after filling her home with uproar and ill-

humour, come dimpling out of doors, swimming and courtesying, and 

smiling upon all the world.



"How smoothly would this vagrant brook glide, at such times, through 

some bosom of green meadow-land among the mountains, where the quiet 

was only interrupted by the occasional tinkling of a bell from the 

lazy cattle among the clover, or the sound of a woodcutter's axe 

from the neighbouring forest!



"For my part, I was always a bungler at all kinds of sport that 

required either patience or adroitness, and had not angled above 

half an hour before I had completely 'satisfied the sentiment,' and 

convinced myself of the truth of Izaak Walton's opinion, that 

angling is something like poetry,--a man must be born to it.  I 

hooked myself instead of the fish; tangled my line in every tree; 

lost my bait; broke my rod; until I gave up the attempt in despair, 

and passed the day under the trees, reading old Izaak, satisfied 

that it was his fascinating vein of honest simplicity and rural 

feeling that had bewitched me, and not the passion for angling."







A NORWEGIAN HONEYMOON





"The best rose-bush, after all, is not that which has the fewest 

thorns, but that which bears the finest roses."--SOLOMON SINGLEWITZ: 

The Life of Adam.





I





It was not all unadulterated sweetness, of course.  There were 

enough difficulties in the way to make it seem desirable; and a few 

stings of annoyance, now and then, lent piquancy to the adventure.  

But a good memory, in dealing with the past, has the art of 

straining out all the beeswax of discomfort, and storing up little 

jars of pure hydromel.  As we look back at our six weeks in Norway, 

we agree that no period of our partnership in experimental 

honeymooning has yielded more honey to the same amount of comb.



Several considerations led us to the resolve of taking our honeymoon 

experimentally rather than chronologically.  We started from the 

self-evident proposition that it ought to be the happiest time in 

married life.



"It is perfectly ridiculous," said my lady Graygown, "to suppose 

that a thing like that can be fixed by the calendar.  It may 

possibly fall in the first month after the wedding, but it is not 

likely.  Just think how slightly two people know each other when 

they get married.  They are in love, of course, but that is not at 

all the same as being well acquainted.  Sometimes the more love, the 

less acquaintance!  And sometimes the more acquaintance, the less 

love!  Besides, at first there are always the notes of thanks for 

the wedding-presents to be written, and the letters of 

congratulation to be answered, and it is awfully hard to make each 

one sound a little different from the others and perfectly natural.  

Then, you know, everybody seems to suspect you of the folly of being 

newly married.  You run across your friends everywhere, and they 

grin when they see you.  You can't help feeling as if a lot of 

people were watching you through opera-glasses, or taking snap-shots 

at you with a kodak.  It is absurd to imagine that the first month 

must be the real honeymoon.  And just suppose it were,--what bad 

luck that would be!  What would there be to look forward to?"



Every word that fell from her lips seemed to me like the wisdom of 

Diotima.



"You are right," I cried; "Portia could not hold a candle to you for 

clear argument.  Besides, suppose two people are imprudent enough to 

get married in the first week of December, as we did!--what becomes 

of the chronological honeymoon then?  There is no fishing in 

December, and all the rivers of Paradise, at least in our latitude, 

are frozen up.  No, my lady, we will discover our month of honey by 

the empirical method.  Each year we will set out together to seek it 

in a solitude for two; and we will compare notes on moons, and 

strike the final balance when we are sure that our happiest 

experiment has been completed."



We are not sure of that, even yet.  We are still engaged, as a 

committee of two, in our philosophical investigation, and we decline 

to make anything but a report of progress.  We know more now than we 

did when we first went honeymooning in the city of Washington.  For 

one thing, we are certain that not even the far-famed rosemary-

fields of Narbonne, or the fragrant hillsides of the Corbieres, 

yield a sweeter harvest to the busy-ness of the bees than the 

Norwegian meadows and mountain-slopes yielded to our idleness in the 

summer of 1888.





II





The rural landscape of Norway, on the long easterly slope that leads 

up to the watershed among the mountains of the western coast, is not 

unlike that of Vermont or New Hampshire.  The railway from 

Christiania to the Randsfjord carried us through a hilly country of 

scattered farms and villages.  Wood played a prominent part in the 

scenery.  There were dark stretches of forest on the hilltops and in 

the valleys; rivers filled with floating logs; sawmills beside the 

waterfalls; wooden farmhouses painted white; and rail-fences around 

the fields.  The people seemed sturdy, prosperous, independent.  

They had the familiar habit of coming down to the station to see the 

train arrive and depart.  We might have fancied ourselves on a 

journey through the Connecticut valley, if it had not been for the 

soft sing-song of the Norwegian speech and the uniform politeness of 

the railway officials.



What a room that was in the inn at Randsfjord where we spent our 

first night out!  Vast, bare, primitive, with eight windows to admit 

the persistent nocturnal twilight; a sea-like floor of blue-painted 

boards, unbroken by a single island of carpet; and a castellated 

stove in one corner: an apartment for giants, with two little beds 

for dwarfs on opposite shores of the ocean.  There was no telephone; 

so we arranged a system of communication with a fishing-line, to 

make sure that the sleepy partner should be awake in time for the 

early boat in the morning.



The journey up the lake took seven hours, and reminded us of a 

voyage on Lake George; placid, picturesque, and pervaded by summer 

boarders.  Somewhere on the way we had lunch, and were well 

fortified to take the road when the steamboat landed us at Odnaes, 

at the head of the lake, about two o'clock in the afternoon.



There are several methods in which you may drive through Norway.  

The government maintains posting-stations at the farms along the 

main travelled highways, where you can hire horses and carriages of 

various kinds.  There are also English tourist agencies which make a 

business of providing travellers with complete transportation.  You 

may try either of these methods alone, or you may make a judicious 

mixture.



Thus, by an application of the theory of permutations and 

combinations, you have your choice among four ways of accomplishing 

a driving-tour.  First, you may engage a carriage and pair, with a 

driver, from one of the tourist agencies, and roll through your 

journey in sedentary case, provided your horses do not go lame or 

give out.  Second, you may rely altogether upon the posting-stations 

to send you on your journey; and this is a very pleasant, lively 

way, provided there is not a crowd of travellers on the road before 

you, who take up all the comfortable conveyances and leave you 

nothing but a jolting cart or a ramshackle KARIOL of the time of St. 

Olaf.  Third, you may rent an easy-riding vehicle (by choice a well-

hung gig) for the entire trip, and change ponies at the stations as 

you drive along; this is the safest way.  The fourth method is to 

hire your horseflesh at the beginning for the whole journey, and 

pick up your vehicles from place to place.  This method is 

theoretically possible, but I do not know any one who has tried it.



Our gig was waiting for us at Odnaes.  There was a brisk little 

mouse-coloured pony in the shafts; and it took but a moment to strap 

our leather portmanteau on the board at the back, perch the postboy 

on top of it, and set out for our first experience of a Norwegian 

driving-tour.



The road at first was level and easy; and we bowled along smoothly 

through the valley of the Etnaelv, among drooping birch-trees and 

green fields where the larks were singing.  At Tomlevolden, ten 

miles farther on, we reached the first station, a comfortable old 

farmhouse, with a great array of wooden outbuildings.  Here we had a 

chance to try our luck with the Norwegian language in demanding "en 

hest, saa straxt som muligt."  This was what the guide-book told us 

to say when we wanted a horse.



There is great fun in making a random cast on the surface of a 

strange language.  You cannot tell what will come up.  It is like an 

experiment in witchcraft.  We should not have been at all surprised, 

I must confess, if our preliminary incantation had brought forth a 

cow or a basket of eggs.



But the good people seemed to divine our intentions; and while we 

were waiting for one of the stable-boys to catch and harness the new 

horse, a yellow-haired maiden inquired, in very fair English, if we 

would not be pleased to have a cup of tea and some butter-bread; 

which we did with great comfort.



The SKYDSGUT, or so-called postboy, for the next stage of the 

journey, was a full-grown man of considerable weight.  As he climbed 

to his perch on our portmanteau, my lady Graygown congratulated me 

on the prudence which had provided that one side of that receptacle 

should be of an inflexible stiffness, quite incapable of being 

crushed; otherwise, asked she, what would have become of her Sunday 

frock under the pressure of this stern necessity of a postboy?



But I think we should not have cared very much if all our luggage 

had been smashed on this journey, for the road now began to ascend, 

and the views over the Etnadal, with its winding river, were of a 

breadth and sweetness most consoling.  Up and up we went, curving in 

and out through the forest, crossing wild ravines and shadowy dells, 

looking back at every turn on the wide landscape bathed in golden 

light.  At the station of Sveen, where we changed horse and postboy 

again, it was already evening.  The sun was down, but the mystical 

radiance of the northern twilight illumined the sky.  The dark fir-

woods spread around us, and their odourous breath was diffused 

through the cool, still air.  We were crossing the level summit of 

the plateau, twenty-three hundred feet above the sea.  Two tiny 

woodland lakes gleamed out among the trees.  Then the road began to 

slope gently towards the west, and emerged suddenly on the edge of 

the forest, looking out over the long, lovely vale of Valders, with 

snow-touched mountains on the horizon, and the river Baegna 

shimmering along its bed, a thousand feet below us.



What a heart-enlarging outlook!  What a keen joy of motion, as the 

wheels rolled down the long incline, and the sure-footed pony swung 

between the shafts and rattled his hoofs merrily on the hard road!  

What long, deep breaths of silent pleasure in the crisp night air!  

What wondrous mingling of lights in the afterglow of sunset, and the 

primrose bloom of the first stars, and faint foregleamings of the 

rising moon creeping over the hill behind us!  What perfection of 

companionship without words, as we rode together through a strange 

land, along the edge of the dark!



When we finished the thirty-fifth mile, and drew up in the courtyard 

of the station at Frydenlund, Graygown sprang out, with a little 

sigh of regret.



"Is it last night," she cried, "or to-morrow morning?  I have n't 

the least idea what time it is; it seems as if we had been 

travelling in eternity."



"It is just ten o'clock," I answered, "and the landlord says there 

will be a hot supper of trout ready for us in five minutes."



It would be vain to attempt to give a daily record of the whole 

journey in which we made this fair beginning.  It was a most idle 

and unsystematic pilgrimage.  We wandered up and down, and turned 

aside when fancy beckoned.  Sometimes we hurried on as fast as the 

horses would carry us, driving sixty or seventy miles a day; 

sometimes we loitered and dawdled, as if we did not care whether we 

got anywhere or not.  If a place pleased us, we stayed and tried the 

fishing.  If we were tired of driving, we took to the water, and 

travelled by steamer along a fjord, or hired a rowboat to cross from 

point to point.  One day we would be in a good little hotel, with 

polyglot guests, and serving-maids in stagey Norse costumes,--like 

the famous inn at Stalheim, which commands the amazing panorama of 

the Naerodal.  Another day we would lodge in a plain farmhouse like 

the station at Nedre Vasenden, where eggs and fish were the staples 

of diet, and the farmer's daughter wore the picturesque peasants' 

dress, with its tall cap, without any dramatic airs.  Lakes and 

rivers, precipices and gorges, waterfalls and glaciers and snowy 

mountains were our daily repast.  We drove over five hundred miles 

in various kinds of open wagons, KARIOLS for one, and STOLKJAERRES 

for two, after we had left our comfortable gig behind us.  We saw 

the ancient dragon-gabled church of Burgund; and the delightful, 

showery town of Bergen; and the gloomy cliffs of the Geiranger-Fjord 

laced with filmy cataracts; and the bewitched crags of the Romsdal; 

and the wide, desolate landscape of Jerkin; and a hundred other 

unforgotten scenes.  Somehow or other we went, (around and about, 

and up and down, now on wheels, and now on foot, and now in a boat,) 

all the way from Christiania to Throndhjem.  My lady Graygown could 

give you the exact itinerary, for she has been well brought up, and 

always keeps a diary.  All I know is, that we set out from one city 

and arrived at the other, and we gathered by the way a collection of 

instantaneous photographs.  I am going to turn them over now, and 

pick out a few of the clearest pictures.







III





Here is the bridge over the Naeselv at Fagernaes.  Just below it is 

a good pool for trout, but the river is broad and deep and swift.  

It is difficult wading to get out within reach of the fish.  I have 

taken half a dozen small ones and come to the end of my cast.  There 

is a big one lying out in the middle of the river, I am sure.  But 

the water already rises to my hips; another step will bring it over 

the top of my waders, and send me downstream feet uppermost.



"Take care!" cries Graygown from the grassy bank, where she sits 

placidly crocheting some mysterious fabric of white yarn.



She does not see the large rock lying at the bottom of the river 

just beyond me.  If I can step on that, and stand there without 

being swept away, I can reach the mid-current with my flies.  It is 

a long stride and a slippery foothold, but by good luck "the last 

step which costs" is accomplished.  The tiny black and orange hackle 

goes curling out over the stream, lights softly, and swings around 

with the current, folding and expanding its feathers as if it were 

alive.  The big trout takes it promptly the instant it passes over 

him; and I play him and net him without moving from my perilous 

perch.



Graygown waves her crochet-work like a flag, "Bravo!" she cries.  

"That's a beauty, nearly two pounds!  But do be careful about coming 

back; you are not good enough to take any risks yet."





The station at Skogstad is a solitary farmhouse lying far up on the 

bare hillside, with its barns and out-buildings grouped around a 

central courtyard, like a rude fortress.  The river travels along 

the valley below, now wrestling its way through a narrow passage 

among the rocks, now spreading out at leisure in a green meadow.  As 

we cross the bridge, the crystal water is changed to opal by the 

sunset glow, and a gentle breeze ruffles the long pools, and the 

trout are rising freely.  It is the perfect hour for fishing.  Would 

Graygown dare to drive on alone to the gate of the fortress, and 

blow upon the long horn which doubtless hangs beside it, and demand 

admittance and a lodging, "in the name of the great Jehovah and the 

Continental Congress,"--while I angle down the river a mile or so?



Certainly she would.  What door is there in Europe at which the 

American girl is afraid to knock?  "But wait a moment.  How do you 

ask for fried chicken and pancakes in Norwegian?  KYLLING OG 

PANDEKAGE?  How fierce it sounds!  All right now.  Run along and 

fish."



The river welcomes me like an old friend.  The tune that it sings is 

the same that the flowing water repeats all around the world.  Not 

otherwise do the lively rapids carry the familiar air, and the 

larger falls drone out a burly bass, along the west branch of the 

Penobscot, or down the valley of the Bouquet.  But here there are no 

forests to conceal the course of the stream.  It lies as free to the 

view as a child's thought.  As I follow on from pool to pool, 

picking out a good trout here and there, now from a rocky corner 

edged with foam, now from a swift gravelly run, now from a snug 

hiding-place that the current has hollowed out beneath the bank, all 

the way I can see the fortress far above me on the hillside.



I am as sure that it has already surrendered to Graygown as if I 

could discern her white banner of crochet-work floating from the 

battlements.



Just before dark, I climb the hill with a heavy basket of fish.  The 

castle gate is open.  The scent of chicken and pancakes salutes the 

weary pilgrim.  In a cosy little parlour, adorned with fluffy mats 

and pictures framed in pine-cones, lit by a hanging lamp with glass 

pendants, sits the mistress of the occasion, calmly triumphant and 

plying her crochet-needle.



There is something mysterious about a woman's fancy-work.  It seems 

to have all the soothing charm of the tobacco-plant, without its 

inconveniences.  Just to see her tranquillity, while she relaxes her 

mind and busies her fingers with a bit of tatting or embroidery or 

crochet, gives me a sense of being domesticated, a "homey" feeling, 

anywhere in the wide world.





If you ever go to Norway, you must be sure to see the Loenvand.  You 

can set out from the comfortable hotel at Faleide, go up the Indvik 

Fjord in a rowboat, cross over a two-mile hill on foot or by 

carriage, spend a happy day on the lake, and return to your inn in 

time for a late supper.  The lake is perhaps the most beautiful in 

Norway.  Long and narrow, it lies like a priceless emerald of palest 

green, hidden and guarded by jealous mountains.  It is fed by huge 

glaciers, which hang over the shoulders of the hills like ragged 

cloaks of ice.



As we row along the shore, trolling in vain for the trout that live 

in the ice-cold water, fragments of the tattered cloth-of-silver far 

above us, on the opposite side, are loosened by the touch of the 

summer sun, and fall from the precipice.  They drift downward, at 

first, as noiselessly as thistledowns; then they strike the rocks 

and come crashing towards the lake with the hollow roar of an 

avalanche.



At the head of the lake we find ourselves in an enormous 

amphitheatre of mountains.  Glaciers are peering down upon us.  

Snow-fields glare at us with glistening eyes.  Black crags seem to 

bend above us with an eternal frown.  Streamers of foam float from 

the forehead of the hills and the lips of the dark ravines.  But 

there is a little river of cold, pure water flowing from one of the 

rivers of ice, and a pleasant shelter of young trees and bushes 

growing among the debris of shattered rocks; and there we build our 

camp-fire and eat our lunch.



Hunger is a most impudent appetite.  It makes a man forget all the 

proprieties.  What place is there so lofty, so awful, that he will 

not dare to sit down in it and partake of food?  Even on the side of 

Mount Sinai, the elders of Israel spread their out-of-door table, 

"and did eat and drink."





I see the Tarn of the Elk at this moment, just as it looked in the 

clear sunlight of that August afternoon, ten years ago.  Far down in 

a hollow of the desolate hills it nestles, four thousand feet above 

the sea.  The moorland trail hangs high above it, and, though it is 

a mile away, every curve of the treeless shore, every shoal and reef 

in the light green water is clearly visible.  With a powerful field-

glass one can almost see the large trout for which the pond is 

famous.



The shelter-hut on the bank is built of rough gray stones, and the 

roof is leaky to the light as well as to the weather.  But there are 

two beds in it, one for my guide and one for me; and a practicable 

fireplace, which is soon filled with a blaze of comfort.  There is 

also a random library of novels, which former fishermen have 

thoughtfully left behind them.  I like strong reading in the 

wilderness.  Give me a story with plenty of danger and wholesome 

fighting in it,--"The Three Musketeers," or "Treasure Island," or 

"The Afghan's Knife."  Intricate studies of social dilemmas and 

tales of mild philandering seem bloodless and insipid.



The trout in the Tarn of the Elk are large, undoubtedly, but they 

are also few in number and shy in disposition.  Either some of the 

peasants have been fishing over them with the deadly "otter," or 

else they belong to that variety of the trout family known as TRUTTA 

DAMNOSA,--the species which you can see but cannot take.  We watched 

these aggravating fish playing on the surface at sunset; we saw them 

dart beneath our boat in the early morning; but not until a driving 

snowstorm set in, about noon of the second day, did we succeed in 

persuading any of them to take the fly.  Then they rose, for a 

couple of hours, with amiable perversity.  I caught five, weighing 

between two and four pounds each, and stopped because my hands were 

so numb that I could cast no longer.



Now for a long tramp over the hills and home.  Yes, home; for yonder 

in the white house at Drivstuen, with fuchsias and geraniums 

blooming in the windows, and a pretty, friendly Norse girl to keep 

her company, my lady is waiting for me.  See, she comes running out 

to the door, in the gathering dusk, with a red flower in her hair, 

and hails me with the fisherman's greeting.  WHAT LUCK?



Well, THIS luck, at all events!  I can show you a few good fish, and 

sit down with you to a supper of reindeer-venison and a quiet 

evening of music and talk.





Shall I forget thee, hospitable Stuefloten, dearest to our memory of 

all the rustic stations in Norway?  There are no stars beside thy 

name in the pages of Baedeker.  But in the book of our hearts a 

whole constellation is thine.



The long, low, white farmhouse stands on a green hill at the head of 

the Romsdal.  A flourishing crop of grass and flowers grows on the 

stable-roof, and there is a little belfry with a big bell to call 

the labourers home from the fields.  In the corner of the living-

room of the old house there is a broad fireplace built across the 

angle.  Curious cupboards are tucked away everywhere.  The long 

table in the dining-room groans thrice a day with generous fare.  

There are as many kinds of hot bread as in a Virginia country-house; 

the cream is thick enough to make a spoon stand up in amazement; 

once, at dinner, we sat embarrassed before six different varieties 

of pudding.



In the evening, when the saffron light is beginning to fade, we go 

out and walk in the road before the house, looking down the long 

mystical vale of the Rauma, or up to the purple western hills from 

which the clear streams of the Ulvaa flow to meet us.



Above Stuefloten the Rauma lingers and meanders through a smoother 

and more open valley, with broad beds of gravel and flowery meadows.  

Here the trout and grayling grow fat and lusty, and here we angle 

for them, day after day, in water so crystalline that when one steps 

into the stream one hardly knows whether to expect a depth of six 

inches or six feet.



Tiny English flies and leaders of gossamer are the tackle for such 

water in midsummer.  With this delicate outfit, and with a light 

hand and a long line, one may easily outfish the native angler, and 

fill a twelve-pound basket every fair day.  I remember an old 

Norwegian, an inveterate fisherman, whose footmarks we saw ahead of 

us on the stream all through an afternoon.  Footmarks I call them; 

and so they were, literally, for there were only the prints of a 

single foot to be seen on the banks of sand, and between them, a 

series of small, round, deep holes.



"What kind of a bird made those marks, Frederik?" I asked my 

faithful guide.



"That is old Pedersen," he said, "with his wooden leg.  He makes a 

dot after every step.  We shall catch him in a little while."



Sure enough, about six o'clock we saw him standing on a grassy 

point, hurling his line, with a fat worm on the end of it, far 

across the stream, and letting it drift down with the current.  But 

the water was too fine for that style of fishing, and the poor old 

fellow had but a half dozen little fish.  My creel was already 

overflowing, so I emptied out all of the grayling into his bag, and 

went on up the river to complete my tale of trout before dark.



And when the fishing is over, there is Graygown with the wagon, 

waiting at the appointed place under the trees, beside the road.  

The sturdy white pony trots gayly homeward.  The pale yellow stars 

blossom out above the hills again, as they did on that first night 

when we were driving down into the Valders.  Frederik leans over the 

back of the seat, telling us marvellous tales, in his broken 

English, of the fishing in a certain lake among the mountains, and 

of the reindeer-shooting on the fjeld beyond it.



"It is sad that you go to-morrow," says he "but you come back 

another year, I think, to fish in that lake, and to shoot those 

reindeer."



Yes, Frederik, we are coming back to Norway some day, perhaps,--who 

can tell?  It is one of the hundred places that we are vaguely 

planning to revisit.  For, though we did not see the midnight sun 

there, we saw the honeymoon most distinctly.  And it was bright 

enough to take pictures by its light.







WHO OWNS THE MOUNTAINS?





"My heart is fixed firm and stable in the belief that ultimately 

the sunshine and the summer, the flowers and the azure sky, shall 

become, as it were, interwoven into man's existence.  He shall take 

from all their beauty and enjoy their glory."--RICHARD JEFFERIES: 

The Life of the Fields.





It was the little lad that asked the question; and the answer also, 

as you will see, was mainly his.



We had been keeping Sunday afternoon together in our favourite 

fashion, following out that pleasant text which tells us to "behold 

the fowls of the air."  There is no injunction of Holy Writ less 

burdensome in acceptance, or more profitable in obedience, than this 

easy out-of-doors commandment.  For several hours we walked in the 

way of this precept, through the untangled woods that lie behind the 

Forest Hills Lodge, where a pair of pigeon-hawks had their nest; and 

around the brambly shores of the small pond, where Maryland yellow-

throats and song-sparrows were settled; and under the lofty hemlocks 

of the fragment of forest across the road, where rare warblers 

flitted silently among the tree-tops.  The light beneath the 

evergreens was growing dim as we came out from their shadow into the 

widespread glow of the sunset, on the edge of a grassy hill, 

overlooking the long valley of the Gale River, and uplooking to the 

Franconia Mountains.



It was the benediction hour.  The placid air of the day shed a new 

tranquillity over the consoling landscape.  The heart of the earth 

seemed to taste a repose more perfect than that of common days.  A 

hermit-thrush, far up the vale, sang his vesper hymn; while the 

swallows, seeking their evening meal, circled above the river-fields 

without an effort, twittering softly, now and then, as if they must 

give thanks.  Slight and indefinable touches in the scene, perhaps 

the mere absence of the tiny human figures passing along the road or 

labouring in the distant meadows, perhaps the blue curls of smoke 

rising lazily from the farmhouse chimneys, or the family groups 

sitting under the maple-trees before the door, diffused a sabbath 

atmosphere over the world.



Then said the lad, lying on the grass beside me, "Father, who owns 

the mountains?"



I happened to have heard, the day before, of two or three lumber 

companies that had bought

some of the woodland slopes; so I told him their names, adding that 

there were probably a good many different owners, whose claims taken 

all together would cover the whole Franconia range of hills.



"Well," answered the lad, after a moment of silence, "I don't see 

what difference that makes.  Everybody can look at them."



They lay stretched out before us in the level sunlight, the sharp 

peaks outlined against the sky, the vast ridges of forest sinking 

smoothly towards the valleys.  the deep hollows gathering purple 

shadows in their bosoms, and the little foothills standing out in 

rounded promontories of brighter green from the darker mass behind 

them.



Far to the east, the long comb of Twin Mountain extended itself back 

into the untrodden wilderness.  Mount Garfield lifted a clear-cut 

pyramid through the translucent air.  The huge bulk of Lafayette 

ascended majestically in front of us, crowned with a rosy diadem of 

rocks.  Eagle Cliff and Bald Mountain stretched their line of 

scalloped peaks across the entrance to the Notch.  Beyond that 

shadowy vale, the swelling summits of Cannon Mountain rolled away to 

meet the tumbling waves of Kinsman, dominated by one loftier crested 

billow that seemed almost ready to curl and break out of green 

silence into snowy foam.  Far down the sleeping Landaff valley the 

undulating dome of Moosilauke trembled in the distant blue.



They were all ours, from crested cliff to wooded base.  The solemn 

groves of firs and spruces, the plumed sierras of lofty pines, the 

stately pillared forests of birch and beech, the wild ravines, the 

tremulous thickets of silvery poplar, the bare peaks with their wide 

outlooks, and the cool vales resounding with the ceaseless song of 

little rivers,--we knew and loved them all; they ministered peace 

and joy to us; they were all ours, though we held no title deeds and 

our ownership had never been recorded.



What is property, after all?  The law says there are two kinds, real 

and personal.  But it seems to me that the only real property is 

that which is truly personal, that which we take into our inner life 

and make our own forever, by understanding and admiration and 

sympathy and love.  This is the only kind of possession that is 

worth anything.



A gallery of great paintings adorns the house of the Honourable 

Midas Bond, and every year adds a new treasure to his collection.  

He knows how much they cost him, and he keeps the run of the 

quotations at the auction sales, congratulating himself as the price 

of the works of his well-chosen artists rises in the scale, and the 

value of his art treasures is enhanced.  But why should he call them 

his?  He is only their custodian.  He keeps them well varnished, and 

framed in gilt.  But he never passes through those gilded frames 

into the world of beauty that lies behind the painted canvas.  He 

knows nothing of those lovely places from which the artist's soul 

and hand have drawn their inspiration.  They are closed and barred 

to him.  He has bought the pictures, but he cannot buy the key.  The 

poor art student who wanders through his gallery, lingering with awe 

and love before the masterpieces, owns them far more truly than 

Midas does.



Pomposus Silverman purchased a rich library a few years ago.  The 

books were rare and costly.  That was the reason why Pomposus bought 

them.  He was proud to feel that he was the possessor of literary 

treasures which were not to be found in the houses of his wealthiest 

acquaintances.  But the threadbare Bucherfreund, who was engaged at 

a slender salary to catalogue the library and take care of it, 

became the real proprietor.  Pomposus paid for the books, but 

Bucherfreund enjoyed them.



I do not mean to say that the possession of much money is always a 

barrier to real wealth of mind and heart.  Nor would I maintain that 

all the poor of this world are rich in faith and heirs of the 

kingdom.  But some of them are.  And if some of the rich of this 

world (through the grace of Him with whom all things are possible) 

are also modest in their tastes, and gentle in their hearts, and 

open in their minds, and ready to be pleased with unbought 

pleasures, they simply share in the best things which are provided 

for all.



I speak not now of the strife that men wage over the definition and 

the laws of property.  Doubtless there is much here that needs to be 

set right.  There are men and women in the world who are shut out 

from the right to earn a living, so poor that they must perish for 

want of daily bread, so full of misery that there is no room for the 

tiniest seed of joy in their lives.  This is the lingering shame of 

civilization.  Some day, perhaps, we shall find the way to banish 

it.  Some day, every man shall have his title to a share in the 

world's great work and the world's large joy.



But meantime it is certain that, where there are a hundred poor 

bodies who suffer from physical privation, there are a thousand poor 

souls who suffer from spiritual poverty.  To relive this greater 

suffering there needs no change of laws, only a change of heart.



What does it profit a man to be the landed proprietor of countless 

acres unless he can reap the harvest of delight that blooms from 

every rood of God's earth for the seeing eye and the loving spirit?  

And who can reap that harvest so closely that there shall not be 

abundant gleaning left for all mankind?  The most that a wide estate 

can yield to its legal owner is a living.  But the real owner can 

gather from a field of goldenrod, shining in the August sunlight, an 

unearned increment of delight.



We measure success by accumulation.  The measure is false.  The true 

measure is appreciation.  He who loves most has most.



How foolishly we train ourselves for the work of life!  We give our 

most arduous and eager efforts to the cultivation of those faculties 

which will serve us in the competitions of the forum and the market-

place.  But if we were wise, we should care infinitely more for the 

unfolding of those inward, secret, spiritual powers by which alone 

we can become the owners of anything that is worth having.  Surely 

God is the great proprietor.  Yet all His works He has given away.  

He holds no title-deeds.  The one thing that is His, is the perfect 

understanding, the perfect joy, the perfect love, of all things that 

He has made.  To a share in this high ownership He welcomes all who 

are poor in spirit.  This is the earth which the meek inherit.  This 

is the patrimony of the saints in light.



"Come, laddie," I said to my comrade, "let us go home.  You and I 

are very rich.  We own the mountains.  But we can never sell them, 

and we don't want to."







A LAZY, IDLE BROOK





"Perpetual devotion to what a man calls his business is only to be 

sustained by perpetual neglect of many other things.  And it is not 

by any means certain that a mans business is the most important 

thing he has to do."--ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: An Apology for Idlers.





I



A CASUAL INTRODUCTION





On the South Shore of Long Island, all things incline to a natural 

somnolence.  There are no ambitious mountains, no braggart cliffs, 

no hasty torrents, no hustling waterfalls in that land,





   "In which it seemeth always afternoon."





The salt meadows sleep in the summer sun; the farms and market-

gardens yield a placid harvest to a race of singularly unhurried 

tillers of the soil; the low hills rise with gentle slopes, not 

caring to get too high in the world, only far enough to catch a 

pleasant glimpse of the sea and a breath of fresh air; the very 

trees grow leisurely, as if they felt that they had "all the time 

there is." And from this dreamy land, close as it lies to the 

unresting ocean, the tumult of the breakers and the foam of ever-

turning tides are shut off by the languid lagoons of the Great South 

Bay and a long range of dunes, crested with wire-grass, bay-bushes, 

and wild-roses.



In such a country you could not expect a little brook to be noisy, 

fussy, energetic.  If it were not lazy, it would be out of keeping.



But the actual and undisguised idleness of this particular brook was 

another affair, and one in which it was distinguished among its 

fellows.  For almost all the other little rivers of the South Shore, 

lazy as they may be by nature, yet manage to do some kind of work 

before they finish the journey from their crystal-clear springs into 

the brackish waters of the bay.  They turn the wheels of sleepy 

gristmills, while the miller sits with his hands in his pockets 

underneath the willow-trees.  They fill reservoirs out of which 

great steam-engines pump the water to quench the thirst of Brooklyn.  

Even the smaller streams tarry long enough in their seaward 

sauntering to irrigate a few cranberry-bogs and so provide that 

savoury sauce which makes the Long Island turkey a fitter subject 

for Thanksgiving.



But this brook of which I speak did none of these useful things.  It 

was absolutely out of business.  

There was not a mill, nor a reservoir, nor a cranberry-bog, on all 

its course of a short mile.  The only profitable affair it ever 

undertook was to fill a small ice-pond near its entrance into the 

Great South Bay.  You could hardly call this a very energetic 

enterprise.  It amounted to little more than a good-natured consent 

to allow itself to be used by the winter for the making of ice, if 

the winter happened to be cold enough.  Even this passive industry 

came to nothing; for the water, being separated from the bay only by 

a short tideway under a wooden bridge on the south country road, was 

too brackish to freeze easily; and the ice, being pervaded with 

weeds, was not much relished by the public.  So the wooden ice-

house, innocent of paint, and toned by the weather to a soft, sad-

coloured gray, stood like an improvised ruin among the pine-trees 

beside the pond.



It was through this unharvested ice-pond, this fallow field of 

water, that my lady Graygown and I entered on acquaintance with our 

lazy, idle brook.  We had a house, that summer, a few miles down the 

bay.  But it was a very small house, and the room that we like best 

was out of doors.  So we spent much time in a sailboat,--by name 

"The Patience,"--making voyages of exploration into watery corners 

and byways.  Sailing past the wooden bridge one day, when a strong 

east wind had made a very low tide, we observed the water flowing 

out beneath the road with an eddying current.  We were interested to 

discover where such a stream came from.  But the sailboat could not 

go under the bridge, nor even make a landing on the shore without 

risk of getting aground.  The next day we came back in a rowboat to 

follow the clue of curiosity.  The tide was high now, and we passed 

with the reversed current under the bridge, almost bumping our heads 

against the timbers.  Emerging upon the pond, we rowed across its 

shallow, weed-encumbered waters, and were introduced without 

ceremony to one of the most agreeable brooks that we had ever met.



It was quite broad where it came into the pond,--a hundred feet from 

side to side,--bordered with flags and rushes and feathery meadow 

grasses.  The real channel meandered in sweeping curves from bank to 

bank, and the water, except in the swifter current, was filled with 

an amazing quantity of some aquatic moss.  The woods came straggling 

down on either shore.  There were fallen trees in the stream here 

and there.  On one of the points an old swamp-maple, with its 

decrepit branches and its leaves already touched with the hectic 

colours of decay, hung far out over the water which was undermining 

it, looking and leaning downward, like an aged man who bends, half-

sadly and half-willingly, towards the grave.



But for the most part the brook lay wide open to the sky, and the 

tide, rising and sinking somewhat irregularly in the pond below, 

made curious alternations in its depth and in the swiftness of its 

current.  For about half a mile we navigated this lazy little river, 

and then we found that rowing would carry us no farther, for we came 

to a place where the stream issued with a livelier flood from an 

archway in a thicket.



This woodland portal was not more than four feet wide, and the 

branches of the small trees were closely interwoven overhead.  We 

shipped the oars and took one of them for a paddle.  Stooping down, 

we pushed the boat through the archway and found ourselves in the 

Fairy Dell.  It was a long, narrow bower, perhaps four hundred feet 

from end to end, with the brook dancing through it in a joyous, 

musical flow over a bed of clean yellow sand and white pebbles.  

There were deep places in the curves where you could hardly touch 

bottom with an oar, and shallow places in the straight runs where 

the boat would barely float.  Not a ray of unbroken sunlight leaked 

through the green roof of this winding corridor; and all along the 

sides there were delicate mosses and tall ferns and wildwood flowers 

that love the shade.



At the upper end of the bower our progress in the boat was barred by 

a low bridge, on a forgotten road that wound through the pine-woods.  

Here I left my lady Graygown, seated on the shady corner of the 

bridge with a book, swinging her feet over the stream, while I set 

out to explore its further course.  Above the wood-road there were 

no more fairy dells, nor easy-going estuaries.  The water came down 

through the most complicated piece of underbrush that I have ever 

encountered.  Alders and swamp maples and pussy-willows and gray 

birches grew together in a wild confusion.  Blackberry bushes and 

fox-grapes and cat-briers trailed and twisted themselves anger.



What a pretty battle it is, and in a good cause, too!  Waste no pity 

on that big black ruffian.  He is a villain and a thief, an egg-

stealer, an ogre, a devourer of unfledged innocents.  The kingbirds 

are not afraid of him, knowing that he is a coward at heart.  They 

fly upon him, now from below, now from above.  They buffet him from 

one side and from the other.  They circle round him like a pair of 

swift gunboats round an antiquated man-of-war.  They even perch upon 

his back and dash their beaks into his neck and pluck feathers from 

his piratical plumage.  At last his lumbering flight has carried him 

far enough away, and the brave little defenders fly back to the 

nest, poising above it on quivering wings for a moment, then dipping 

down swiftly in pursuit of some passing insect.  The war is over.  

Courage has had its turn.  Now tenderness comes into play.in an 

incredible tangle.  There was only one way to advance, and that was 

to wade in the middle of the brook, stooping low, lifting up the 

pendulous alder-branches, threading a tortuous course, now under and 

now over the innumerable obstacles, as a darning-needle is pushed in 

and out through the yarn of a woollen stocking.



It was dark and lonely in that difficult passage.  The brook divided 

into many channels, turning this way and that way, as if it were 

lost in the woods.  There were huge clumps of OSMUNDA REGALIS 

spreading their fronds in tropical profusion.  Mouldering logs were 

covered with moss.  The water gurgled slowly into deep corners under 

the banks.  Catbirds and blue jays fluttered screaming from the 

thickets.  Cotton-tailed rabbits darted away, showing the white flag 

of fear.  Once I thought I saw the fuscous gleam of a red fox 

stealing silently through the brush.  It would have been no surprise 

to hear the bark of a raccoon, or see the eyes of a wildcat gleaming 

through the leaves.



For more than an hour I was pushing my way through this miniature 

wilderness of half a mile; and then I emerged suddenly, to find 

myself face to face with--a railroad embankment and the afternoon 

express, with its parlour-cars, thundering down to Southampton!



It was a strange and startling contrast.  The explorers joy, the 

sense of adventure, the feeling of wildness and freedom, withered 

and crumpled somewhat preposterously at the sight of the parlour-

cars.  My scratched hands and wet boots and torn coat seemed unkempt 

and disreputable.  Perhaps some of the well-dressed people looking 

out at the windows of the train were the friends with whom we were 

to dine on Saturday.  BATECHE!  What would they say to such a 

costume as mine?  What did I care what they said!



But, all the same, it was a shock, a disenchantment, to find that 

civilization, with all its absurdities and conventionalities, was so 

threateningly close to my new-found wilderness.  My first enthusiasm 

was not a little chilled as I walked back, along an open woodland 

path, to the bridge where Graygown was placidly reading.  Reading, I 

say, though her book was closed, and her brown eyes were wandering 

over the green leaves of the thicket, and the white clouds drifting, 

drifting lazily across the blue deep of the sky.







II



A BETTER ACQUAINTANCE





On the voyage home, she gently talked me out of my disappointment, 

and into a wiser frame of mind.



It was a surprise, of course, she admitted, to find that our 

wilderness was so little, and to discover the trail of a parlour-car 

on the edge of Paradise.  But why not turn the surprise around, and 

make it pleasant instead of disagreeable?  Why not look at the 

contrast from the side that we liked best?



It was not necessary that everybody should take the same view of 

life that pleased us.  The world would not get on very well without 

people who preferred parlour-cars to canoes, and patent-leather 

shoes to India-rubber boots, and ten-course dinners to picnics in 

the woods.  These good people were unconsciously toiling at the hard 

and necessary work of life in order that we, of the chosen and 

fortunate few, should be at liberty to enjoy the best things in the 

world.



Why should we neglect our opportunities, which were also our real 

duties?  The nervous disease of civilization might prevail all 

around us, but that ought not to destroy our grateful enjoyment of 

the lucid intervals that were granted to us by a merciful 

Providence.



Why should we not take this little untamed brook, running its humble 

course through the borders of civilized life and midway between two 

flourishing summer resorts,--a brook without a single house or a 

cultivated field on its banks, as free and beautiful and secluded as 

if it flowed through miles of trackless forest,--why not take this 

brook as a sign that the ordering of the universe had a "good 

intention" even for inveterate idlers, and that the great Arranger 

of the world felt some kindness for such gipsy-hearts as ours?  What 

law, human or divine, was there to prevent us from making this 

stream our symbol of deliverance from the conventional and 

commonplace, our guide to liberty and a quiet mind?



So reasoned Graygown with her





          "most silver flow

     Of subtle-paced counsel in distress."





And, according to her word, so did we.  That lazy, idle brook became 

to us one of the best of friends; the pathfinder of happiness on 

many a bright summer day; and, through long vacations, the faithful 

encourager of indolence.



Indolence in the proper sense of the word, you understand.  The 

meaning which is commonly given to it, as Archbishop Trench pointed 

out in his suggestive book about WORDS AND THEIR USES, is altogether 

false.  To speak of indolence as if it were a vice is just a great 

big verbal slander.



Indolence is a virtue.  It comes from two Latin words, which mean 

freedom from anxiety or grief.  And that is a wholesome state of 

mind.  There are times and seasons when it is even a pious and 

blessed state of mind.  Not to be in a hurry; not to be ambitious or 

jealous or resentful; not to feel envious of anybody; not to fret 

about to-day nor worry about to-morrow,--that is the way we ought 

all to feel at some time in our lives; and that is the kind of 

indolence in which our brook faithfully encouraged us.



T is an age in which such encouragement is greatly needed.  We have 

fallen so much into the habit of being always busy that we know not 

how nor when to break it off with firmness.  Our business tags after 

us into the midst of our pleasures, and we are ill at ease beyond 

reach of the telegraph and the daily newspaper.  We agitate 

ourselves amazingly about a multitude of affairs,--the politics of 

Europe, the state of the weather all around the globe, the marriages 

and festivities of very rich people, and the latest novelties in 

crime, none of which are of vital interest to us.  The more earnest 

souls among us are cultivating a vicious tendency to Summer Schools, 

and Seaside Institutes of Philosophy, and Mountaintop Seminaries of 

Modern Languages.



We toil assiduously to cram something more into those scrap-bags of 

knowledge which we fondly call our minds.  Seldom do we rest 

tranquil long enough to find out whether there is anything in them 

already that is of real value,--any native feeling, any original 

thought, which would like to come out and sun itself for a while in 

quiet.



For my part, I am sure that I stand more in need of a deeper sense 

of contentment with life than of a knowledge of the Bulgarian 

tongue, and that all the paradoxes of Hegel would not do me so much 

good as one hour of vital sympathy with the careless play of 

children.  The Marquis du Paty de lHuitre may espouse the daughter 

and heiress of the Honourable James Bulger with all imaginable pomp, 

if he will.  CA NE MINTRIGUE POINT DU TOUT.  I would rather stretch 

myself out on the grass and watch yonder pair of kingbirds carrying 

luscious flies to their young ones in the nest, or chasing away the 

marauding crow with shrill cries of   The 

young birds, all ignorant of the passing danger, but always 

conscious of an insatiable hunger, are uttering loud remonstrances 

and plaintive demands for food.  Domestic life begins again, and 

they that sow not, neither gather into barns, are fed.





Do you suppose that this wondrous stage of earth was set, and all 

the myriad actors on it

taught to play their parts, without a spectator in view?  Do you 

think that there is anything better for you and me to do, now and 

then, than to sit down quietly in a humble seat, and watch a few 

scenes in the drama?  Has it not something to say to us, and do we 

not understand it best when we have a peaceful heart and free from 

dolor?  That is what IN-DOLENCE means, and there are no better 

teachers of it then the light-hearted birds and untoiling flowers, 

commended by the wisest of all masters to our consideration; nor can 

we find a more pleasant pedagogue to lead us to their school than a 

small, merry brook.



And this was what our chosen stream did for us.  It was always 

luring us away from an artificial life into restful companionship 

with nature.



Suppose, for example, we found ourselves growing a bit dissatisfied 

with the domestic arrangements of our little cottage, and coveting 

the splendours of a grander establishment.  An afternoon on the 

brook was a good cure for that folly.  Or suppose a day came when 

there was an imminent prospect of many formal calls.  We had an 

important engagement up the brook; and while we kept it we could 

think with satisfaction of the joy of our callers when they 

discovered that they could discharge their whole duty with a piece 

of pasteboard.  This was an altruistic pleasure.  Or suppose that a 

few friends were coming to supper, and there were no flowers for the 

supper-table.  We could easily have bought them in the village.  But 

it was far more to our liking to take the children up the brook, and 

come back with great bunches of wild white honeysuckle and blue 

flag, or posies of arrowheads and cardinal-flowers.  Or suppose that 

I was very unwisely and reluctantly labouring at some serious piece 

of literary work, promised for the next number of THE SCRIBBLERS 

REVIEW; and suppose that in the midst of this labour the sad news 

came to me that the fisherman had forgotten to leave any fish at our 

cottage that morning.  Should my innocent babes and my devoted wife 

be left to perish of starvation while I continued my poetical 

comparison of the two Williams, Shakspeare and Watson?  Inhuman 

selfishness!  Of course it was my plain duty to sacrifice my 

inclinations, and get my fly-rod, and row away across the bay, with 

a deceptive appearance of cheerfulness, to catch a basket of trout 

in--







III



THE SECRETS OF INTIMACY





THERE!  I came within eight letters of telling the name of the 

brook, a thing that I am firmly resolved not to do.  If it were an 

ordinary fishless little river, or even a stream with nothing better 

than grass-pike and sunfish in it, you should have the name and 

welcome.  But when a brook contains speckled trout, and when their 

presence is known to a very few persons who guard the secret as the 

dragon guarded the golden apples of the Hesperides, and when the 

size of the trout is large beyond the dreams of hope,--well, when 

did you know a true angler who would willingly give away the name of 

such a brook as that?  You may find an encourager of indolence in 

almost any stream of the South Side, and I wish you joy of your 

brook.  But if you want to catch trout in mine you must discover it 

for yourself, or perhaps go with me some day, and solemnly swear 

secrecy.



That was the way in which the freedom of the stream was conferred 

upon me.  There was a small boy in the village, the son of rich but 

respectable parents, and an inveterate all-round sportsman, aged 

fourteen years, with whom I had formed a close intimacy.  I was 

telling him about the pleasure of exploring the idle brook, and 

expressing the opinion that in bygone days, (in that mythical "forty 

years ago" when all fishing was good), there must have been trout in 

it.  A certain look came over the boys face.  He gazed at me 

solemnly, as if he were searching the inmost depths of my character 

before he spoke.



"Say, do you want to know something?"



I assured him that an increase of knowledge was the chief aim of my 

life.



"Do you promise you wont tell?"



I expressed my readiness to be bound to silence by the most awful 

pledge that the law would sanction.



"Wish you may die?"



I not only wished that I might die, but was perfectly certain that I 

would die.



"Well, whats the matter with catching trout in that brook now?  Do 

you want to go with me next Saturday?  I saw four or five bully ones 

last week, and got three."



On the appointed day we made the voyage, landed at the upper bridge, 

walked around by the woodpath to the railroad embankment, and began 

to worm our way down through the tangled wilderness.  Fly-fishing, 

of course, was out of the question.  The only possible method of 

angling was to let the line, baited with a juicy "garden hackle," 

drift down the current as far as possible before you, under the 

alder-branches and the cat-briers, into the holes and corners of the 

stream.  Then, if there came a gentle tug on the rod, you must 

strike, to one side or the other, as the branches might allow, and 

trust wholly to luck for a chance to play the fish.  Many a trout we 

lost that day,--the largest ones, of course,--and many a hook was 

embedded in a sunken log, or hopelessly entwined among the boughs 

overhead.  But when we came out at the bridge, very wet and 

disheveled, we had seven pretty fish, the heaviest about half a 

pound.  The Fairy Dell yielded a brace of smaller ones, and 

altogether we were reasonably happy as we took up the oars and 

pushed out upon the open stream.



But if there were fish above, why should there not be fish below?  

It was about sunset, the anglers golden hour.  We were already 

committed to the crime of being late for supper.  It would add 

little to our guilt and much to our pleasure to drift slowly down 

the middle of the brook and cast the artful fly in the deeper 

corners on either shore.  So I took off the vulgar bait-hook and put 

on a delicate leader with a Queen of the Water for a tail-fly and a 

Yellow Sally for a dropper,--innocent little confections of feathers 

and tinsel, dressed on the tiniest hooks, and calculated to tempt 

the appetite or the curiosity of the most capricious trout.



For a long time the whipping of the water produced no result, and it 

seemed as if the dainty style of angling were destined to prove less 

profitable than plain fishing with a worm.  But presently we came to 

an elbow of the brook, just above the estuary, where there was quite 

a stretch of clear water along the lower side, with two half-sunken 

logs sticking out from the bank, against which the current had 

drifted a broad raft of weeds.  I made a long cast, and sent the 

tail-fly close to the edge of the weeds.  There was a swelling 

ripple on the surface of the water, and a noble fish darted from 

under the logs, dashed at the fly, missed it, and whirled back to 

his shelter.



"Gee!" said the boy, "that was a whacker!  He made a wake like a 

steamboat."



It was a moment for serious thought.  What was best to be done with 

that fish?  Leave him to settle down for the night and come back 

after him another day?  Or try another cast for him at once?  A fish 

on Saturday evening is worth two on Monday morning.  I changed the 

Queen of the Water for a Royal Coachman tied on a number fourteen 

hook,--white wings, peacock body with a belt of crimson silk,--and 

sent it out again, a foot farther up the stream and a shade closer 

to the weeds.  As it settled on the water, there was a flash of gold 

from the shadow beneath the logs, and a quick turn of the wrist made 

the tiny hook fast in the fish.  He fought wildly to get back to the 

shelter of his logs, but the four ounce rod had spring enough in it 

to hold him firmly away from that dangerous retreat.  Then he 

splurged up and down the open water, and made fierce dashes among 

the grassy shallows, and seemed about to escape a dozen times.  But 

at last his force was played out; he came slowly towards the boat, 

turning on his side, and I netted him in my hat.



"Bully for us;" said the boy, "we got him!  What a dandy!"



It was indeed one of the handsomest fish that I have ever taken on 

the South Side,--just short of two pounds and a quarter,--small 

head, broad tail, and well-rounded sides coloured with orange and 

blue and gold and red.  A pair of the same kind, one weighing two 

pounds and the other a pound and three quarters, were taken by 

careful fishing down the lower end of the pool, and then we rowed 

home through the dusk, pleasantly convinced that there is no virtue 

more certainly rewarded than the patience of anglers, and entirely 

willing to put up with a cold supper and a mild reproof for the sake 

of sport.



Of course we could not resist the temptation to show those fish to 

the neighbours.  But, equally of course, we evaded the request to 

give precise information as to the precise place where they were 

caught.  Indeed, I fear that there must have been something confused 

in our description of where we had been on that afternoon.  Our 

carefully selected language may have been open to misunderstanding.  

At all events, the next day, which was the Sabbath, there was a row 

of eager but unprincipled anglers sitting on a bridge OVER ANOTHER 

STREAM, and fishing for trout with worms and large expectations, but 

without visible results.



The boy and I agreed that if this did not teach a good moral lesson 

it was not our fault.



I obtained the boys consent to admit the partner of my lifes joys 

and two of our children to the secret of the brook, and thereafter, 

when we visited it, we took the fly-rod with us.  If by chance 

another boat passed us in the estuary, we were never fishing, but 

only gathering flowers, or going for a picnic, or taking 

photographs.  But when the uninitiated ones had passed by, we would 

get out the rod again, and try a few more casts.



One day in particular I remember, when Graygown and little Teddy 

were my companions.  We really had no hopes of angling, for the hour 

was mid-noon, and the day was warm and still.  But suddenly the 

trout, by one of those unaccountable freaks which make their 

disposition so interesting and attractive, began to rise all about 

us in a bend of the stream.



"Look!" said Teddy; "wherever you see one of those big smiles on the 

water, I believe theres a fish!"



Fortunately the rod was at hand.  Graygown and Teddy managed the 

boat and the landing-net with consummate skill.  We landed no less 

than a dozen beautiful fish at that most unlikely hour and then 

solemnly shook hands all around.



There is a peculiar pleasure in doing a thing like this, catching 

trout in a place where nobody thinks of looking for them, and at an 

hour when everybody believes they cannot be caught.  It is more fun 

to take one good fish out of an old, fished-out stream, near at hand 

to the village, than to fill a basket from some far-famed and well-

stocked water.  It is the unexpected touch that tickles our sense of 

pleasure.  While life lasts, we are always hoping for it and 

expecting it.  There is no country so civilized, no existence so 

humdrum, that there is not room enough in it somewhere for a lazy, 

idle brook, an encourager of indolence, with hope of happy 

surprises.







THE OPEN FIRE





 "It is a vulgar notion that a fire is only for heat.  A chief value 

of it is, however, to look at.  And it is never twice the same."--

CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER: Backlog Studies.





I



LIGHTING UP





Man is the animal that has made friends with the fire.



All the other creatures, in their natural state, are afraid of it.  

They look upon it with wonder and dismay.  It fascinates them, 

sometimes, with its glittering eyes in the night.  The squirrels and 

the hares come pattering softly towards it through the underbrush 

around the new camp.  The fascinated deer stares into the blaze of 

the jack-light while the hunters canoe creeps through the lily-

pads.  But the charm that masters them is one of dread, not of love.  

It is the witchcraft of the serpents lambent look.  When they know 

what it means, when the heat of the fire touches them, or even when 

its smell comes clearly to their most delicate sense, they recognize 

it as their enemy, the Wild Huntsman whose red hounds can follow, 

follow for days without wearying, growing stronger and more furious 

with every turn of the chase.  Let but a trail of smoke drift down 

the wind across the forest, and all the game for miles and miles 

will catch the signal for fear and flight.



Many of the animals have learned how to make houses for themselves.  

The CABANE of the beaver is a wonder of neatness and comfort, much 

preferable to the wigwam of his Indian hunter.  The muskrat knows 

how thick and high to build the dome of his waterside cottage, in 

order to protect himself against the frost of the coming winter and 

the floods of the following spring.  The woodchucks house has two 

or three doors; and the squirrels dwelling is provided with a good 

bed and a convenient storehouse for nuts and acorns.  The sportive 

otters have a toboggan slide in front of their residence; and the 

moose in winter make a "yard," where they can take exercise 

comfortably and find shelter for sleep.  But there is one thing 

lacking in all these various dwellings,--a fireplace.



Man is the only creature that dares to light a fire and to live with 

it.  The reason?  Because he alone has learned how to put it out.



It is true that two of his humbler friends have been converted to 

fire-worship.  The dog and the cat, being half-humanized, have begun 

to love the fire.  I suppose that a cat seldom comes so near to 

feeling a true sense of affection as when she has finished her 

saucer of bread and milk, and stretched herself luxuriously 

underneath the kitchen stove, while her faithful mistress washes up 

the dishes.  As for a dog, I am sure that his admiring love for his 

master is never greater than when they come in together from the 

hunt, wet and tired, and the man gathers a pile of wood in front of 

the tent, touches it with a tiny magic wand, and suddenly the clear, 

consoling flame springs up, saying cheerfully, "Here we are, at home 

in the forest; come into the warmth; rest, and eat, and sleep."  

When the weary, shivering dog sees this miracle, he knows that his 

master is a great man and a lord of things.



After all, that is the only real open fire.  Wood is the fuel for 

it.  Out-of-doors is the place for it.  A furnace is an underground 

prison for a toiling slave.  A stove is a cage for a tame bird.  

Even a broad hearthstone and a pair of glittering andirons--the best 

ornament of a room--must be accepted as an imitation of the real 

thing.  The veritable open fire is built in the open, with the whole 

earth for a fireplace and the sky for a chimney.



To start a fire in the open is by no means as easy as it looks.  It 

is one of those simple tricks that every one thinks he can perform 

until he tries it.



To do it without trying,--accidentally and unwillingly,--that, of 

course, is a thing for which any fool is fit.  You knock out the 

ashes from your pipe on a fallen log; you toss the end of a match 

into a patch of grass, green on top, but dry as punk underneath; you 

scatter the dead brands of an old fire among the moss,--a 

conflagration is under way before you know it.



A fire in the woods is one thing; a comfort and a joy.  Fire in the 

woods is another thing; a terror, an uncontrollable fury, a burning 

shame.



But the lighting up of a proper fire, kindly, approachable, 

serviceable, docile, is a work of intelligence.  If, perhaps, you 

have to do it in the rain, with a single match, it requires no 

little art and skill.



There is plenty of wood everywhere, but not a bit to burn.  The 

fallen trees are waterlogged.  The dead leaves are as damp as grief.  

The charred sticks that you find in an old fireplace are absolutely 

incombustible.  Do not trust the handful of withered twigs and 

branches that you gather from the spruce-trees.  They seem dry, but 

they are little better for your purpose than so much asbestos.  You 

make a pile of them in some apparently suitable hollow, and lay a 

few larger sticks on top.  Then you hastily scratch your solitary 

match on the seat of your trousers and thrust it into the pile of 

twigs.  What happens?  The wind whirls around in your stupid little 

hollow, and the blue flame of the sulphur spirts and sputters for an 

instant, and then goes out.  Or perhaps there is a moment of 

stillness; the match flares up bravely; the nearest twigs catch 

fire, crackling and sparkling; you hurriedly lay on more sticks; but 

the fire deliberately dodges them, creeps to the corner of the pile 

where the twigs are fewest and dampest, snaps feebly a few times, 

and expires in smoke.  Now where are you?  How far is it to the 

nearest match?



If you are wise, you will always make your fire before you light it.  

Time is never saved by doing a thing badly.







II



THE CAMP-FIRE





In the making of fires there is as much difference as in the 

building of houses.  Everything depends upon the purpose that you 

have in view.  There is the camp-fire, and the cooking-fire, and the 

smudge-fire, and the little friendship-fire,--not to speak of other 

minor varieties.  Each of these has its own proper style of 

architecture, and to mix them is false art and poor economy.



The object of the camp-fire is to give heat, and incidentally light, 

to your tent or shanty.  You can hardly build this kind of a fire 

unless you have a good axe and know how to chop.  For the first 

thing that you need is a solid backlog, the thicker the better, to 

hold the heat and reflect it into the tent.  This log must not be 

too dry, or it will burn out quickly.  Neither must it be too damp, 

else it will smoulder and discourage the fire.  The best wood for it 

is the body of a yellow birch, and, next to that, a green balsam.  

It should be five or six feet long, and at least two and a half feet 

in diameter.  If you cannot find a tree thick enough, cut two or 

three lengths of a smaller one; lay the thickest log on the ground 

first, about ten or twelve feet in front of the tent; drive two 

strong stakes behind it, slanting a little backward; and lay the 

other logs on top of the first, resting against the stakes.



Now you are ready for the hand-chunks, or andirons.  These are 

shorter sticks of wood, eight or ten inches thick, laid at right 

angles to the backlog, four or five feet apart.  Across these you 

are to build up the firewood proper.



Use a dry spruce-tree, not one that has fallen, but one that is dead 

and still standing, if you want a lively, snapping fire.  Use a hard 

maple or a hickory if you want a fire that will burn steadily and 

make few sparks.  But if you like a fire to blaze up at first with a 

splendid flame, and then burn on with an enduring heat far into the 

night, a young white birch with the bark on is the tree to choose.  

Six or eight round sticks of this laid across the hand-chunks, with 

perhaps a few quarterings of a larger tree, will make a glorious 

fire.



But before you put these on, you must be ready to light up.  A few 

splinters of dry spruce or pine or balsam, stood endwise against the 

backlog, or, better still, piled up in a pyramid between the hand-

chunks; a few strips of birch-bark; and one good match,--these are 

all that you want.  But be sure that your match is a good one.  It 

is better to see to this before you go into the brush.  Your 

comfort, even your life, may depend on it.



"AVEC CES ALLUMETTES-LA," said my guide at LAC ST. JEAN one day, as 

he vainly tried to light his pipe with a box of parlour matches from 

the hotel,--AVEC CES GNOGNOTTES DALLUMETTES ON POURRA MOURIR AU 

BOIS!"



In the woods, the old-fashioned brimstone match of our grandfathers--

the match with a brown head and a stout stick and a dreadful smell--

is the best.  But if you have only one, do not trust even that to 

light your fire directly.  Use it first to touch off a roll of 

birch-bark which you hold in your hand.  Then, when the bark is well 

alight, crinkling and curling, push it under the heap of kindlings, 

give the flame time to take a good hold, and lay your wood over it, 

a stick at a time, until the whole pile is blazing.  Now your fire 

is started.  Your friendly little red-haired gnome is ready to serve 

you through the night.



He will dry your clothes if you are wet.  He will cheer you up if 

you are despondent.  He will diffuse an air of sociability through 

the camp, and draw the men together in a half circle for 

storytelling and jokes and singing.  He will hold a flambeau for you 

while you spread your blankets on the boughs and dress for bed.  He 

will keep you warm while you sleep,--at least till about three 

oclock in the morning, when you dream that you are out sleighing in 

your pajamas, and wake up with a shiver.



"HOLA, FERDINAND, FRANCOIS!" you call out from your bed, pulling the 

blankets over your ears; "RAMANCHEZ LE FEU, SIL VOUS PLAIT.  CEST 

UN FREITE DE CHIEN."







III



THE COOKING-FIRE





Of course such a fire as I have been describing can be used for 

cooking, when it has burned down a little, and there is a bed of hot 

embers in front of the backlog.  But a correct kitchen fire should 

be constructed after another fashion.  What you want now is not 

blaze, but heat, and that not diffused, but concentrated.  You must 

be able to get close to your fire without burning your boots or 

scorching your face.



If you have time and the material, make a fireplace of big stones.  

But not of granite, for that will split with the heat, and perhaps 

fly in your face.



If you are in a hurry and there are no suitable stones at hand, lay 

two good logs nearly parallel with each other, a foot or so apart, 

and build your fire between them.  For a cooking-fire, use split 

wood in short sticks.  Let the first supply burn to glowing coals 

before you begin.  A frying-pan that is lukewarm one minute and red-

hot the next is the abomination of desolation.  If you want black 

toast, have it made before a fresh, sputtering, blazing heap of 

wood.



In fires, as in men, an excess of energy is a lack of usefulness.  

The best work is done without many sparks.  Just enough is the right 

kind of a fire and a feast.



To know how to cook is not a very elegant accomplishment.  Yet there 

are times and seasons when it seems to come in better than 

familiarity with the dead languages, or much skill upon the lute.



You cannot always rely on your guides for a tasteful preparation of 

food.  Many of them are ignorant of the difference between frying 

and broiling, and their notion of boiling a potato or a fish is to 

reduce it to a pulp.  Now and then you find a man who has a natural 

inclination to the culinary art, and who does very well within 

familiar limits.



Old Edouard, the Montaignais Indian who cooked for my friends H. E. 

G. and C. S. D. last summer on the STE. MARGUERITE EN BAS, was such 

a man.  But Edouard could not read, and the only way he could tell 

the nature of the canned provisions was by the pictures on the cans.  

If the picture was strange to him, there was no guessing what he 

would do with the contents of the can.  He was capable of roasting 

strawberries, and serving green peas cold for dessert.  One day a 

can of mullagatawny soup and a can of apricots were handed out to 

him simultaneously and without explanations.  Edouard solved the 

problem by opening both cans and cooking them together.  We had a 

new soup that day, MULLAGATAWNY AUX APRICOTS.  It was not as bad as 

it sounds.  It tasted somewhat like chutney.



The real reason why food that is cooked over an open fire tastes so 

good to us is because we are really hungry when we get it.  The man 

who puts up provisions for camp has a great advantage over the 

dealers who must satisfy the pampered appetite of people in houses.  

I never can get any bacon in New York like that which I buy at a 

little shop in Quebec to take into the woods.  If I ever set up in 

the grocery business, I shall try to get a good trade among anglers.  

It will be easy to please my customers.



The reputation that trout enjoy as a food-fish is partly due to the 

fact that they are usually cooked over an open fire.  In the city 

they never taste as good.  It is not merely a difference in 

freshness.  It is a change in the sauce.  If the truth must be told, 

even by an angler, there are at least five salt-water fish which are 

better than trout,--to eat.  There is none better to catch.





IV



THE SMUDGE-FIRE





But enough of the cooking-fire.  Let us turn now to the subject of 

the smudge, known in Lower Canada as LA BOUCANE.  The smudge owes 

its existence to the pungent mosquito, the sanguinary black-fly, and 

the peppery midge,--LE MARINGOUIN, LA MOUSTIQUE, ET LE BRULOT.  To 

what it owes its English name I do not know; but its French name 

means simply a thick, nauseating, intolerable smoke.



The smudge is called into being for the express purpose of creating 

a smoke of this kind, which is as disagreeable to the mosquito, the 

black-fly, and the midge as it is to the man whom they are 

devouring.  But the man survives the smoke, while the insects 

succumb to it, being destroyed or driven away.  Therefore the 

smudge, dark and bitter in itself, frequently becomes, like 

adversity, sweet in its uses.  It must be regarded as a form of fire 

with which man has made friends under the pressure of a cruel 

necessity.



It would seem as if it ought to be the simplest affair in the world 

to light up a smudge.  And so it is--if you are not trying.



An attempt to produce almost any other kind of a fire will bring 

forth smoke abundantly.  But when you deliberately undertake to 

create a smudge, flames break from the wettest timber, and green 

moss blazes with a furious heat.  You hastily gather handfuls of 

seemingly incombustible material and throw it on the fire, but the 

conflagration increases.  Grass and green leaves hesitate for an 

instant and then flash up like tinder.  The more you put on, the 

more your smudge rebels against its proper task of smudging.  It 

makes a pleasant warmth, to encourage the black-flies; and bright 

light to attract and cheer the mosquitoes.  Your effort is a 

brilliant failure.



The proper way to make a smudge is this.  Begin with a very little, 

lowly fire.  Let it be bright, but not ambitious.  Dont try to make 

a smoke yet.



Then gather a good supply of stuff which seems likely to suppress 

fire without smothering it.  Moss of a certain kind will do, but not 

the soft, feathery moss that grows so deep among the spruce-trees.  

Half-decayed wood is good; spongy, moist, unpleasant stuff, a 

vegetable wet blanket.  The bark of dead evergreen trees, hemlock, 

spruce, or balsam, is better still.  Gather a plentiful store of it.  

But dont try to make a smoke yet.



Let your fire burn a while longer; cheer it up a little.  Get some 

clear, resolute, unquenchable coals aglow in the heart of it.  Dont 

try to make a smoke yet.



Now pile on your smouldering fuel.  Fan it with your hat.  Kneel 

down and blow it, and in ten minutes you will have a smoke that will 

make you wish you had never been born.



That is the proper way to make a smudge.  But the easiest way is to 

ask your guide to make it for you.



If he makes it in an old iron pot, so much the better, for then you 

can move it around to the windward when the breeze veers, and carry 

it into your tent without risk of setting everything on fire, and 

even take it with you in the canoe while you are fishing.



Some of the pleasantest pictures in the anglers gallery of 

remembrance are framed in the smoke that rises from a smudge.



With my eyes shut, I can call up a vision of eight birch-bark canoes 

floating side by side on Moosehead Lake, on a fair June morning, 

fifteen years ago.  They are anchored off Green Island, riding 

easily on the long, gentle waves.  In the stern of each canoe there 

is a guide with a long-handled net; in the bow, an angler with a 

light fly-rod; in the middle, a smudge-kettle, smoking steadily.  In 

the air to the windward of the little fleet hovers a swarm of flies 

drifting down on the shore breeze, with bloody purpose in their 

breasts, but baffled by the protecting smoke.  In the water to the 

leeward plays a school of speckled trout, feeding on the minnows 

that hang around the sunken ledges of rock.  As a larger wave than 

usual passes over the ledges, it lifts the fish up, and you can see 

the big fellows, three, and four, and even five pounds apiece, 

poising themselves in the clear brown water.  A long cast will send 

the fly over one of them.  Let it sink a foot.  Draw it up with a 

fluttering motion.  Now the fish sees it, and turns to catch it.  

There is a yellow gleam in the depth, a sudden swirl on the surface; 

you strike sharply, and the trout is matching his strength against 

the spring of your four ounces of split bamboo.



You can guess at his size, as he breaks water, by the breadth of his 

tail: a pound of weight to an inch of tail,--that is the traditional 

measure, and it usually comes pretty close to the mark, at least in 

the case of large fish.  But it is never safe to record the weight 

until the trout is in the canoe.  As the Canadian hunters say, "Sell 

not the skin of the bear while he carries it."



Now the breeze that blows over Green Island drops away, and the 

smoke of the eight smudge-kettles falls like a thick curtain.  The 

canoes, the dark shores of Norcross Point, the twin peaks of Spencer 

Mountain, the dim blue summit of Katahdin, the dazzling sapphire 

sky, the flocks of fleece-white clouds shepherded on high by the 

western wind, all have vanished.  With closed eyes I see another 

vision, still framed in smoke,--a vision of yesterday.



It is a wild river flowing into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, on the 

COTE NORD, far down towards Labrador.  There is a long, narrow, 

swift pool between two parallel ridges of rock.  Over the ridge on 

the right pours a cataract of pale yellow foam.  At the bottom of 

the pool, the water slides down into a furious rapid, and dashes 

straight through an impassable gorge half a mile to the sea.  The 

pool is full of salmon, leaping merrily in their delight at coming 

into their native stream.  The air is full of black-flies, rejoicing 

in the warmth of the July sun.  On a slippery point of rock, below 

the fall, are two anglers, tempting the fish and enduring the flies.  

Behind them is an old HABITANT raising a mighty column of smoke.



Through the cloudy pillar which keeps back the Egyptian host, you 

see the waving of a long rod.  A silver-gray fly with a barbed tail 

darts out across the pool, swings around with the current, well 

under water, and slowly works past the big rock in the centre, just 

at the head of the rapid.  Almost past it, but not quite: for 

suddenly the fly disappears; the line begins to run out; the reel 

sings sharp and shrill; a salmon is hooked.



But how well is he hooked?  That is the question.  This is no easy 

pool to play a fish in.  There is no chance to jump into a canoe and 

drop below him, and get the current to help you in drowning him.  

You cannot follow him along the shore.  You cannot even lead him 

into quiet water, where the gaffer can creep near to him unseen and 

drag him in with a quick stroke.  You must fight your fish to a 

finish, and all the advantages are on his side.  The current is 

terribly strong.  If he makes up his mind to go downstream to the 

sea, the only thing you can do is to hold him by main force; and 

then it is ten to one that the hook tears out or the leader breaks.



It is not in human nature for one man to watch another handling a 

fish in such a place without giving advice.  "Keep the tip of your 

rod up.  Dont let your reel overrun.  Stir him up a little, he s 

sulking.  Dont let him jig, or youll lose him.  You re playing 

him too hard.  There, he s going to jump again.  Drop your tip.  

Stop him, quick! he s going down the rapid!"



Of course the man who is playing the salmon does not like this.  If 

he is quick-tempered, sooner or later he tells his counsellor to 

shut up.  But if he is a gentle, early-Christian kind of a man, wise 

as a serpent and harmless as a dove, he follows the advice that is 

given to him, promptly and exactly.  Then, when it is all ended, and 

he has seen the big fish, with the line over his shoulder, poised 

for an instant on the crest of the first billow of the rapid, and 

has felt the leader stretch and give and SNAP!--then he can have the 

satisfaction, while he reels in his slack line, of saying to his 

friend, "Well, old man, I did everything just as you told me.  But I 

think if I had pushed that fish a little harder at the beginning, AS 

I WANTED TO, I might have saved him."



But really, of course, the chances were all against it.  In such a 

pool, most of the larger fish get away.  Their weight gives them a 

tremendous pull.  The fish that are stopped from going into the 

rapid, and dragged back from the curling wave, are usually the 

smaller ones.  Here they are,--twelve pounds, eight pounds, six 

pounds, five pounds and a half, FOUR POUNDS!  Is not this the 

smallest salmon that you ever saw?  Not a grilse, you understand, 

but a real salmon, of brightest silver, hall-marked with St. 

Andrews cross.



Now let us sit down for a moment and watch the fish trying to leap 

up the falls.  There is a clear jump of about ten feet, and above 

that an apparently impossible climb of ten feet more up a ladder of 

twisting foam.  A salmon darts from the boiling water at the bottom 

of the fall like an arrow from a bow.  He rises in a beautiful 

curve, fins laid close to his body and tail quivering; but he has 

miscalculated his distance.  He is on the downward curve when the 

water strikes him and tumbles him back.  A bold little fish, not 

more than eighteen inches long, makes a jump at the side of the 

fall, where the water is thin, and is rolled over and over in the 

spray.  A larger salmon rises close beside us with a tremendous 

rush, bumps his nose against a jutting rock, and flops back into the 

pool.  Now comes a fish who has made his calculations exactly.  He 

leaves the pool about eight feet from the foot of the fall, rises 

swiftly, spreads his fins, and curves his tail as if he were flying, 

strikes the water where it is thickest just below the brink, holds 

on desperately, and drives himself, with one last wriggle, through 

the bending stream, over the edge, and up the first step of the 

foaming stairway.  He has obeyed the strongest instinct of his 

nature, and gone up to make love in the highest fresh water that he 

can reach.



The smoke of the smudge-fire is sharp and tearful, but a man can 

learn to endure a good deal of it when he can look through its rings 

at such scenes as these.





V



THE LITTLE FRIENDSHIP-FIRE





There are times and seasons when the angler has no need of any of 

the three fires of which we have been talking.  He sleeps in a 

house.  His breakfast and dinner are cooked for him in a kitchen.  

He is in no great danger from black-flies or mosquitoes.  All he 

needs now, as he sets out to spend a day on the Neversink, or the 

Willowemoc, or the Shepaug, or the Swiftwater, is a good lunch in 

his pocket, and a little friendship-fire to burn pleasantly beside 

him while he eats his frugal fare and prolongs his noonday rest.



This form of fire does less work than any other in the world.  Yet 

it is far from being useless; and I, for one, should be sorry to 

live without it.  Its only use is to make a visible centre of 

interest where there are two or three anglers eating their lunch 

together, or to supply a kind of companionship to a lone fisherman.  

It is kindled and burns for no other purpose than to give you the 

sense of being at home and at ease.  Why the fire should do this, I 

cannot tell, but it does.



You may build your friendship-fire in almost any way that pleases 

you; but this is the way in which you shall build it best.  You have 

no axe, of course, so you must look about for the driest sticks that 

you can find.  Do not seek them close beside the stream, for there 

they are likely to be water-soaked; but go back into the woods a bit 

and gather a good armful of fuel.  Then break it, if you can, into 

lengths of about two feet, and construct your fire in the following 

fashion.



Lay two sticks parallel, and put between them a pile of dried grass, 

dead leaves, small twigs, and the paper in which your lunch was 

wrapped.  Then lay two other sticks crosswise on top of your first 

pair.  Strike your match and touch your kindlings.  As the fire 

catches, lay on other pairs of sticks, each pair crosswise to the 

pair that is below it, until you have a pyramid of flame.  This is 

"a Micmac fire" such as the Indians make in the woods.



Now you can pull off your wading-boots and warm your feet at the 

blaze.  You can toast your bread if you like.  You can even make 

shift to broil one of your trout, fastened on the end of a birch 

twig if you have a fancy that way.  When your hunger is satisfied, 

you shake out the crumbs for the birds and the squirrels, pick up a 

stick with a coal at the end to light your pipe, put some more wood 

on your fire, and settle down for an hours reading if you have a 

book in your pocket, or for a good talk if you have a comrade with 

you.



The stream of time flows swift and smooth, by such a fire as this.  

The moments slip past unheeded; the sun sinks down his western arch; 

the shadows begin to fall across the brook; it is time to move on 

for the afternoon fishing.  The fire has almost burned out.  But do 

not trust it too much.  Throw some sand over it, or bring a hatful 

of water from the brook to pour on it, until you are sure that the 

last glowing ember is extinguished, and nothing but the black coals 

and the charred ends of the sticks are left.



Even the little friendship-fire must keep the law of the bush.  All 

lights out when their purpose is fulfilled!







VI



ALTARS OF REMEMBRANCE





It is a question that we have often debated, in the informal 

meetings of our Petrine Club: Which is pleasanter,--to fish an old 

stream, or a new one?



The younger members are all for the "fresh woods and pastures new."  

They speak of the delight of turning off from the high-road into 

some faintly-marked trail; following it blindly through the forest, 

not knowing how far you have to go; hearing the voice of waters 

sounding through the woodland; leaving the path impatiently and 

striking straight across the underbrush; scrambling down a steep 

bank, pushing through a thicket of alders, and coming out suddenly, 

face to face with a beautiful, strange brook.  It reminds you, of 

course, of some old friend.  It is a little like the Beaverkill, or 

the Ausable, or the Gale River.  And yet it is different.  Every 

stream has its own character and disposition.  Your new acquaintance 

invites you to a day of discoveries.  If the water is high, you will 

follow it down, and have easy fishing.  If the water is low, you 

will go upstream, and fish "fine and far-off."  Every turn in the 

avenue which the little river has made for you opens up a new view,--

a rocky gorge where the deep pools are divided by white-footed 

falls; a lofty forest where the shadows are deep and the trees arch 

overhead; a flat, sunny stretch where the stream is spread out, and 

pebbly islands divide the channels, and the big fish are lurking at 

the sides in the sheltered corners under the bushes.  From scene to 

scene you follow on, delighted and expectant, until the night 

suddenly drops its veil, and then you will be lucky if you can find 

your way home in the dark!



Yes, it is all very good, this exploration of new streams.  But, for 

my part, I like still better to go back to a familiar little river, 

and fish or dream along the banks where I have dreamed and fished 

before.  I know every bend and curve: the sharp turn where the water 

runs under the roots of the old hemlock-tree; the snaky glen, where 

the alders stretch their arms far out across the stream; the meadow 

reach, where the trout are fat and silvery, and will only rise about 

sunrise or sundown, unless the day is cloudy; the Naiads Elbow, 

where the brook rounds itself, smooth and dimpled, to embrace a 

cluster of pink laurel-bushes.  All these I know; yes, and almost 

every current and eddy and backwater I know long before I come to 

it.  I remember where I caught the big trout the first year I came 

to the stream; and where I lost a bigger one.  I remember the pool 

where there were plenty of good fish last year, and wonder whether 

they are there now.



Better things than these I remember: the companions with whom I have 

followed the stream in days long past; the rendezvous with a comrade 

at the place where the rustic bridge crosses the brook; the hours of 

sweet converse beside the friendship-fire; the meeting at twilight 

with my lady Graygown and the children, who have come down by the 

wood-road to walk home with me.



Surely it is pleasant to follow an old stream.  Flowers grow along 

its banks which are not to be found anywhere else in the wide world.  

"There is rosemary, that s for remembrance; and there is pansies, 

that s for thoughts!"



One May evening, a couple of years since, I was angling in the 

Swiftwater, and came upon Joseph Jefferson, stretched out on a large 

rock in midstream, and casting the fly down a long pool.  He had 

passed the threescore years and ten, but he was as eager and as 

happy as a boy in his fishing.



"You here!" I cried.  "What good fortune brought you into these 

waters?"



"Ah," he answered, "I fished this brook forty-five years ago.  It 

was in the Paradise Valley that I first thought of Rip Van Winkle.  

I wanted to come back again for the sake of old times."



But what has all this to do with an open fire?  I will tell you.  It 

is at the places along the stream, where the little flames of love 

and friendship have been kindled in bygone days, that the past 

returns most vividly.  These are the altars of remembrance.



It is strange how long a small fire will leave its mark.  The 

charred sticks, the black coals, do not decay easily.  If they lie 

well up the hank, out of reach of the spring floods, they will stay 

there for years.  If you have chanced to build a rough fireplace of 

stones from the brook, it seems almost as if it would last forever.



There is a mossy knoll beneath a great butternut-tree on the 

Swiftwater where such a fireplace was built four years ago; and 

whenever I come to that place now I lay the rod aside, and sit down 

for a little while by the fast-flowing water, and remember.



This is what I see: A man wading up the stream, with a creel over 

his shoulder, and perhaps a dozen trout in it; two little lads in 

gray corduroys running down the path through the woods to meet him, 

one carrying a frying-pan and a kettle, the other with a basket of 

lunch on his arm.  Then I see the bright flames leaping up in the 

fireplace, and hear the trout sizzling in the pan, and smell the 

appetizing odour.  Now I see the lads coming back across the foot-

bridge that spans the stream, with a bottle of milk from the nearest 

farmhouse.  They are laughing and teetering as they balance along 

the single plank.  Now the table is spread on the moss.  How good 

the lunch tastes!  Never were there such pink-fleshed trout, such 

crisp and savoury slices of broiled bacon.  Douglas, (the beloved 

doll that the younger lad shamefacedly brings out from the pocket of 

his jacket,) must certainly have some of it.  And after the lunch is 

finished, and the birds portion has been scattered on the moss, we 

creep carefully on our hands and knees to the edge of the brook, and 

look over the bank at the big trout that is poising himself in the 

amber water.  We have tried a dozen times to catch him, but never 

succeeded.  The next time, perhaps--



Well, the fireplace is still standing.  The butternut-tree spreads 

its broad branches above the stream.  The violets and the bishops-

caps and the wild anemones are sprinkled over the banks.  The 

yellow-throat and the water-thrush and the vireos still sing the 

same tunes in the thicket.  And the elder of the two lads often 

comes back with me to that pleasant place and shares my fishermans 

luck beside the Swiftwater.



But the younger lad?



Ah, my little Barney, you have gone to follow a new stream,--clear 

as crystal,--flowing through fields of wonderful flowers that never 

fade.  It is a strange river to Teddy and me; strange and very far 

away.  Some day we shall see it with you; and you will teach us the 

names of those blossoms that do not wither.  But till then, little 

Barney, the other lad and I will follow the old stream that flows by 

the woodland fireplace,--your altar.



Rue grows here.  Yes, there is plenty of rue.  But there is also 

rosemary, that s for remembrance!  And close beside it I see a 

little hearts-ease.







A SLUMBER SONG



FOR THE FISHERMAN'S CHILD





Furl your sail, my little boatie;

    Here s the haven, still and deep,

Where the dreaming tides, in-streaming,

         Up the channel creep.

See, the sunset breeze is dying;

Hark, the plover, landward flying,

Softly down the twilight crying;

    Come to anchor, little boatie,

        In the port of Sleep.



Far away, my little boatie,

    Roaring waves are white with foam;

Ships are striving, onward driving,

        Day and night they roam.

Father s at the deep-sea trawling,

In the darkness, rowing, hauling,

While the hungry winds are calling,--

    God protect him, little boatie,

        Bring him safely home!



Not for you, my little boatie,

    Is the wide and weary sea;

You re too slender, and too tender,

        You must rest with me.

All day long you have been straying

Up and down the shore and playing;

Come to port, make no delaying!

    Day is over, little boatie,

        Night falls suddenly.



Furl your sail, my little boatie;

    Fold your wings, my tired dove.

Dews are sprinkling, stars are twinkling

        Drowsily above.

Cease from sailing, cease from rowing;

Rock upon the dream-tide, knowing

Safely oer your rest are glowing,

    All the night, my little boatie, 

        Harbour-lights of love.









End 
