


God the Known and God the Unknown

by Samuel Butler


                         Prefatory Note         "GOD the Known and God the Unknown" first appeared in the form of  a series of articles which were published in "The Examiner" in  May, June, and July, 1879.  Samuel Butler subsequently revised  the text of his work, presumably with the intention of  republishing it, though he never carried the intention into  effect.  In the present edition I have followed his revised  version almost without deviation.  I have, however, retained a  few passages which Butler proposed to omit, partly because they  appear to me to render the course of his argument clearer, and  partly because they contain characteristic thoughts and  expressions of which none of his admirers would wish to be  deprived.  In the list of Butler's works "God the Known and God  the Unknown" follows "Life and Habit," which appeared in 1877,  and "Evolution, Old and New," which was published in May, 1879.   It is scarcely necessary to point out that the three works are  closely akin in subject and treatment, and that "God the Known  and God the Unknown" will gain in interest by being considered in  relation to its predecessors.

                      R.  A.  STREATFEILD ------------------------------------------------

                        God the Known and                          God the Unknown

                        BY SAMUEL BUTLER

                                    CHAPTER 1                                   INTRODUCTION         MANKIND has ever been ready to discuss matters in the inverse  ratio of their importance, so that the more closely a question is  felt to touch the hearts of all of us, the more incumbent it is  considered upon prudent people to profess that it does not exist,  to frown it down, to tell it to hold its tongue, to maintain that  it has long been finally settled, so that there is now no  question concerning it.

So far, indeed, has this been carried through all time past that  the actions which are most important to us, such as our passage  through the embryonic stages, the circulation of our blood, our  respiration, etc.  etc., have long been formulated beyond all  power of reopening question concerning them - the mere fact or  manner of their being done at all being ranked among the great  discoveries of recent ages.  Yet the analogy of past settlements  would lead us to suppose that so much unanimity was not arrived  at all at once, but rather that it must have been preceded by  much smouldering [sic] discontent, which again was followed by  open warfare; and that even after a settlement had been  ostensibly arrived at, there was still much secret want of  conviction on the part of many for several generations.

There are many who see nothing in this tendency of our nature but  occasion for sarcasm; those, on the other hand, who hold that the  world is by this time old enough to be the best judge concerning  the management of its own affairs will scrutinise [sic] this  management with some closeness before they venture to satirise  [sic] it; nor will they do so for long without finding  justification for its apparent recklessness; for we must all fear  responsibility upon matters about which we feel we know but  little; on the other hand we must all continually act, and for  the most part promptly.  We do so, therefore, with greater  security when we can persuade both ourselves and others that a  matter is already pigeon-holed than if we feel that we must use  our own judgment for the collection, interpretation, and  arrangement of the papers which deal with it.  Moreover, our  action is thus made to appear as if it received collective  sanction; and by so appearing it receives it.  Almost any  settlement, again, is felt to be better than none, and the more  nearly a matter comes home to everyone, the more important is it  that it should be treated as a sleeping dog, and be let to lie,  for if one person begins to open his mouth, fatal developments  may arise in the Babel that will follow.

It is not difficult, indeed, to show that, instead of having  reason to complain of the desire for the postponement of  important questions, as though the world were composed mainly of  knaves or fools, such fixity as animal and vegetable forms  possess is due to this very instinct.  For if there had been no  reluctance, if there were no friction and vis inertae to  be encountered even after a  theoretical equilibrium had been  upset, we  should have had no fixed organs nor settled   proclivities, but should have been daily and  hourly undergoing  Protean transformations,  and have still been throwing out  pseudopodia like the amoeba.  True, we might have come to like  this fashion of living as well as our more steady-going system if  we had taken to it many millions of ages ago when we were yet  young; but we have contracted other habits which have become so  confirmed that we cannot break with them.  We therefore now hate  that which we should perhaps have loved if we had practised [sic]  it.  This, however, does not affect the argument, for our concern  is with our likes and dislikes, not with the manner in which  those likes and dislikes have come about.  The discovery that  organism is capable of modification at all has occasioned so much  astonishment that it has taken the most enlightened part of the  world more than a hundred years to leave off expressing its  contempt for such a crude, shallow, and preposterous conception.   Perhaps in another hundred years we shall learn to admire the  good sense, endurance, and thorough Englishness of organism in  having been so averse to change, even more than its versatility  in having been willing to change so much.

Nevertheless, however conservative we may be, and however much  alive to the folly and wickedness of tampering with settled  convictions-no matter what they are-without sufficient cause,  there is yet such a constant though gradual change in our  surroundings as necessitates corresponding modification in our  ideas, desires, and actions.  We may think that we should like to  find ourselves always in the same surroundings as our ancestors,  so that we might be guided at every touch and turn by the  experience of our race, and be saved from all self-communing or  interpretation of oracular responses uttered by the facts around  us.  Yet the facts will change their utterances in spite of us;  and we, too, change with age and ages in spite of ourselves, so  as to see the facts around us as perhaps even more changed than  they actually are.  It has been said, "Tempora mutantur nos et  mutamur in illis." The passage would have been no less true  if it had stood, "Nos mutamur et tempora mutantur in  nobis." Whether the organism or the surroundings began  changing first is a matter of such small moment that the two may  be left to fight it out between themselves; but, whichever view  is taken, the fact will remain that whenever the relations  between the organism and its surroundings have been changed, the  organism must either succeed in putting the surroundings into  harmony with itself, or itself into harmony with the  surroundings; or must be made so uncomfortable as to be unable to  remember itself as subjected to any such difficulties, and there fore to die through inability to recognise [sic] its own identity  further.

Under these circumstances, organism must act in one or other of  these two ways: it must either change slowly and continuously  with the surroundings, paying cash for everything, meeting the  smallest change with a corresponding modification so far as is  found convenient; or it must put off change as long as possible,  and then make larger and more sweeping changes.

Both these courses are the same in principle, the difference  being only one of scale, and the one being a miniature of the  other, as a ripple is an Atlantic wave in little; both have their  advantages and disadvantages, so that most organisms will take  the one course for one set of things and the other for another.   They will deal promptly with things which they can get at easily,  and which lie more upon the surface; those, however, which are  more troublesome to reach, and lie deeper, will be handled upon  more cataclysmic principles, being allowed longer periods of  repose followed by short periods of greater activity.

Animals breathe and circulate their blood by a little action many  times a minute; but they feed, some of them, only two or three  times a day, and breed for the most part not more than once a  year, their breeding season being much their busiest time.  It is  on the first principle that the modification of animal forms has  proceeded mainly; but it may be questioned whether what is called  a sport is not the organic expression of discontent which has  been long felt, but which has not been attended to, nor been met  step by step by as much small remedial modification as was found  practicable: so that when a change does come it comes by way of  revolution.  Or, again (only that it comes to much the same  thing), a sport may be compared to one of those happy thoughts  which sometimes come to us unbidden after we have been thinking  for a long time what to do, or how to arrange our ideas, and have  yet been unable to arrive at any conclusion.

So with politics, the smaller the matter the prompter, as a  general rule, the settlement; on the other hand, the more  sweeping the change that is felt to be necessary, the longer it  will be deferred.

The advantages of dealing with the larger questions by more  cataclysmic methods are obvious.  For, in the first place, all  composite things must have a system, or arrangement of parts, so  that some parts shall depend upon and be grouped round others, as  in the articulation of a skeleton and the arrangement of muscles,  nerves, tendons, etc., which are attached to it.  To meddle with  the skeleton is like taking up the street, or the flooring of  one's house; it so upsets our arrangements that we put it off  till whatever else is found wanted, or whatever else seems likely  to be wanted for a long time hence, can be done at the same time.   Another advantage is in the rest which is given to the attention  during the long hollows, so to speak, of the waves between the  periods of resettlement.  Passion and prejudice have time to calm  down, and when attention is next directed to the same question,  it is a refreshed and invigorated attention-an attention,  moreover, which may be given with the help of new lights derived  from other quarters that were not luminous when the question was  last considered.  Thirdly, it is more easy and safer to make such  alterations as  experience has proved to be necessary than to  forecast what is going to be wanted.  Reformers are like  paymasters, of whom there are only two bad kinds, those who pay  too soon, and those who do not pay at all.



                           CHAPTER II

                          COMMON GROUND

I HAVE now, perhaps, sufficiently proved my sympathy with the  reluctance felt by many to tolerate discussion upon such a  subject as the existence and nature of God.  I trust that I may  have made the reader feel that he need fear no sarcasm or levity  in my treatment of the subject which I have chosen.  I will,  therefore, proceed to sketch out a plan of what I hope to  establish, and this in no doubtful or unnatural sense, but by  attaching the same meanings to words as those which we usually  attach to them, and with the same certainty, precision, and  clearness as anything else is established which is commonly  called known.

As to what God is, beyond the fact that he is the Spirit and the  Life which creates, governs, and upholds all living things, I can  say nothing.  I cannot pretend that I can show more than others  have done in what Spirit and the Life consists, which governs  living things and animates them.  I cannot show the connection  between consciousness and the will, and the organ, much less can  I tear away the veil from the face of God, so as to show wherein  will and consciousness consist.  No philosopher, whether Christian  or Rationalist, has attempted this without discomfiture; but I  can, I hope, do two things: Firstly, I can demonstrate, perhaps  more clearly than modern science is prepared to admit, that there  does exist a single Being or Animator of all living things - a  single Spirit, whom we cannot think of under any meaner name than  God; and, secondly, I can show something more of the  persona or bodily expression, mask, and mouthpiece of this  vast Living Spirit than I know of as having been familiarly  expressed elsewhere, or as being accessible to myself or others,  though doubtless many works exist in which what I am going to say  has been already said.

Aware that much of this is widely accepted under the name of  Pantheism, I venture to think it differs from Pantheism with all  the difference that exists between a coherent, intelligible  conception and an incoherent unintelligible one.  I shall  therefore proceed to examine the doctrine called Pantheism, and  to show how incomprehensible and valueless it is.

I will then indicate the Living and Personal God about whose  existence and about many of whose attributes there is no room for  question; I will show that man has been so far made in the  likeness of this Person or God, that He possesses all its  essential characteristics, and that it is this God who has called  man and all other living forms, whether animals or plants, into  existence, so that our bodies are the temples of His spirit; that  it is this which sustains them in their life and growth, who is  one with them, living, moving, and having His being in them; in  whom, also, they live and move, they in Him and He in them; He  being not a Trinity in Unity only, but an Infinity in Unity, and  a Unity in an Infinity; eternal in time past, for so much time at  least that our minds can come no nearer to eternity than this;  eternal for the future as long as the universe shall exist; ever  changing, yet the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.  And I  will show this with so little ambiguity that it shall be  perceived not as a phantom or hallucination following upon a  painful straining of the mind and a vain endeavour [sic] to give  coherency to incoherent and inconsistent ideas, but with the same  ease, comfort, and palpable flesh-and-blood clearness with which  we see those near to us ; whom, though we see them at the best as  through a glass darkly, we still see face to face, even as we are  ourselves seen.

I will also show in what way this Being exercises a moral  government over the world, and rewards and punishes us according  to His own laws.

Having done this I shall proceed to compare this conception of  God with those that are currently accepted, and will endeavour  [sic] to show that the ideas now current are in truth efforts to  grasp the one on which I shall here insist.  Finally, I shall  persuade the reader that the differences between the so-called  atheist and the so-called theist are differences rather about  words than things, inasmuch as not even the most prosaic of  modern scientists will be inclined to deny the existence of this  God, while few theists will feel that this, the natural  conception of God, is a less worthy one than that to which they  have been accustomed.  


                           CHAPTER III

                           PANTHEISM.  I

THE Rev.  J.  H.  Blunt, in his "Dictionary of Sects, Heresies,  etc.," defines Pantheists as "those who hold that God is  everything, and everything is God."

If it is granted that the value of words lies in the definiteness  and coherency of the ideas that present themselves to us when the  words are heard or spoken-then such a sentence as "God is  everything and everything is God" is worthless.

For we have so long associated the word "God" with the idea of a  Living Person, who can see, hear, will, feel pleasure,  displeasure, etc., that we cannot think of God, and also of  something which we have not been accustomed to think of as a  Living Person, at one and the same time, so as to connect the two  ideas and fuse them into a coherent thought.  While we are  thinking of the one, our minds involuntarily exclude the other,  and vice versa; so that it is as impossible for us to  think of anything as God, or as forming part of God, which we  cannot also think of as a Person, or as a part of a Person, as it  is to produce a hybrid between two widely distinct animals.  If I  am not mistaken, the barrenness of inconsistent ideas, and the  sterility of widely distant species or genera of plants and  animals, are one in principle-sterility of hybrids being due to  barrenness of ideas, and barrenness of ideas arising from  inability to fuse unfamiliar thoughts into a coherent conception.   I have insisted on this at some length in "Life and Habit," but  can do so no further here.  (Footnote: Butler returned to this  subject in "Luck, or cunning?" which was originally published in  1887.

In like manner we have so long associated the word "Person" with  the idea of a substantial visible body, limited in extent, and  animated by an invisible something which we call Spirit, that we  can think of nothing as a person which does not also bring these  ideas before us.  Any attempt to make us imagine God as a Person  who does not fulfil [sic] the conditions which our ideas attach  to the word "person," is ipso facto atheistic, as  rendering the word God without meaning, and therefore without  reality, and therefore non-existent to us.  Our ideas are like  our organism, they will stand a vast amount of modification if it  is effected slowly and without shock, but the life departs out of  them, leaving the form of an idea without the power thereof, if  they are jarred too rudely.

Any being, then, whom we can imagine as God, must have all the  qualities, capabilities, and also all the limitations which are  implied when the word "person" is used.

But, again, we cannot conceive of "everything" as a person.   "Everything" must comprehend all that is to be found on earth, or  outside of it, and we know of no such persons as this.  When we  say "persons" we intend living people with flesh and blood;  sometimes we extend our conceptions to animals and plants, but we  have not hitherto done so as generally as I hope we shall some  day come to do.  Below animals and plants we have never in any  seriousness gone.  All that we have been able to regard as  personal has had what we can call a living body, even though that  body is vegetable only; and this body has been tangible, and has  been comprised within certain definite limits, or within limits  which have at any rate struck the eye as definite.  And every part  within these limits has been animated by an unseen something  which we call soul or spirit.  A person must be a persona- that is to say, the living mask and mouthpiece of an energy  saturating it, and speaking through it.  It must be animate in all  its parts.

But "everything" is not animate.  Animals and plants alone produce  in us those ideas which can make reasonable people call them  "persons" with consistency of intention.  We can conceive of each  animal and of each plant as a person; we can conceive again of a  compound person like the coral polypes [sic], or like a tree  which is composed of a congeries of subordinate persons,  inasmuch as each bud is a separate and individual plant.  We can  go farther than this, and, as I shall hope to show, we ought to  do so; that is to say, we shall find it easier and more agreeable  with our other ideas to go farther than not; for we should see  all animal and vegetable life as united by a subtle and till  lately invisible ramification, so that all living things are one  tree-like growth, forming a single person.  But we cannot conceive  of oceans, continents, and air as forming parts of a person at  all; much less can we think of them as forming one person with  the living forms that inhabit them.

To ask this of us is like asking us to see the bowl and the water  in which three gold-fish are swimming as part of the gold-fish.   We cannot do it any more than we can do something physically  impossible.  We can see the gold-fish as forming one family, and  therefore as in a way united to the personality of the parents  from which they sprang, and therefore as members one of another,  and therefore as forming a single growth of gold-fish, as boughs  and buds unite to form a tree; but we cannot by any effort of the  imagination introduce the bowl and the water into the  personality, for we have never been accustomed to think of such  things as living and personal.  Those, therefore, who tell us that  "God is everything, and everything is God," require us to see  "everything" as a person, which we cannot; or God as not a  person, which again we cannot.

Continuing the article of Mr.  Blunt from which I have already  quoted, I read :-

"Linus, in a passage which has been preserved by Stobaeus,  exactly expresses the notion afterwards adopted by Spinoza: 'One  sole energy governs all things; all things are unity, and each  portion is All; for of one integer all things were born; in the  end of time all things shall again become unity; the unity of  multiplicity.'  Orpheus, his disciple, taught no other doctrine."

According to Pythagoras, "an adept in the Orphic philosophy,"  "the soul of the world is the Divine energy which interpenetrates  every portion of the mass, and the soul of man is an efflux of  that energy.  The world, too, is an exact impress of the Eternal  Idea, which is the mind of God."  John Scotus Erigena taught that  "all is God and God is all."  William of Champeaux, again, two  hundred years later, maintained that "all individuality is one in  substance, and varies only in its non-essential accidents and  transient properties." Amalric of Bena and David of Dinant  followed the theory out "into a thoroughgoing Pantheism."   Amalric held that "All is God and God is all.  The Creator and the  creature are one Being.  Ideas are at once creative and created,  subjective and objective.  God is the end of all, and all return  to Him.  As every variety of humanity forms one manhood, so the  world contains individual forms of one eternal essence."  David  of Dinant only varied upon this by "imagining a corporeal unity.   Although body, soul, and eternal substance are three, these three  are one and the same being."

Giordano Bruno maintained the world of sense to be "a vast animal  having the Deity for its living.  soul." The inanimate part of the  world is thus excluded from participation in the Deity, and a  conception that our minds can embrace is offered us instead of  one which they cannot entertain, except as in a dream,  incoherently.  But without such a view of evolution as was  prevalent at the beginning of this century, it was impossible to  see "the world of sense" intelligently, as forming "a vast  animal."  Unless, therefore, Giordano Bruno held the opinions of  Buffon, Dr.  Erasmus Darwin, and Lamarck, with more definiteness  than I am yet aware of his having done, his contention must be  considered as a splendid prophecy, but as little more than a  prophecy.  He continues, "Birth is expansion from the one centre  of Life; life is its continuance, and death is the necessary  return of the ray to the centre of light." This begins finely,  but ends mystically.  I have not, however, compared the English  translation with the original, and must reserve a fuller  examination of Giordano Bruno's teaching for another opportunity.

Spinoza disbelieved in the world rather than in God.  He was an  Acosmist, to use Jacobi's expression, rather than an Atheist.   According to him, "the Deity and the Universe are but one  substance, at the same time both spirit and matter, thought and  extension, which are the only known attributes of the Deity."

My readers will, I think, agree with me that there is very little  of the above which conveys ideas with the fluency and comfort  which accompany good words.  Words are like servants: it is not  enough that we should have them-we must have the most able and  willing that we can find, and at the smallest wages that will  content them.  Having got them we must make the best and not the  worst of them.  Surely, in the greater part of what has been  quoted above, the words are barren letters only: they do not  quicken within us and enable us to conceive a thought, such as we  can in our turn impress upon dead matter, and mould [sic] that  matter into another shape than its own, through the thought which  has become alive within us.  No offspring of ideas has followed  upon them, or, if any at all, yet in such unwonted shape, and  with such want of alacrity, that we loathe them as malformations  and miscarriages of our minds.  Granted that if we examine them  closely we shall at length find them to embody a little germ of  truth-that is to say, of coherency with our other ideas; but  there is too little truth in proportion to the trouble necessary  to get at it.  We can get more truth, that is to say, more  coherency-for truth and coherency are one-for less trouble in  other ways.

But it may be urged that the beginnings of all tasks are  difficult and unremunerative, and that later developments of  Pantheism may be more intelligible than the earlier ones.   Unfortunately, this is not the case.  On continuing Mr.  Blunt's  article, I find the later Pantheists a hundredfold more  perplexing than the earlier ones.  With Kant, Schelling, Fichte,  and Hegel, we feel that we are with men who have been decoyed  into a hopeless quagmire; we understand nothing of their  language-we doubt whether they understand themselves, and feel  that we can do nothing with them but look at them and pass them  by.

In my next chapter I propose to show the end which the early  Pantheists were striving after, and the reason and naturalness of  their error.


                           CHAPTER IV

                          PANTHEISM.  II

The earlier Pantheists were misled by the endeavour [sic] to lay  hold of two distinct ideas, the one of which was a reality that  has since been grasped and is of inestimable value, the other a  phantom which has misled all who have followed it.  The reality is  the unity of Life, the oneness of the guiding and animating  spirit which quickens animals and plants, so that they are all  the outcome and expression of a common mind, and are in truth one  animal; the phantom is the endeavour [sic] to find the origin of  things, to reach the fountain-head of all energy, and thus to lay  the foundations on which a philosophy may be constructed which  none can accuse of being baseless, or of arguing in a circle.

In following as through a thick wood after the phantom our  forefathers from time to time caught glimpses of the reality,  which seemed so wonderful as it eluded them, and flitted back  again into the thickets, that they declared it must be the  phantom they were in search of, which was thus evidenced as  actually existing.  Whereon, instead of mastering such of the  facts they met with as could be captured easily-which facts would  have betrayed the hiding-places of others, and these again of  others, and so ad infinitum-they overlooked what was  within their reach, and followed hotly through brier and brake  after an imaginary greater prize.

Great thoughts are not to be caught in this way.  They must  present themselves for capture of their own free will, or be  taken after a little coyness only.  They are like wealth and  power, which, if a man is not born to them, are the more likely  to take him, the more he has restrained himself from an attempt  to snatch them.  They hanker after those only who have tamed their  nearer thoughts.  Nevertheless, it is impossible not to feel that  the early Pantheists were true prophets and seers, though the  things were unknown to them without which a complete view was  unattainable.  What does Linus mean, we ask ourselves, when he  says :- "One sole energy governs all things" ? How can one sole  energy govern, we will say, the reader and the chair on which he  sits? What is meant by an energy governing a chair? If by an  effort we have made ourselves believe we understand something  which can be better expressed by these words than by any others,  no sooner do we turn our backs than the ideas so painfully  collected fly apart again.  No matter how often we go in search of  them, and force them into juxtaposition, they prove to have none  of that innate coherent power with which ideas combine that we  can hold as true and profitable.

Yet if Linus had confined his statement to living things, and had  said that one sole energy governed all plants and animals, he  would have come near both to being intelligible and true.  For if,  as we now believe, all animals and plants are descended from a  single cell, they must be considered as cousins to one another,  and as forming a single tree-like animal, every individual plant  or animal of which is as truly one and the same person with the  primordial cell as the oak a thousand years old is one and the  same plant with the acorn out of which it has grown.  This is  easily understood, but will, I trust, be made to appear simpler  presently.

When Linus says, "All things are unity, and each portion is All;  for of one integer all things were born," it is impossible for  plain people-who do not wish to use words unless they mean the  same things by them as both they and others have been in the  habit of meaning-to understand what is intended.  How can each  portion be all? How can one Londoner be all London? I know that  this, too, can in a way be shown, but the resulting idea is too  far to fetch, and when fetched does not fit in well enough with  our other ideas to give it practical and commercial value.  How,  again, can all things be said to be born of one integer, unless  the statement is confined to living things, which can alone be  born at all, and unless a theory of evolution is intended, such  as Linus would hardly have accepted?

Yet limit the "all things" to "all living things," grant the  theory of evolution, and explain "each portion is All" to mean  that all life is akin, and possesses the same essential  fundamental characteristics, and it is surprising how nearly  Linus approaches both to truth and intelligibility.

It may be said that the animate and the inanimate have the same  fundamental substance, so that a chair might rot and be absorbed  by grass, which grass might be eaten by a cow, which cow might be  eaten by a man; and by similar processes the man might become a  chair; but these facts are not presented to the mind by saying  that "one energy governs all things"-a chair, we will say, and a  man; we could only say that one energy governed a man and a  chair, if the chair were a reasonable living person, who was  actively and consciously engaged in helping the man to attain a  certain end, unless, that is to say, we are to depart from all  usual interpretation of words, in which case we invalidate the  advantages of language and all the sanctions of morality.

"All things shall again become unity" is intelligible as meaning  that all things probably have come from a single elementary  substance, say hydrogen or what not, and that they will return to  it; but the explanation of unity as being the "unity of  multiplicity" puzzles; if there is any meaning it is too  recondite to be of service to us.

What, again, is meant by saying that "the soul of the world is  the Divine energy which interpenetrates every portion of the  mass" ? The soul of the world is an expression which, to myself,  and, I should imagine, to most people, is without propriety.  We  cannot think of the world except as earth, air, and water, in  this or that state, on and in which there grow plants and  animals.  What is meant by saying that earth has a soul, and  lives?  Does it move from place to place erratically? Does it  feed? Does it reproduce itself? Does it make such noises, or  commit such vagaries as shall make us say that it feels? Can it  achieve its ends, and fail of achieving them through mistake? If  it cannot, how has it a soul more than a dead man has a soul, out  of whom we say that the soul has departed, and whose body we  conceive of as returning to dead earth, inasmuch as it is now  soulless? Is there any unnatural violence which can be done to  our thoughts by which we can bring the ideas of a soul and of  water, or of a stone into combination, and keep them there for  long together?  The ancients, indeed, said they believed their  rivers to be gods, and carved likenesses of them under the forms  of men ; but even supposing this to have been their real mind,  can it by any conceivable means become our own? Granted that a  stone is kept from falling to dust by an energy which compels its  particles to cohere, which energy can be taken out of it and  converted into some other form of energy; granted (which may or  may not be true) also, that the life of a living body is only the  energy which keeps the particles which compose it in a certain  disposition; and granted that the energy of the stone may be  convertible into the energy of a living form, and that thus,  after a long journey a tired idea may lag after the sound of such  words as "the soul of the world." Granted all the above,  nevertheless to speak of the world as having a soul is not  sufficiently in harmony with our common notions, nor does it go  sufficiently with the grain of our thoughts to render the  expression a meaning one, or one that can be now used with any  propriety or fitness, except by those who do not know their own  meaninglessness.  Vigorous minds will harbour [sic] vigorous  thoughts only, or such as bid fair to become so; and vigorous  thoughts are always simple, definite, and in harmony with  everyday ideas.

We can imagine a soul as living in the lowest slime that moves,  feeds, reproduces itself, remembers, and dies.  The amoeba wants  things, knows it wants them, alters itself so as to try and alter  them, thus preparing for an intended modification of outside  matter by a preliminary modification of itself.  It thrives if  the modification from within is followed by the desired  modification in the external object; it knows that it is well,  and breeds more freely in consequence.  If it cannot get hold of  outside matter, or cannot proselytise [sic] that matter and  persuade it to see things through its own (the amoeba's)  spectacles-if it cannot convert that matter, if the matter  persists in disagreeing with it-its spirits droop, its  soul is disquieted within it, it becomes listless like a  withering flower-it languishes and dies.  We cannot imagine a  thing to live at all and yet be soulless except in sleep for a  short time, and even so not quite soulless.  The idea of a soul,  or of that unknown something for which the word "soul" is our  hieroglyphic, and the idea of living organism, unite so  spontaneously, and stick together so inseparably, that no matter  how often we sunder them they will elude our vigilance and come  together, like true lovers, in spite of us.  Let us not attempt to  divorce ideas that have so long been wedded together.

I submit, then, that Pantheism, even as explained by those who  had entered on the outskirts only of its great morass,  nevertheless holds out so little hope of leading to any  comfortable conclusion that it will be more reasonable to occupy  our minds with other matter than to follow Pantheism further.  The  Pantheists speak of a person without meaning a person; they speak  of a" him" and a "he" without having in their minds the idea of a  living person with all its inevitable limitations.  Pantheism is,  therefore, as is said by Mr.  Blunt in another article,  "practically nothing else than Atheism; it has no belief in a  personal deity overruling the affairs of the world, as Divine  Providence, and is, therefore, Atheistic," and again, "Theism  believes in a spirit superior to matter, and so does Pantheism;  but the spirit of Theism is self-conscious, and therefore  personal and of individual existence-a nature per se, and  upholding all things by an active control; while Pantheism  believes in spirit that is of a higher nature than brute matter,  but is a mere unconscious principle of life, impersonal,  irrational as the brute matter that it quickens."

If this verdict concerning Pantheism is true-and from all I can  gather it is as nearly true as anything can be said to be which  is predicated of an incoherent idea-the Pantheistic God is an  attempt to lay hold of a truth which has nevertheless eluded its  pursuers.

In my next chapter I will consider the commonly received,  orthodox conception of God, and compare it with the Pantheistic.   I will show that it, too, is Atheistic, inasmuch as, in spite of  its professing to give us a conception of God, it raises no ideas  in our minds of a person or Living Being-and a God who is not  this is non-existent.  


                            CHAPTER V                                    ORTHODOX THEISM           We have seen that Pantheism fails to satisfy, inasmuch as it  requires us to mean something different by the word "God" from  what we have been in the habit of meaning.  I have already said-I  fear, too often-that no conception of God can have any value or  meaning for us which does not involve his existence as an  independent Living Person of ineffable wisdom and power,  vastness, and duration both in the past and for the future.  If  such a Being as this can be found existing and made evident,  directly or indirectly, to human senses, there is a God.  If  otherwise, there is no God, or none, at any rate, so far as we  can know, none with whom we need concern ourselves.  No conscious  personality, no God.  An impersonal God is as much a contradiction  in terms as an impersonal person.

Unfortunately, when we question orthodox theology closely, we  find that it supposes God to be a person who has no material body  such as could come within the range of any human sense, and make  an impression upon it.  He is supposed to be of a spiritual nature  only, except in so far as one part of his triune personality is,  according to the Athanasian Creed, "perfect man, of a reasonable  soul and human flesh subsisting."

Here, then, we find ourselves in a dilemma.  On the one hand, we  are involved in the same difficulty as in the case of Pantheism,  inasmuch as a person without flesh and blood, or something  analogous, is not a person; we are required, therefore, to  believe in a personal God, who has no true person; to believe,  that is to say, in an impersonal person.

This, as we have seen already, is Atheism under another name,  being, as it is, destructive of all idea of God whatever; for  these words do not convey an idea of something which human  intelligence can understand up to a certain point, and which it  can watch going out of sight into regions beyond our view, but in  the same direction-as we may infer other stars in space beyond  the farthest that we know of; they convey utterly self- destructive ideas, which can have no real meaning, and can only  be thought to have a meaning by ignorant and uncultivated people.   Otherwise such foundation as human reason rests upon-that is to  say, the current opinion of those whom the world appraises as  reasonable and agreeable, or capable of being agreed with for any  time-is sapped; the whole thing tumbles down, and we may have  square circles and round triangles, which may be declared to be  no longer absurdities and contradictions in terms, but mysteries  that go beyond our reason, without being contrary to it.  Few will  maintain this, and those few may be neglected; an impersonal  person must therefore be admitted to be nonsense, and an  immaterial God to be Atheism in another shape.

On the other hand, if God is "of a reasonable soul and human  flesh subsisting," and if he thus has the body without which he  is-as far as we are concerned-non-existent, this body must yet be  reasonably like other bodies, and must exist in some place and at  some time.  Furthermore, it must do sufficiently nearly what all  other "human flesh" belonging to "perfect man" must do, or cease  to be human flesh.  Our ideas are like our organisms; they have  some little elasticity and circumstance-suiting power, some  little margin on which, as I have elsewhere said, side-notes may  be written, and glosses on the original text; but this power is  very limited.  As offspring will only, as a general rule, vary  very little from its immediate parents, and as it will fail  either immediately or in the second generation if the parents  differ too widely from one another, so we cannot get our idea of- we will say a horse-to conjure up to our minds the idea of any  animal more unlike a horse than a pony is; nor can we get a well- defined idea of a combination between a horse and any animal more  remote from it than an ass, zebra, or giraffe.  We may, indeed,  make a statue of a flying horse, but the idea is one which cannot  be made plausible to any but ignorant people.  So "human flesh"  may vary a little from "human flesh" without undue violence being  done to our reason and to the right use of language, but it  cannot differ from it so much as not to eat, drink, nor waste and  repair itself.  "Human flesh," which is without these necessary  adjuncts, is human flesh only to those who can believe in flying  horses with feathered wings and bills like birds-that is to say,  to vulgar and superstitious persons.

Lastly, not only must the "perfect man," who is the second person  of the Godhead according to the orthodox faith, and who subsists  of "human flesh" as well as of a "reasonable soul," not only must  this person exist, but he must exist in some place either on this  earth or outside it.  If he exists on earth, he must be in Europe,  Asia, Africa, America, or on some island, and if he were met with  he must be capable of being seen and handled in the same way as  all other things that can be called perfect man are seen;  otherwise he is a perfect man who is not only not a perfect man,  but who does not in any considerable degree resemble one.  It is  not, however, pretended by anyone that God, the "perfect man," is  to be looked for in any place upon the surface of the globe.

If, on the other hand, the person of God exists in some sphere  outside the earth, his human flesh again proves to be of an  entirely different kind from all other human flesh, for we know  that such flesh cannot exist except on earth; if in space  unsupported, it must fall to the ground, or into some other  planet, or into a sun, or go on revolving round the earth or some  other heavenly body-or not be personal.  None of those  whose opinions will carry weight will assign a position either in  some country on this earth, or yet again in space, to Jesus  Christ, but this involves the rendering meaningless of all  expressions which involve his personality.

The Christian conception, therefore, of the Deity proves when  examined with any desire to understand our own meaning (and what  lawlessness so great as the attempt to impose words upon our  understandings which have no lawful settlement within them?) to  be no less a contradiction in terms than the Pantheistic  conception.  It is Atheistic, as offering us a God which is not a  God, inasmuch as we can conceive of no such being, nor of  anything in the least like it.  It is, like Pantheism, an  illusion, which can be believed only by those who repeat a  formula which they have learnt by heart in a foreign language of  which they understand nothing, and yet aver that they believe it.   There are doubtless many who will say that this is possible, but  the majority of my readers will hold that no proposition can be  believed or disbelieved until its nature is understood.

It may perhaps be said that there is another conception of God  possible, and that we may see him as personal, without at the  same time believing that he has any actual tangible existence.   Thus we personify hope, truth, and justice, without intending to  convey to anyone the impression that these qualities are women,  with flesh and blood.  Again, we do not think of Nature as an  actual woman, though we call her one; why may we not conceive of  God, then, as an expression whereby we personify, by a figure of  speech only; the thing that is intended being no person, but our  own highest ideal of power, wisdom, and duration.

There would be no reason to complain of this if this manner of  using the word "God" were well understood.  Many words have two  meanings, or even three, without any mischievous confusion of  thought following.  There can not only be no objection to the use  of the word God as a manner of expressing the highest ideal of  which our minds can conceive, but on the contrary no better  expression can be found, and it is a pity the word is not thus  more generally used.

Few, however, would be content with any such limitation of God as  that he should be an idea only, an expression for certain  qualities of human thought and action.  Whence, it may be fairly  asked, did our deeply rooted belief in God as a Living Person  originate? The idea of him as of an inconceivably vast, ancient,  powerful, loving, and yet formidable Person is one which survives  all changes of detail in men's opinion.  I believe there are a  few very savage tribes who are as absolutely without religious  sense as the beasts of the field, but the vast majority for a  long time past have been possessed with an idea that there is  somewhere a Living God who is the Spirit and the Life of all that  is, and who is a true Person with an individuality and self- consciousness of his own.  It is only natural that we should be  asked how such an idea has remained in the minds of so many - who  differ upon almost every other part of their philosophy-for so  long a time if it was without foundation, and a piece of dreamy  mysticism only.

True, it has generally been declared that this God is an infinite  God, and an infinite God is a God without any bounds or  limitations; and a God without bounds or limitations is an  impersonal God; and an impersonal God is Atheism.  But may not  this be the incoherency of prophecy which precedes the successful  mastering of an idea? May we not think of this illusory  expression as having arisen from inability to see the whereabouts  of a certain vast but tangible Person as to whose existence men  were nevertheless clear? If they felt that it existed, and yet  could not say where, nor wherein it was to be laid hands on, they  would be very likely to get out of the difficulty by saying that  it existed as an infinite Spirit, partly from a desire to magnify  what they felt must be so vast and powerful, and partly because  they had as yet only a vague conception of what they were aiming  at, and must, therefore, best express it vaguely.

We must not be surprised that when an idea is still inchoate its  expression should be inconsistent and imperfect-ideas will almost  always during the earlier history of a thought be put together  experimentally so as to see whether or no they will cohere.   Partly out of indolence, partly out of the desire of those who  brought the ideas together to be declared right, and partly out  of joy that the truth should be supposed found, incoherent ideas  will be kept together longer than they should be; nevertheless  they will in the end detach themselves and go, if others present  themselves which fit into their place better.  There is no  consistency which has not once been inconsistent, nor coherency  that has not been incoherent.  The incoherency of our ideas  concerning God is due to the fact that we have not yet truly  found him, but it does not argue that he does not exist and  cannot be found anywhere after more diligent search; on the  contrary, the persistence of the main idea, in spite of the  incoherency of its details, points strongly in the direction of  believing that it rests upon a foundation in fact.

But it must be remembered there can be no God who is not personal  and material: and if personal, then, though inconceivably vast in  comparison with man, still limited in space and time, and capable  of making mistakes concerning his own interests, though as a  general rule right in his estimates concerning them.  Where, then,  is this Being? He must be on earth, or what folly can be greater  than speaking of him as a person? What are persons on any other  earth to us, or we to them? He must have existed and be going to  exist through all time, and he must have a tangible body.  Where,  then, is the body of this God? And what is the mystery of his  Incarnation?

It will be my business to show this in the following chapter.


                          CHAPTER VI

                       THE TREE OF LIFE

Atheism denies knowledge of a God of any kind.  Pantheism and  Theism alike profess to give us a God, but they alike fail to  perform what they have promised.  We can know nothing of the God  they offer us, for not even do they themselves profess that any  of our senses can be cognisant [sic] of him.  They tell us that he  is a personal God, but that he has no material person.  This is  disguised Atheism.  What we want is a Personal God, the glory of  whose Presence can be made in part evident to our senses, though  what we can realise [sic] is less than nothing in comparison with  what we must leave for ever unimagined.

And truly such a God is not far from every one of us; for if we  survey the broader and deeper currents of men's thoughts during  the last three thousand years, we may observe two great and  steady sets as having carried away with them the more eligible  races of mankind.  The one is a tendency from Polytheism to  Monotheism; the other from Polytypism to Monotypism of the  earliest forms of life-all animal and vegetable forms having at  length come to be regarded as differentiations of a single  substance-to wit, protoplasm.

No man does well so to kick against the pricks as to set himself  against tendencies of such depth, strength, and permanence as  this.  If he is to be in harmony with the dominant opinion of his  own and of many past ages, he will see a single God-impregnate  substance as having been the parent from which all living forms  have sprung.  One spirit, and one form capable of such  modification as its directing spirit shall think fit; one soul  and one body, one God and one Life.

For the time has come when the two unities so painfully arrived  at must be joined together as body and soul, and be seen not as  two, but one.  There is no living organism untenanted by the  Spirit of God, nor any Spirit of God perceivable by man apart  from organism embodying and expressing it.  God and the Life of  the World are like a mountain, which will present different  aspects as we look at it from different sides, but which, when we  have gone all round it, proves to be one only.  God is the animal  and vegetable world, and the animal and vegetable world is God.

I have repeatedly said that we ought to see all animal and  vegetable life as uniting to form a single personality.  I should  perhaps explain this more fully, for the idea of a compound  person is one which at first is not very easy to grasp, inasmuch  as we are not conscious of any but our more superficial aspects,  and have therefore until lately failed to understand that we are  ourselves compound persons.  I may perhaps be allowed to quote  from an earlier work.

"Each cell in the human body is now admitted by physiologists to  be a person with an intelligent soul, differing from our own more  complex soul in degree and not in kind, and, like ourselves,  being born, living, and dying.  It would appear, then, as though  'we,' 'our souls,' or 'selves,' or 'personalities,' or by  whatever name we may prefer to be called, are but the  consensus and full- flowing stream of countless sensations  and impulses on the part of our tributary souls or 'selves,' who  probably no more know that we exist, and that they exist as a  part of us, than a microscopic insect knows the results of  spectrum analysis, or than an agricultural labourer [sic] knows  the working of the British Constitution; and of whom we know no  more than we do of the habits and feelings of some class widely  separated from our own."-("Life and Habit," p.  110.)

After which it became natural to ask the following question :-  "Is it possible to avoid imagining that we may be ourselves  atoms, undesignedly combining to form some vaster being, though  we are utterly incapable of perceiving this being as a single  individual, or of realising [sic] the scheme and scope of our own  combination? And this, too, not a spiritual being, which, without  matter or what we think matter of some sort, is as complete  nonsense to us as though men bade us love and lean upon an  intelligent vacuum, but a being with what is virtually flesh and  blood and bones, with organs, senses, dimensions in some way  analogous to our own, into some other part of which being at the  time of our great change we must infallibly re-enter, starting  clean anew, with bygones bygones, and no more ache for ever from  age or antecedents.

"'An organic being,' writes Mr.  Darwin, 'is a microcosm, a little  universe, formed of a host of self-propagating organisms  inconceivably minute and numerous as the stars in Heaven.'  As  these myriads of smaller organisms are parts and processes of us,  so are we parts and processes of life at large."

A tree is composed of a multitude of subordinate trees, each bud  being a distinct individual.  So coral polypes [sic] form a tree- like growth of animal life, with branches from which spring  individual polypes [sic] that are connected by a common tissue  and supported by a common skeleton.  We have no difficulty in  seeing a unity in multitude, and a multitude in unity here,  because we can observe the wood and the gelatinous tissue  connecting together all the individuals which compose either the  tree or the mass of polypes [sic].  Yet the skeleton, whether of  tree or of polype [sic], is inanimate; and the tissue, whether of  bark or gelatine [sic], is only the matted roots of the  individual buds; so that the outward and striking connection  between the individuals is more delusive than real.  The true  connection is one which cannot be seen, and consists in the  animation of each bud by a like spirit-in the community of soul,  in "the voice of the Lord which maketh men to be of one mind in  an house"-"to dwell together in unity"-to take what are  practically identical views of things, and express themselves in  concert under all circumstances.  Provided this-the true unifier  of organism-can be shown to exist, the absence of gross outward  and visible but inanimate common skeleton is no bar to oneness of  personality.

Let us picture to our minds a tree of which all the woody fibre  [sic] shall be invisible, the buds and leaves seeming to stand in  mid-air unsupported and unconnected with one another, so that  there is nothing but a certain tree- like collocation of foliage  to suggest any common principle of growth uniting the leaves.

Three or four leaves of different ages stand living together at  the place in the air where the end of each bough should be; of  these the youngest are still tender and in the bud, while the  older ones are turning yellow and on the point of falling.   Between these leaves a sort of twig-like growth can be detected  if they are looked at in certain lights, but it is hard to see,  except perhaps when a bud is on the point of coming out.  Then  there does appear to be a connection which might be called  branch-like.

The separate tufts are very different from one another, so that  oak leaves, ash leaves, horse-chestnut leaves, etc., are each  represented, but there is one species only at the end of each  bough.

Though the trunk and all the inner boughs and leaves have  disappeared, yet there hang here and there fossil leaves, also in  mid-air; they appear to have been petrified, without method or  selection, by what we call the caprices of nature; they hang in  the path which the boughs and twigs would have taken, and they  seem to indicate that if the tree could have been seen a million  years earlier, before it had grown near its present size, the  leaves standing at the end of each bough would have been found  very different from what they are now.  Let us suppose that all  the leaves at the end of all the invisible boughs, no matter how  different they now are from one another, were found in earliest  budhood to be absolutely indistinguishable, and afterwards to  develop towards each differentiation through stages which were  indicated by the fossil leaves.  Lastly, let us suppose that  though the boughs which seem wanted to connect all the living  forms of leaves with the fossil leaves, and with countless forms  of which all trace has disappeared, and also with a single root- have become invisible, yet that there is irrefragable evidence to  show that they once actually existed, and indeed are existing at  this moment, in a condition as real though as invisible to the  eye as air or electricity.  Should we, I ask, under these  circumstances hesitate to call our imaginary plant or tree by a  single name, and to think of it as one person, merely upon the  score that the woody fibre [sic] was invisible? Should we not  esteem the common soul, memories and principles of growth which  are preserved between all the buds, no matter how widely they  differ in detail, as a more living bond of union than a framework  of wood would be, which, though it were visible to the eye, would  still be inanimate?

The mistletoe appears as closely connected with the tree on which  it grows as any of the buds of the tree itself; it is fed upon  the same sap as the other buds are, which sap-however much it may  modify it at the last moment-it draws through the same fibres  [sic] as do its foster-brothers-why then do we at once feel that  the mistletoe is no part of the apple tree? Not from any want of  manifest continuity, but from the spiritual difference-from the  profoundly different views of life and things which are taken by  the parasite and the tree on which it grows-the two are  now different because they think differently-as long as  they thought alike they were alike-that is to say they were  protoplasm-they and we and all that lives meeting in this common  substance.

We ought therefore to regard our supposed tufts of leaves as a  tree, that is to say, as a compound existence, each one of whose  component items is compounded of others which are also in their  turn compounded.  But the tree above described is no imaginary  parallel to the condition of life upon the globe; it is perhaps  as accurate a description of the Tree of Life as can be put into  so small a compass.  The most sure proof of a man's identity is  the power to remember that such and such things happened, which  none but he can know; the most sure proof of his remembering is  the power to react his part in the original drama, whatever it  may have been; if a man can repeat a performance with consummate  truth, and can stand any amount of cross-questioning about it, he  is the performer of the original performance, whatever it was.   The memories which all living forms prove by their actions that  they possess-the memories of their common identity with a single  person in whom they meet-this is incontestable proof of their  being animated by a common soul.  It is certain, therefore, that  all living forms, whether animal or vegetable, are in reality one  animal; we and the mosses being part of the same vast person in  no figurative sense, but with as much bona fide literal  truth as when we say that a man's finger-nails and his eyes are  parts of the same man.

It is in this Person that we may see the Body of God-and in the  evolution of this Person, the mystery of His Incarnation.

[In "Unconscious Memory," Chapter V, Butler wrote: "In the  articles above alluded to ("God the Known and God the Unknown") I  separated the organic from the inorganic, but when I came to  rewrite them I found that this could not be done, and that I must  reconstruct what I had written." This reconstruction never having  been effected, it may be well to quote further from "Unconscious  Memory" (concluding chapter): "At parting, therefore, I would  recommend the reader to see every atom in the universe as living  and able to feel and remember, but in a humble way.  He must have  life eternal as well as matter eternal; and the life and the  matter must be joined together inseparably as body and soul to  one another.  Thus he will see God everywhere, not as those who  repeat phrases conventionally, but as people who would have their  words taken according to their most natural and legitimate  meaning; and he will feel that the main difference between him  and many of those who oppose him lies in the fact that whereas  both he and they use the same language, his opponents only half  mean what they say, while he means it entirely...  We shall  endeavour [sic] to see the so-called inorganic as living, in  respect of the qualities it has in common with the organic,  rather than the organic as non- living in respect of the  qualities it has in common with the inorganic."] 


                           CHAPTER VII

                       THE LIKENESS OF GOD

In my last chapter I endeavoured [sic] to show that each living  being, whether animal or plant, throughout the world is a  component item of a single personality, in the same way as each  individual citizen of a community is a member of one state, or as  each cell of our own bodies is a separate person, or each bud of  a tree a separate plant.  We must therefore see the whole varied  congeries of living things as a single very ancient Being,  of inconceivable vastness, and animated by one Spirit.

We call the octogenarian one person with the embryo of a few days  old from which he has developed.  An oak or yew tree may be two  thousand years old, but we call it one plant with the seed from  which it has grown.  Millions of individual buds have come and  gone, to the yearly wasting and repairing of its substance; but  the tree still lives and thrives, and the dead leaves have life  therein.  So the Tree of Life still lives and thrives as a single  person, no matter how many new features it has acquired during  its development, nor, again, how many of its individual leaves  fall yellow to the ground daily.  The spirit or soul of this  person is the Spirit of God, and its body-for we know of no soul  or spirit without a body, nor of any living body without a spirit  or soul, and if there is a God at all there must be a body of  God-is the many-membered outgrowth of protoplasm, the  ensemble of animal and vegetable life.

To repeat.  The Theologian of to-day tells us that there is a God,  but is horrified at the idea of that God having a body.  We say  that we believe in God, but that our minds refuse to realise  [sic] an intelligent Being who has no bodily person.  "Where  then," says the Theologian, " is the body of your God?" We have  answered, "In the living forms upon the earth, which, though they  look many, are, when we regard them by the light of their history  and of true analogies, one person only." The spiritual connection  between them is a more real bond of union than the visible  discontinuity of material parts is ground for separating them in  our thoughts.

Let the reader look at a case of moths in the shop-window of a  naturalist, and note the unspeakable delicacy, beauty, and yet  serviceableness of their wings; or let him look at a case of  humming-birds, and remember how infinitely small a part of Nature  is the whole group of the animals he may be considering, and how  infinitely small a part of that group is the case that he is  looking at.  Let him bear in mind that he is looking on the dead  husks only of what was inconceivably more marvellous [sic] when  the moths or humming-birds were alive.  Let him think of the  vastness of the earth, and of the activity by day and night  through countless ages of such countless forms of animal and  vegetable life as that no human mind can form the faintest  approach to anything that can be called a conception of their  multitude, and let him remember that all these forms have touched  and touched and touched other living beings till they meet back  on a common substance in which they are rooted, and from which  they all branch forth so as to be one animal.  Will he not in this  real and tangible existence find a God who is as much more worthy  of admiration than the God of the ordinary Theologian-as He is  also more easy of comprehension?

For the Theologian dreams of a God sitting above the clouds among  the cherubim, who blow their loud uplifted angel trumpets before  Him, and humour [sic] Him as though He were some despot in an  Oriental tale; but we enthrone Him upon the wings of birds, on  the petals of flowers, on the faces of our friends, and upon  whatever we most delight in of all that lives upon the earth.  We  then can not only love Him, but we can do that without which love  has neither power nor sweetness, but is a phantom only, an  impersonal person, a vain stretching forth of arms towards  something that can never fill them-we can express our love and  have it expressed to us in return.  And this not in the uprearing  of stone temples-for the Lord dwelleth [sic] in temples made with  other organs than hands-nor yet in the cleansing of our hearts,  but in the caress bestowed upon horse and dog, and kisses upon  the lips of those we love.  

Wide, however, as is the difference between the orthodox  Theologian and ourselves, it is not more remarkable than the  number of the points on which we can agree with him, and on  which, moreover, we can make his meaning clearer to himself than  it can have ever hitherto been.  He, for example, says that man  has been made in the image of God, but he cannot mean what he  says, unless his God has a material body; we, on the other hand,  do not indeed believe that the body of God-the incorporation of  all life-is like the body of a man, more than we believe each one  of our own cells or subordinate personalities to be like a man in  miniature; but we nevertheless hold that each of our tributary  selves is so far made after the likeness of the body corporate  that it possesses all our main and essential characteristics-that  is to say, that it can waste and repair itself; can feel, move,  and remember.  To this extent, also, we-who stand in mean  proportional between our tributary personalities and God-are made  in the likeness of God; for we, and God, and our subordinate  cells alike possess the essential characteristics of life which  have been above recited.  It is more true, therefore, for us to  say that we are made in the likeness of God than for the orthodox  Theologian to do so.

Nor, again, do we find difficulty in adopting such an expression  as that "God has taken our nature upon Him." We hold this as  firmly, and much more so, than Christians can do, but we say that  this is no new thing for Him to do, for that He has taken flesh  and dwelt among us from the day that He first assumed our shape,  some millions of years ago, until now.  God cannot become man more  especially than He can become other living forms, any more than  we can be our eyes more especially than any other of our  organs.  We may develop larger eyes, so that our eyes may come to  occupy a still more important place in our economy than they do  at present; and in a similar way the human race may become a more  predominant part of God than it now is-but we cannot admit that  one living form is more like God than another; we must hold all  equally like Him, inasmuch as they "keep ever," as Buffon says,  "the same fundamental unity, in spite of differences of detail- nutrition, development, reproduction" (and, I would add,  "memory") "being the common traits of all organic bodies."  The  utmost we can admit is, that some embodiments of the Spirit of  Life may be more important than others to the welfare of Life as  a whole, in the same way as some of our organs are more important  than others to ourselves.

But the above resemblances between the language which we can  adopt intelligently and that which Theologians use vaguely, seem  to reduce the differences of opinion between the two contending  parties to disputes about detail.  For even those who believe  their ideas to be the most definite, and who picture to  themselves a God as anthropomorphic as He was represented by  Raffaelle, are yet not prepared to stand by their ideas if they  are hard pressed in the same way as we are by ours.  Those who say  that God became man and took flesh upon Him, and that He is now  perfect God and perfect man of a reasonable soul and human flesh  subsisting, will yet not mean that Christ has a heart, blood, a  stomach, etc., like man's, which, if he has not, it is idle to  speak of him as "perfect man." I am persuaded that they do not  mean this, nor wish to mean it; but that they have been led into  saying it by a series of steps which it is very easy to  understand and sympathise [sic] with, if they are considered with  any diligence.

For our forefathers, though they might and did feel the existence  of a Personal God in the world, yet could not demonstrate this  existence, and made mistakes in their endeavour [sic] to persuade  themselves that they understood thoroughly a truth which they had  as yet perceived only from a long distance.  Hence all the  dogmatism and theology of many centuries.  It was impossible for  them to form a clear or definite conception concerning God until  they had studied His works more deeply, so as to grasp the idea  of many animals of different kinds and with no apparent  connection between them, being yet truly parts of one and the  same animal which comprised them in the same way as a tree  comprises all its buds.  They might speak of this by a figure of  speech, but they could not see it as a fact.  Before this could be  intended literally, Evolution must be grasped, and not Evolution  as taught in what is now commonly called Darwinism, but the old  teleological Darwinism of eighty years ago.  Nor is this again  sufficient, for it must be supplemented by a perception of the  oneness of personality between parents and offspring, the  persistence of memory through all generations, the latency of  this memory until rekindled by the recurrence of the associated  ideas, and the unconsciousness with which repeated acts come to  be performed.  These are modern ideas which might be caught sight  of now and again by prophets in time past, but which are even now  mastered and held firmly only by the few.

When once, however, these ideas have been accepted, the chief  difference between the orthodox God and the God who can be seen  of all men is, that the first is supposed to have existed from  all time, while the second has only lived for more millions of  years than our minds can reckon intelligently; the first is  omnipresent in all space, while the second is only present in the  living forms upon this earth-that is to say, is only more widely  present than our minds can intelligently embrace.  The first is  omnipotent and all-wise; the second is only quasi-omnipotent and  quasi all-wise.  It is true, then, that we deprive God of that  infinity which orthodox Theologians have ascribed to Him, but the  bounds we leave Him are of such incalculable extent that nothing  can be imagined more glorious or vaster; and in return for the  limitations we have assigned to Him, we render it possible for  men to believe in Him , and love Him, not with their lips only,  but with their hearts and lives.  

Which, I may now venture to ask my readers, is the true God-the  God of the Theologian, or He whom we may see around us, and in  whose presence we stand each hour and moment of our lives?  


                           CHAPTER VIII

                       THE LIFE EVERLASTING

Let us now consider the life which we can look forward to with  certainty after death, and the moral government of the world here  on earth.

If we could hear the leaves complaining to one another that they  must die, and commiserating the hardness of their lot in having  ever been induced to bud forth, we should, I imagine, despise  them for their peevishness more than we should pity them.  We  should tell them that though we could not see reason for thinking  that they would ever hang again upon the same-or any at all  similar-bough as the same individual leaves, after they had once  faded and fallen off, yet that as they had been changing  personalities without feeling it during the whole of their  leafhood, so they would on death continue to do this selfsame  thing by entering into new phases of life.  True, death will  deprive them of conscious memory concerning their now current  life; but, though they die as leaves, they live in the tree whom  they have helped to vivify, and whose growth and continued well- being is due solely to this life and death of its component  personalities.

We consider the cells which are born and die within us yearly to  have been sufficiently honoured [sic] in having contributed their  quotum to our life; why should we have such difficulty in seeing  that a healthy enjoyment and employment of our life will give us  a sufficient reward in that growth of God wherein we may live  more truly and effectually after death than we have lived when we  were conscious of existence?  Is Handel dead when he influences  and sets in motion more human beings in three months now than  during the whole, probably, of the years in which he thought that  he was alive? What is being alive if the power to draw men for  many miles in order that they may put themselves en  rapport with him is not being so? True, Handel no longer  knows the power which he has over us, but this is a small matter;  he no longer animates six feet of flesh and blood, but he lives  in us as the dead leaf lives in the tree.  He is with God, and God  knows him though he knows himself no more.

This should suffice, and I observe in practice does suffice, for  all reasonable persons.  It may be said that one day the tree  itself must die, and the leaves no longer live therein; and so,  also, that the very God or Life of the World will one day perish,  as all that is born must surely in the end die.  But they who fret  upon such grounds as this must be in so much want of a grievance  that it were a cruelty to rob them of one: if a man who is fond  of music tortures himself on the ground that one day all possible  combinations and permutations of sounds will have been exhausted  so that there can be no more new tunes, the only thing we can do  with him is to pity him and leave him; nor is there any better  course than this to take with those idle people who worry them selves and others on the score that they will one day be unable  to remember the small balance of their lives that they have not  already forgotten as unimportant to them-that they will one day  die to the balance of what they have not already died to.  I never  knew a well-bred or amiable person who complained seriously of  the fact that he would have to die.  Granted we must all some times find ourselves feeling sorry that we cannot remain for ever  at our present age, and that we may die so much sooner than we  like; but these regrets are passing with well-disposed people,  and are a sine qua non for the existence of life at all.   For if people could live for ever so as to suffer from no such  regret, there would be no growth nor development in life; if, on  the other hand, there were no unwillingness to die, people would  commit suicide upon the smallest contradiction, and the race  would end in a twelvemonth.

We then offer immortality, but we do not offer resurrection from  the dead; we say that those who die live in the Lord whether they  be just or unjust, and that the present growth of God is the  outcome of all past lives; but we believe that as they live in  God-in the effect they have produced upon the universal life-when  once their individual life is ended, so it is God who knows of  their life thenceforward and not themselves; and we urge that  this immortality, this entrance into the joy of the Lord, this  being ever with God, is true, and can be apprehended by all men,  and that the perception of it should and will tend to make them  lead happier, healthier lives; whereas the commonly received  opinion is true with a stage truth only, and has little permanent  effect upon those who are best worth considering.  Nevertheless  the expressions in common use among the orthodox fit in so  perfectly with facts, which we must all acknowledge, that it is  impossible not to regard the expressions as founded upon a  prophetic perception of the facts.

Two things stand out with sufficient clearness.  The first is the  rarity of suicide even among those who rail at life most  bitterly.  The other is the little eagerness with which those who  cry out most loudly for a resurrection desire to begin their new  life.  When comforting a husband upon the loss of his wife we do  not tell him we hope he will soon join her; but we should  certainly do this if we could even pretend we thought the husband  would like it.  I can never remember having felt or witnessed any  pain, bodily or mental, which would have made me or anyone else  receive a suggestion that we had better commit suicide without  indignantly asking how our adviser would like to commit suicide  himself.  Yet there are so many and such easy ways of dying that  indignation at being advised to commit suicide arises more from  enjoyment of life than from fear of the mere physical pain of  dying.  Granted that there is much deplorable pain in the world  from ill-health, loss of money, loss of reputation, misconduct of  those nearest to us, or what not, and granted that in some cases  these causes do drive men to actual self-destruction, yet  suffering such as this happens to a comparatively small number,  and occupies comparatively a small space in the lives of those to  whom it does happen.

What, however, have we to say to those cases in which suffering  and injustice are inflicted upon defenceless [sic] people for  years and years, so that the iron enters into their souls, and  they have no avenger.  Can we give any comfort to such sufferers?  and, if not, is our religion any better than a mockery-a filling  the rich with good things and sending the hungry empty away?  Can  we tell them, when they are oppressed with burdens, yet that  their cry will come up to God and be heard?  The question  suggests its own answer, for assuredly our God knows our  innermost secrets: there is not a word in our hearts but He  knoweth it altogether; He knoweth our down-sitting and our  uprising, He is about our path and about our bed, and spieth out  all our ways; He has fashioned us behind and before, and "we  cannot attain such knowledge," for, like all knowledge when it  has become perfect, "it is too excellent for us."

"Whither then," says David, "shall I go from thy Spirit, or  whither shall I go, then, from thy presence?  If I climb up into  heaven thou art there; if I go down into hell thou art there  also.  If I take the wings of the morning and remain in the  uttermost parts of the sea; even there also shall thy hand lead  me, and thy right hand shall hold me.  If I say peradventure the  darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be turned into day:  the darkness and light to thee are both alike.  For my reins  are thine; thou hast covered me in my mother's womb.  My bones  are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly and fashioned  beneath in the earth, thine eyes did see my substance yet being  unperfect; and in thy book were all my members written, which day  by day were fashioned when as yet there was none of them.  Do I  not hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am I not grieved with  them that rise up against thee? Yea, I hate them right sore, as  though they were mine enemies." (Psalm CXXXIX.) There is not a  word  of this which we cannot endorse with more significance, as  well as with greater heartiness than those can who look upon God  as He is commonly represented to them; whatever comfort,  therefore, those in distress have been in the habit of receiving  from these and kindred passages, we intensify rather than not.  We  cannot, alas! make pain cease to be pain, nor injustice easy to  bear; but we can show that no pain is bootless, and that there is  a tendency in all injustice to right itself; suffering is not  inflicted wilfully, [sic] as it were by a magician who could have  averted it ; nor is it vain in its results, but unless we are cut  off from God by having dwelt in some place where none of our kind  can know of what has happened to us, it will move God's heart to  redress our grievance, and will tend to the happiness of those  who come after us, even if not to our own.

The moral government of God over the world is exercised through  us, who are his ministers and persons, and a government of this  description is the only one which can be observed as practically  influencing men's conduct.  God helps those who help themselves,  because in helping themselves they are helping Him.  Again, Vox  Populi vox Dei. The current feeling of our peers is what we  instinctively turn to when we would know whether such and such a  course of conduct is right or wrong; and so Paul clenches his  list of things that the Philippians were to hold fast with the  words, "whatsoever things are of good fame"-that is to say, he  falls back upon an appeal to the educated conscience of his age.   Certainly the wicked do sometimes appear to escape punishment,  but it must be remembered there are punishments from within which  do not meet the eye.  If these fall on a man, he is sufficiently  punished; if they do not fall on him, it is probable we have been  over hasty in assuming that he is wicked.  


                            CHAPTER IX

                         GOD THE UNKNOWN

The reader will already have felt that the panzoistic conception  of God-the conception, that is to say, of God as comprising all  living units in His own single person-does not help us to  understand the origin of matter, nor yet that of the primordial  cell which has grown and unfolded itself into the present life of  the world.  How was the world rendered fit for the habitation of  the first germ of Life? How came it to have air and water,  without which nothing that we know of as living can exist? Was  the world fashioned and furnished with aqueous and atmospheric  adjuncts with a view to the requirements of the infant monad, and  to his due development?  If so, we have evidence of design, and  if so of a designer, and if so there must be Some far vaster  Person who looms out behind our God, and who stands in the same  relation to him as he to us.  And behind this vaster and more  unknown God there may be yet another, and another, and another.

It is certain that Life did not make the world with a view to its  own future requirements.  For the world was at one time red hot,  and there can have been no living being upon it.  Nor is it  conceivable that matter in which there was no life-inasmuch as it  was infinitely hotter than the hottest infusion which any living  germ can support-could gradually come to be alive without  impregnation from a living parent.  All living things that we know  of have come from other living things with bodies and souls,  whose existence can be satisfactorily established in spite of  their being often too small for our detection.  Since, then, the  world was once without life, and since no analogy points in the  direction of thinking that life can spring up spontaneously, we  are driven to suppose that it was introduced into this world from  some other source extraneous to it altogether, and if so we find  ourselves irresistibly drawn to the inquiry whether the source of  the life that is in the world-the impregnator of this earth-may  not also have prepared the earth for the reception of his  offspring, as a hen makes an egg-shell or a peach a stone for the  protection of the germ within it? Not only are we drawn to the  inquiry, but we are drawn also to the answer that the earth  was so prepared designedly by a Person with body and soul  who knew beforehand the kind of thing he required, and who took  the necessary steps to bring it about.

If this is so we are members indeed of the God of this world, but  we are not his children; we are children of the Unknown and  Vaster God who called him into existence; and this in a far more  literal sense than we have been in the habit of realising [sic]  to ourselves.  For it may be doubted whether the monads are not as  truly seminal in character as the procreative matter from which  all animals spring.

It must be remembered that if there is any truth in the view put  forward in "Life and Habit," and in "Evolution Old and New" (and  I have met with no serious attempt to upset the line of argument  taken in either of these books), then no complex animal or plant  can reach its full development without having already gone  through the stages of that development on an infinite number of  past occasions.  An egg makes itself into a hen because it knows  the way to do so, having already made itself into a hen millions  and millions of times over; the ease and unconsciousness with  which it grows being in themselves sufficient demonstration of  this fact.  At each stage in its growth {he chicken is reminded,  by a return of the associated ideas, of the next step that it  should take, and it accordingly takes it.

But if this is so, and if also the congeries of all the  living forms in the world must be regarded as a single person,  throughout their long growth from the primordial cell onwards to  the present day, then, by parity of reasoning, the person thus  compounded-that is to say, Life or God-should have already passed  through a growth analogous to that which we find he has taken  upon this earth on an infinite number of past occasions; and the  development of each class of life, with its culmination in the  vertebrate animals and in man, should be due to recollection  by God of his having passed through the same stages, or nearly  so, in worlds and universes, which we know of from personal  recollection, as evidenced in the growth and structure of our  bodies, but concerning which we have no other knowledge  whatsoever.

So small a space remains to me that I cannot pursue further the  reflections which suggest themselves.  A few concluding  considerations are here alone possible.

We know of three great concentric phases of life, and we are not  without reason to suspect a fourth.  If there are so many there  are very likely more, but we do not know whether there are or  not.  The innermost sphere of life we know of is that of our own  cells.  These people live in a world of their own, knowing nothing  of us, nor being known by ourselves until very recently.  Yet they  can be seen under a microscope; they can be taken out of us, and  may then be watched going here and there in perturbation of mind,  endeavouring [sic] to find something in their new environment  that will suit them, and then dying on finding how hopelessly  different it is from any to which they have been accustomed.  They  live in us, and make us up into the single person which we  conceive ourselves to form; we are to them a world comprising an  organic and an inorganic kingdom, of which they consider  themselves to be the organic, and whatever is not very like  themselves to be the inorganic.  Whether they are composed of  subordinate personalities or not we do not know, but we have no  reason to think that they are, and if we touch ground, so to  speak, with life in the units of which our own bodies are  composed, it is likely that there is a limit also in an upward  direction, though we have nothing whatever to guide us as to  where it is, nor any certainty that there is a limit at all.

We are ourselves the second concentric sphere of life, we being  the constituent cells which unite to form the body of God.  Of the  third sphere we know a single member only-the God of this world;  but we see also the stars in heaven, and know their multitude.   Analogy points irresistibly in the direction of thinking that  these other worlds are like our own, begodded and full of life;  it also bids us believe that the God of their world is begotten  of one more or less like himself, and that his growth has  followed the same course as that of all other growths we know of.

If so, he is one of the constituent units of an unknown and  vaster personality who is composed of Gods, as our God is  composed of all the living forms on earth, and as all those  living forms are composed of cells.  This is the Unknown God.   Beyond this second God we cannot at present go, nor should we  wish to do so, if we are wise.  It is no reproach to a system that  it does not profess to give an account of the origin of things;  the reproach rather should lie against a system which professed  to explain it, for we may be well assured that such a profession  would, for the present at any rate, be an empty boast.  It is  enough if a system is true as far as it goes; if it throws new  light on old problems, and opens up vistas which reveal a hope of  further addition to our knowledge, and this I believe may be  fairly claimed for the theory of life put forward in "Life and  Habit" and "Evolution, Old and New," and for the corollary  insisted upon in these pages; a corollary which follows logically  and irresistibly if the position I have taken in the above-named  books is admitted.  

Let us imagine that one of the cells of which we are composed  could attain to a glimmering perception of the manner in which he  unites with other cells, of whom he knows very little, so as to  form a greater compound person of whom he has hitherto known  nothing at all.  Would he not do well to content himself with the  mastering of this conception, at any rate for a considerable  time? Would it be any just ground of complaint against him on the  part of his brother cells, that he had failed to explain to them  who made the man (or, as he would call it, the omnipotent deity)  whose existence and relations to himself he had just caught sight  of?

But if he were to argue further on the same lines as those on  which he had travelled hitherto, and were to arrive at the  conclusion that there might be other men in the world.  besides  the one whom he had just learnt to apprehend, it would be still  no refutation or just ground of complaint against him that he had  failed to show the manner in which his supposed human race had  come into existence.

Here our cell would probably stop.  He could hardly be expected  to arrive at the existence of animals and plants differing from  the human race, and uniting with that race to form a single  Person or God, in the same way as he has himself united with  other cells to form man.  The existence, and much more the  roundness of the earth itself, would be unknown to him, except by  way of inference and deduction.  The only universe which he could  at all understand would be the body of the man of whom he was a  component part.

How would not such a cell be astounded if all that we know  ourselves could be suddenly revealed to him, so that not only  should the vastness of this earth burst upon his dazzled view,  but that of the sun and of his planets also, and not only these,  but the countless other suns which we may see by night around us.   Yet it is probable that an actual being is hidden from us, which  no less transcends the wildest dream of our theologians than the  existence of the heavenly bodies transcends the perception of our  own constituent cells.  




                           THE END  