




History Of The Mackenzies

by Alexander Mackenzie









PREFACE




THE  ORIGINAL  EDITION of this work appeared in 1879, fifteen years ago.  It was well received by the press, by the clan, and by all interested in  the history of the Highlands.  The best proof of this is the fact that the  book has for several years been out of print, occasional second-hand  copies of it coming into the market selling at a high premium on the  original subscription price.

Personally, however, I was never satisfied with it.  It was my first  clan history, and to say nothing of inevitable defects of style by a  comparatively inexperienced hand, it was for several other reasons  necessarily incomplete, and in many respects not what I should wish the  history of my own clan to be.

This edition, which extends to close upon two hundred pages  more than its predecessor, has an accurate and well-executed plate of the clan tartan, and a life-like portrait of the Author; has been almost entirely  re-written; contains several families omitted from the first; has all been  carefully revised; and although not even now absolutely perfect, I believe  it is almost as near being so as it is possible for any work which contains  such an enormous number of dates and other details as this one to be.  The mythical Fitzgerald origin of the clan, hitherto accepted by  most of its leading members, is exhaustively dealt with, I venture to hope effectively, if not completely and finally disposed of.  That it is now  established beyond any reasonable dispute to have been a pure invention  of the seventeenth century may, I think, be safely asserted, while it is, with  almost equal conclusiveness, shown that the Mackenzies are descended  from a native Celtic chief of the same stock as the original O'Beolan Earls  of Ross, as set forth in the Table printed on page 39.  My list of subscribers, for a second edition, shows in the most  gratifying form that the work is still in active demand, and I am sanguine  enough to expect that as soon as it is issued to the public the remaining copies will be quickly disposed of.

I am indebted to a young gentleman, Mr Evan North Burton-Mackenzie, Younger of Kilcoy, of whom I venture to predict more will be  heard in this particular field, for valuable genealogical notes about his own and other Mackenzie families, while for the copious and well-arranged Index at the end of the volume--a new feature of this edition--I  have again to acknowledge the services of my eldest son, Hector Rose  Mackenzie, solicitor, Inverness.

        A. M.         PARK HOUSE, INVERNESS,         March 1894







THE HISTORY  OF  THE  MACKENZIES.





ORIGIN.



THE  CLAN  MACKENZIE at one time formed one of the most powerful families in the Highlands.  It is still one of the most numerous and  influential, and justly claims a very ancient descent.  But there has always  been a difference of opinion regarding its original progenitor.  It has long  been maintained and generally accepted that the Mackenzies are  descended from an Irishman named Colin or Cailean Fitzgerald, who is  alleged but not proved to have been descended from a certain Otho, who  accompanied William the Conqueror to England, fought with that warrior  at the battle of Hastings, and was by him created Baron and Castellan of  Windsor for his services on that occasion.


THE  REPUTED  FITZGERALD  DESCENT.


According to the supporters of the Fitzgerald-Irish origin of the clan, Otho had a son Fitz-Otho, who is on record as his father's successor  as Castellan of Windsor in 1078.  Fitz-Otho is said to have had three sons.

Gerald, the eldest, under the name of Fitz-Walter, is said to have married,  in 1112, Nesta, daughter of a Prince of South Wales, by whom he also had  three sons.  Fitz-Walter's eldest son, Maurice, succeeded his father, and accompanied Richard Strongbow to Ireland in 1170. He was afterwards  created Baron of Wicklow and Naas Offelim of the territory of the  Macleans for distinguished services rendered in the subjugation of that  country, by Henry II., who on his return to England in 1172 left Maurice in  the joint Government.

Maurice married Alicia, daughter of Arnulph de Montgomery,  brother of Robert Earl of Shrewsbury, and by that lady had four sons.  The eldest was known as Gerald Fitz-Maurice, who in due course succeeded his father, and was created Lord Offaly.  Having married Catherine, daughter of Hamo de Valois, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, he had a son,  named Maurice after his grandfather.  This Maurice died in 1257, leaving  two sons, Thomas and Gerald.  Thomas, generally called "Tomas Mor," or  Great Thomas, on account of his great valour and signal services in the  battlefield, succeeded his father as Lord Offaly.  He married the only  daughter of Thomas Carron.  This lady brought him the Seigniory of  Desmond as a dowry.  By her Thomas Lord Offaly had an only son, John,  who, according to Colin Fitzgerald's supporters, was first Earl of Kildare  and married first, Marjory, daughter of Sir Thomas Fitz-Antony, by whom  he had issue--Maurice, progenitor of the Dukes of Leinster.  John married, secondly, Honora, daughter of Hugh O'Connor, by whom he had six sons,  the eldest of whom, according to the Irish-origin theory, was Colin Fitz-Gerald--but who, if the Fitzgerald theory had not been a pure invention, really ought to have been called Colin Fitz-John, or son of John--the  reputed ancestor of the Mackenzies.

This, briefly stated, is the genealogy of the Fitzgeralds as given by  the supporters of the Irish origin of the Mackenzies, and it may be right or  wrong for all we need care in discussing the origin of the Mackenzies.  Its  accuracy will, however, be proved impossible.

According to the true genealogy, Thomas, who was the third son of Maurice, married Rohesia, heiress of Woodstock, near Athy, and daughter  of Richard de St. Michael, Lord of Rheban. By this lady he had an only  son, John, who succeeded as 6th Baron Offaly, and was in 1316 created  1st Earl of Kildare.  John married Blanche, daughter of John Roche, Baron of Fermoy; not the two ladies given him in the Fitzgerald-Mackenzie  genealogy.

The real authentic genealogy of the Fitzgeralds, from whom the Dukes of Leinster and other Fitzgerald families are descended, is as  follows:--The first, I.  OTHO, known as "Dominus Otho," belonged undoubtedly to  the Gherardini family of Florence.  He passed into Normandy, and in 1057  crossed into England, became a favourite with Edward the Confessor, and  obtained extensive estates from that monarch. He had a son II.  WALTER  FITZ  OTHO, or son of Otho.  He is mentioned in  Domesday Book in 1078 as being then in possession of his father's  estates.  He was Castellan of Windsor and Warden of the Forests in  Berkshire.  He married Gladys, daughter of Rhiwallon ap Cynfyn, Prince  of North Wales, and had three sons, the eldest being III.  GERALD  FITZ  WALTER, or son of Walter, who was  appointed by Henry I. to the Constableship of Pembroke Castle and other  important offices.  He married Nesta, daughter of Rhys ap Gruffyd, ap  Tudor Mawr, Prince of South Wales, and had issue by her, three sons, the  eldest of whom was IV.  MAURICE  FITZ GERALD, or son of Gerald. This, it will be  noticed, was the first Fitzgerald of which we have any record, and he was the progenitor of the Irish Fitzgeralds.  He accompanied Richard de Clare,  Earl of Pembroke, popularly known as "Strongbow," to Ireland, and there highly distinguished himself, having, among other acts of renown, captured the city of Dublin.  He died at Wexford in 1177.  He married Alice or Alicia, daughter of Arnulph de Montgomery, fourth son of Roger  de Montgomery, who led the centre of the Norman army at the battle of  Hastings, and by her had issue--five sons, the eldest of whom was  William, Baron of Naas, not Gerald as claimed by the supporters of the  Colin Fitzgerald theory.

Thus far the two genealogies may be said to agree, except in a few of the marriages.

V.  GERALD  FITZ  MAURICE, the second son, in 1205 became  first Baron Offaly.  The third son, Thomas, was progenitor of the original Earls of Desmond, who have long been extinct in the male line, the present Earldom, which is the Irish title of the Earl of Denbigh, having  been created in 1622.  Gerald Fitz Maurice married Katherine, daughter of Hamo de Valois, who was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland in 1197, and by  her had a son, VI.  MAURICE  FITZ  GERALD, second Baron Offaly, one of the  Lord Justices of Ireland. Maurice died in 1257, having married Juliana,  daughter of John de Cogan, who was Lord Justice of Ireland in 1247, and  by her had three sons, Maurice, Gerald, and Thomas.  Maurice Fitzgerald  has no wife given him in the Colin Fitzgerald genealogy.  Thomas, the  youngest son, had a son John, who ultimately, on the death of Maurice,  fifth Baron Offaly, without issue, succeeded as sixth Baron, and was, on the 14th May, 1316, created the first Earl of Kildare.  Maurice Fitz Gerald  was succeeded by his eldest son, VII.  MAURICE  FITZ MAURICE, as third Baron Offaly.  He  married Emelina, daughter of Sir Stephen de Longespee, a rich heiress,  and by her had a son and two daughters. He was succeeded by his only  son, VIII.  GERALD  FITZ MAURICE, 4th Baron Offaly, who died  without issue in 1287, when he was succeeded by his cousin Maurice, only  son of Gerald, second son of Maurice Fitzgerald, second Baron Offaly, as IX.  MAURICE FITZGERALD, 5th Baron Offaly, who married  Agnes de Valance, daughter of William Earl of Pembroke, without issue,  when he was succeeded by his cousin John, son of Thomas, third son of  Maurice Fitzgerald, second Baron Offaly, as X.  JOHN  FITZ  THOMAS  FITZ GERALD, sixth Baron Offaly,  and first Earl of Kildare.  From him, by his wife Blanche, daughter of John  Roche, Baron of Fermoy, are descended the present Duke of Leinster and  other Irish Fitzgeralds. He died on the 10th November, 1316.  Several important particulars bearing on the points in dispute are  noticeable in this genuine Fitzgerald genealogy, a few of which may be  remarked upon.  (1) There is no trace of a Colin Fitzgerald, or of any other  Colin, in the real family genealogy from beginning to end, down to the present day.  (2) Gerald, the 4th Baron Offaly, died in 1287.  He was  succeeded by his cousin Maurice, as 5th Baron, who in turn war  succeeded by his cousin John Fitz Thomas Fitz Gerald, who died comparatively young in 1316.  According to the Colin Fitzgerald theory,  this John, first Earl of Kildare, was twice married, and by his second wife  had six sons, of whom Colin Fitzgerald, who really ought to have been  described as Colin Fitz John--for it will be observed that the Chiefs in the  real genealogy are invariably described as Fitz or son of their fathers--was  the eldest.  This was impossible.  How could John Fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, who died at a comparatively early age in 1316, have had a son by his  second marriage, who must have arrived at a mature age before he "was driven" from Ireland to Scotland in 1261, and be able to fight, as alleged  by his supporters, with great distinction, as a warrior who had already an  established reputation, at the battle of Largs, in 1263? Let us suppose that  Colin's reputed father was 70 years old when he died.  He (the father)  must thus have been born as early as 1246.  Let us take it that his eldest  son, the reputed Colin, by his second wife, was born when his father was  only 24 years of age--say in 1270--and the result of the Fitzgerald origin theory would be that Colin must have fought at the battle of Largs 7 years  before, according to the laws of nature, he could have been born.  In other  words, he was not born, if born at all, for seven years after the battle of  Largs, four years after the reputed charter of 1266, and 40 years  subsequent to 1230, the last year in which either of the witnesses whose  names are upon the alleged charter itself was in life.  (3) But take the  genealogy as given by the upholders of the Colin Fitzgerald origin  themselves Maurice, who died in 1257, had, according to it, two sons--Thomas and Gerald. This Thomas, they say, succeeded his father as third  Lord Offaly, and had a son, John, who, by his second wife, had Colin Fitzgerald. That is, Maurice, who died in 1257, had a great grandson Colin, who, as a warrior of mature years and experience, fought at the battle of Largs only six years after his great-grandfathers death. But there was in  fact no Earl of Kildare at this early date.  That title was, as already stated,  not created until 1316, twenty-eight years after his son Colin Fitzgerald was, according to the testimony of his supporters, buried in Icolmkill.

It is  surely unnecessary to add that such a consummation is absolutely  impossible; and these facts alone, though no other shred of evidence was  forthcoming, would dispose of the Colin Fitzgerald origin of the  Mackenzies for ever.

Colin's five brothers are given by the upholders of the Fitzgerald origin as Galen, said to have been the same as Gilleon or Gillean, the ancestor of the Macleans; Gilbert, ancestor of the White Knights; John,  ancestor of the Knights of Glynn; Maurice, ancestor of the Knights of  Kerry; and Thomas, progenitor of the Fitzgeralds of Limerick.  But it is  quite unnecessary to deal with Colin's brothers and their descendants here.

It will be sufficient if we dispose of Colin himself, who, according to the  genealogy given to him by those who claim him as their progenitor, was  really not Colin Fitz-Gerald but Colin Fitz-John. He must, however, be  dealt with a little more at length; for, whoever he may have been, and  however mythical his personal history, his name will always command a  certain amount of interest for members of the Clan Mackenzie, and those  who have become allied with them by marriage or association.  Most of us are acquainted with the turbulent state of the West  Highlands and Islands in the reign of Alexander II., when the Highland  Chiefs became so powerful, and were so remote from the centre of  Government, that they could not be brought under the King's authority.   His Majesty determined to make a serious effort to reduce these men to  obedience, and for this purpose he proceeded, at the head of a large force,  but died on his way in 1249, on the Island of Kerrera, leaving his son, Alexander III., then only nine years of age, with the full weight and  responsibility of government on his shoulders.  Shortly after the King attained his majority, Colin Fitzgerald,  correctly speaking Fitz John is said to have been driven out of Ireland and  to have sought refuge at the Scottish Court, where he was heartily  welcomed by the King, by whom his rank and prowess well known to him  by repute, were duly recognised and acknowledged.

At this time Alexander was preparing to meet Haco, King of  Norway, who, on the 2nd of October, 1262, landed with a large force on  the coast of Ayrshire, where he was met by a gallant force of fifteen hundred knights splendidly mounted on magnificent chargers--many of  them of pure Spanish breed--wearing breastplates, while their riders, clad  in complete armour, with a numerous army of foot armed with spears,  bows and arrows, and other weapons of war, according to the usage in  their respective provinces, the whole of this valiant force led by the King  in person.  These splendid, well-accoutred armies met at Largs two or  three days after, and then commenced that sanguinary and memorable  engagement which was the first decisive check to the arrogance of the  Norsemen who had so long held sway in the West Highlands and Isles,  and the first opening up of the channel which led to the subsequent  arrangements between Alexander III. of Scotland and Magnus IV. of  Norway in consequence of which an entirely new organisation was  introduced into the Hebrides, then inhabited by a mixed race composed of  the natives and largely of the descendants of successive immigrant  colonists of Norwegians and Danes who had settled in the country.  In this memorable engagement, we are told, the Scots commenced  the attack.  The right wing, composed of the men of Argyle, of Lennox, of Athole, and Galloway, was commanded by Alexander, Lord High  Steward, while Patrick Dunbar, Earl of March, commanded the left wing,  composed of the men of the Lothians, Berwick, Stirling, and Fife.  The  King placed himself in the centre, at the head of the choice men of Ross, Perth, Angus, Mearns, Mar, Moray, Inverness, and Caithness, where he  was confronted by Haco in person, who, for the purpose of meeting the  Scottish King, took post in the Norwegian centre. The High Steward, by a dexterous movement, made the enemy's left give way, and instantly, by  another adroit manoeuvre, he wheeled back on the rear of Haco's centre,  where he found the two warrior Kings desperately engaged.  This induced  Haco, after exhibiting all the prowess of a brave King and an able  commander, to retreat from the field, followed by his left wing, leaving, as  has been variously stated, sixteen to twenty-four thousand of his followers on the field, while the loss on the Scottish side is estimated at about five  thousand.  The men of Caithness and Sutherland were led by the Flemish  Freskin, those of Moray by one of their great chiefs, and there is every  reason to believe that the men of Ross rallied round one of their native  chiefs.  Among the most distinguished warriors who took part in this great  and decisive victory for the Scots, under the immediate eye of their brave King, was, it is said, Colin Fitzgerald, who is referred to in a fragment of  the Record of Icolmkill as "Callenus peregrinus Hibernus nobilis ex  familia Geraldinorum qui proximo anno ab Hibernia pulsus opud regni  benigne acceptus hinc usque in curta permansit et in praefacto proelio  strenue pugnavit."  That is, "Colin, an Irish stranger and nobleman, of the  family of the Geraldines who, in the previous year, had been driven from  Ireland, and had been well received by the King, remained up to this time at Court, and fought bravely in the aforesaid battle."  This extract has  often been quoted to prove that Colin Fitzgerald was the progenitor of the Mackenzies; but it will be noticed that it contains no reference whatever to the point.  It merely says that Colin, an Irishman, was present at Largs.

After the defeat of Haco the King sent detachments to secure the West Highlands and Isles, and to check the local chiefs.  Among the leaders sent in charge of the Western garrisons was, according to the  supporters of the Irish-origin theory, Colin Fitzgerald, who, under the  patronage of Walter Stewart, Earl of Menteith, was settled in the  Government of the Castle of Ellandonnan, the well-known stronghold of  the Mackenzies, in Kintail, situated on a small rocky island at the junction  of Lochalsh, Loch Duich and Loch Long. Colin's jurisdiction, it is said, extended over a wide district, and he is referred to in the fragment of the  Record of Icolmkill, already quoted, as he "of whom we have spoken at  the battle of Largs, and who afterwards conducted himself with firmness  against the Islanders, and was left a governor among them."  Sir George Mackenzie, first Earl of Cromartie, who will be proved later on to have  been the inventor of the Fitzgerald theory, says in a MS. history of the  clan, that Colin "being left in Kintail, tradition records that he married the  daughter of Mac Mhathoin, heritor of the half of Kintail.  This Mhathoin,"  he continues, "is frequently identified with Coinneach Gruamach Mac  Mhathoin, Cailean's predecessor as Governor of Ellandonnan Castle.  The  other half of Kintail belonged to O'Beolan, one of whose chiefs, Ferchair,  was created Earl of Ross, and his lands were given to Cailean Fitzgerald."

It will be proved by incontestible public documents still in existence, that  these identical lands were, except that they once for a time exchanged  them with a relative for lands in Buchan, uninterruptedly possessed by the  Earls of Ross, the descendants of this Ferchair, or Farquhar, for two  centuries after the battle of Largs.  While the Earl of Cromartie and other clan historians accept the  Fitzgerald origin by marriage with a daughter of Kenneth Matheson of  Lochalsh, the Mathesons maintain that the first Mackenzie, or Mac  Choinnich--the actual progenitor of the clan--was a son of their chief, Coinneach Gruamach, and that the Mackenzies are thus only a sept, or  minor branch of the Mathesons. It must in fairness be admitted that the  latter contention is quite as near the truth as the Fitzgerald theory and it  must have already occurred to the reader, how, if the Fitzgerald origin of the Mackenzies had been true, has it come about that the original patronymic of Fitzgerald has given way to that of Mackenzie?  It is not  pretended that it was ever heard of after Colin himself. This difficulty occurred even to the Earl of Cromartie, and this is  how he attempts to dispose of it.  Cailean, he says, had a son by the  daughter of Kenneth Mac Mhathoin, or Matheson, whom he named Coinneach, or Kenneth, after his father-in-law Kenneth Matheson; Cailean  himself was killed in Glaic Chailein by Mac Mhathoin, who envied him,  and was sore displeased at Colin's succession to Matheson's ancient  heritage; Colin was succeeded by his son Kenneth, and all his descendants were by the Highlanders called "Mac Choinnich," or Kenneth's son,  taking the patronymic from Mac Mhathoin rather than from Cailean,  whom they esteemed a stranger. Of the two theories the Matheson one is  by far the more probable; but they are both without any real foundation.  The Fitzgerald theory has, however, until recently, been accepted  by all the leading Mackenzie families and by the clan generally.  It has  been adopted in all the Peerages and Baronetages, and by almost every writer on the history and genealogy of the Cabar feidh race.  The main if not the only authority of any consequence in favour of this Irish origin is the charter alleged to have been granted by Alexander  III. to Colin in 1266, of which the reputed original runs as follows:--

`Alexander, Dei Gracia, Rex Scottorum omnibus probis hominibus tocius terre sue clericis it laicis, salutem sciant presentes et futuri me pro  fiddi seruicio michi navato per Colinum Hybernum tam in bello quam in  pace ideo dedisse, et hac Presenti carta mea concessisse dicto Colino, et ejus successoribus to/as terras de Kintail Tenendas de nabis et  successoribus nostris in liberam baronium cum g ua rdia Reddendo  servicium fo rinsecum et fidelitatem Testibus Andrea episcopo,  Moraviensi. Wa ltero Stewart. Hen rico de Balioth Camerario. Ama/do de  Campania. Thoma Hostiario, vice-comite de Innerness. Apud Kincardine,  IX die Jan.. Anno Regni Domini, Regis XVI."

This is a literal translation of the document.--"Alexander, by the Grace of God, King of Scots, to all honest men  of his whole dominions, cleric and laic, greeting: Be it known to the  present and future that I, for the faithful service rendered to me by Colin of Ireland, in war as well as peace, therefore I have given, and by this my  present charter I concede to the said Colin and his successors, the lands of  Kintail to be held of us in free barony with ward to render foreign service  and fidelity. Witnesses (as above.) At Kincardine, 9th day of January, in the year of the reign of the Lord the King. the 16th."

The Kincardine at which this charter is alleged to have been signed is supposed to be the place of that name situated on the River Dee; for  about this time an incident is reported to have occurred in the Forest of Mar in connection with which it is traditionally stated that the Mackenzies  adopted the stag's head as their coat armour.  The legend is as follows:

Alexander was on a hunting expedition in the forest, near Kincardine, when an infuriated stag, closely pursued by the hounds, made straight in  the direction of the King, and Cailean Fitzgerald, who accompanied the  Royal party, gallantly interposed his own person between the exasperated  animal and his Majesty, and shot it with an arrow in the forehead.  The  King in acknowledgment of the Royal gratitude at once issued a diploma  in favour of Colin granting him armorial bearings which were to be, a  stags head puissant, bleeding at the forehead where the arrow pierced it, to  be borne on a field azure, supported by two greyhounds.  The crest to be a dexter arm bearing a naked sword, surrounded by the motto "Fide Parta,  Fide Acta," which continued to be the distinctive bearings of the  Mackenzies of Seaforth until it was considered expedient, as  corroborating their claims on the extensive possessions of the Macleods of  Lewis, to substitute for the original the crest of that warlike clan, namely,  a mountain in flames, surcharged with the words, "Luceo non uro," the  ancient shield, supported by two savages, naked, and wreathed about the  head with laurel, armed with clubs issuing fire, which are the bearings  now used by the representatives of the High Chiefs of Kintail.  The incident of the hunting match and Colin Fitzgerald's gallant  rescue of Alexander III. was painted by West for "The last of the  Seaforths" in one of those large pictures with which the old Academician  employed and gratified his latter years.  The artist received ?oo for the noble painting, which is still preserved in Brahan Castle, and in his old age he expressed his willingness to give the same sum for it in order to  have it exhibited in his own collection.

The first notice of the reputed charter to Colin Fitzgerald is in the  manuscript history of the Mackenzies, by George, first Earl of Cromartie, already quoted, written about the middle of the seventeenth century.  All the later genealogists appear to have taken its authenticity for granted, and  quoted it accordingly.  Dr Skene, the most learned and accurate of all our  Highland historians, expresses his decided opinion that the charter is  forged and absolutely worthless as evidence in favour of the Fitzgerald  origin of the clan.  At pages 223-25 of his Highlanders of Scotland, he  says --

"The Mackenzies have long boasted of their descent from the great Norman family of Fitzgerald in Ireland, and in support of this origin they  produce a fragment of the Records of Icolmkill, and a charter by  Alexander III. to Colin Fitzgerald, the supposed progenitor of the family,  of the lands of Kintail. At first sight these documents might appear  conclusive, but, independently of the somewhat suspicious circumstance  that while these pages have been most freely and generally quoted, no one has ever seen the originals, and the fragment of the Icolmkill Record  merely says that among the actors in the battle of Largs, fought in 1263, was `Peregrinus et Hibernus nobilis ex familia Geraldinorum qui proximo anno Hibernia pulsus apud regni benigne acceptus hinc usque in curta  permansit et in praefacto proelio strenue pugnavit,' giving not a hint of his  having settled in the Highlands, or of his having become the progenitor of  any Scottish family whatever while as to the supposed charter of  Alexander III., it is equally inconclusive, as it merely grants the lands of  Kintail to Colin Hiberno, the word `Hiberno' having at the time come into general use as denoting the Highlanders, in the same manner as the word  `Erse' is now frequently used to express their language; but inconclusive as it is, this charter," he continues, "cannot be admitted at all, as it bears  the most palpable marks of having been a forgery of a later time, and one by no means happy in its execution.  How such a tradition of the origin of  the Mackenzies ever could have arisen, it is difficult to say but the fact of  their native origin and Gaelic descent is completely set at rest by the  Manuscript of 1450, which has already so often been the means of  detecting the falsehood of the foreign origins of other clans."

Cosmo Innes, another high authority, editor of the Orgines Parachiales Scotia, the most valuable work ever published dealing with  the early history of Scotland, and especially of the Highlands, came to a similar conclusion, and expresses it even more strongly than Dr Skene.

At  pages 392-3, Vol. II., he says "The lands of Kintail are said to have been  granted by Alexander III. to Colin, an Irishman of the family of Fitzgerald,  for services done at the battle of Largs. The charter is not extant, and its  genuineness has been doubted." In a footnote, this learned antiquarian  gives the text of the document, in the same terms as those in which they  have been already quoted from another source, and which, he says, is  "from a copy of the 17th century."  "If the charter be genuine," he adds, "it is not of Alexander III., or connected with the battle of Largs (1263).

Two of the witnesses, Andrew, Bishop of Moray, and Henry de Baliol, Chamberlain, would correspond with the 16th year of Alexander II." He  further says that "the writers of the history of the Mackenzies assert also  charters of David II. (1360) and of Robert II. (1380) to `Murdo filius  Kennethi de Kintail,' but without furnishing any description or means of  testing their authenticity.  No such charters are recorded."

This is emphatic enough and to every unprejudiced mind  absolutely conclusive.  The sixteenth year of the reign of Alexander II.  was 1230; for he ascended the throne in 1214.  It necessarily follows that the charter, if signed at all, must have been signed thirty-three years before  the battle of Largs, and thirty-six years earlier than the actual date written  on the document itself.  If it had any existence before it appeared in the  Earl of Cromartie's manuscript of the seventeenth century, it must have  been written during the lives of the witnesses whose names attest it.

That  is, according to those who maintain that Colin Fitzgerald was the  progenitor of the Mackenzies, thirty-one years before that adventurer ever  crossed the Irish Channel, and probably several years before he was born, if he ever existed elsewhere than in the Earl of Cromartie's fertile  imagination.

But this is not all.  It has long been established beyond any possible doubt that the Earls of Ross were the superiors of the lands of  Kintail during the identical period in which the same lands are said to  have been held by Colin Fitzgerald and his descendants as direct vassals of  the Crown. Ferchard Mac an t-Sagairt, Earl of Ross, received a grant of  the lands of Kintail from Alexander II. for services rendered to that  monarch in 1222, and he is again on record as their possessor in 1234,  four years after the latest date on which the reputed charter to Colin  Fitzgerald, keeping in view the witnesses whose names appear on the face  of it, could possibly have been a genuine document.  Even the most  prominent of the clan historians who have so stoutly maintained the  Fitzgerald theory felt bound to admit that, "it cannot be disputed that the Earl of Ross was the Lord paramount under Alexander II., by whom Farquhard Mac an t-Sagairt was recognised in the hereditary dignity of his  predecessors, and who, by another tradition," Dr George Mackenzie says,  "was a real progenitor of the noble family of Kintail."  That the Earls of  Ross continued lords paramount long after the death of Colin Fitzgerald,  which event is said to have taken place in 1278, will be incontestibly  proved.

But meantime let us return to the Origines Parochiales Scotiae. There we have it stated on authority which no one whose opinion is worth  anything will for a moment call in question. The editor of that remarkable  work says: -- "In 1292 the Sheriffdom of Skye erected by King John Baliol, included the lands of the Earl of Ross in North Argyle, a district which  comprehended Kintail and several other large parishes in Ross (Acts of  Parliament of Scotland, Vol. 1. p. 917).  Between 1306 and 1329 King  Robert Bruce confirmed to the Earl of Ross all his lands including North  Argyle (Robertson's Index, p. 16, No. 7; Register of Moray, p. 342). in  1342, William, Earl of Ross, the son and heir of the deceased Hugh, Earl  of Ross, granted to Reginald, the son of Roderick (Ranald Rorissoune or  MacRuaraidh) of the Isles, the ten davochs (or pennylands) of Kintail in  North Argyle (Robertson's Index, p. 48, No. 1; p. 99; p. 100, No. 1).

The  grant was afterwards confirmed by King David II. (Robertson's Index).   About the year 1346 Ranald was succeeded by his sister Amie, the wife of  John of Isla (Gregory p. 27).  Between the years 1362 and 1372, William,  Earl of Ross, exchanged with his brother Hugh of Ross, Lord of Phylorth,  and his heirs, his lands of all Argyle, with the Castle of Ellandonnan, for  Hugh's lands in Buchan (Balnagown Charters).  In 1463 the lands of  Kintail were held by Alexander Mackenzie (Gregory, p, 83)," when the  Mackenzies obtained the first authentic charter on record as direct vassals  from the Crown.

During the whole of this period--for two hundred years--there is no trace of Colin Fitzgerald or any of his descendants as superiors of the  lands of Kintail in terms of Alexander III.'s reputed charter of 1266, the  Mackenzies holding all that time from and as direct vassals of their  relatives, the Earls of Ross, who really held the position of Crown vassals  which, according to the upholders of the Fitzgerald theory, had that theory  been true, would have been held by Colin and his posterity.  But neither he  nor any of his reputed descendants appear once on record in that capacity during the whole of these two centuries.  On the contrary, it has now been  proved from unquestionable authentic sources that Kintail was in  possession of the Earls of Ross in, and for at least two generations before,  1296; that King Robert the Bruce confirmed him in these lands in 1306,  and again in 1329; that in 1342 Earl William granted the ten davochs or  pennylands of Kintail--which is its whole extent--to Reginald of the Isles;  that this grant was afterwards confirmed by David II.; and that between  the years 1362 and 1372 the Earl of Ross exchanged the lands of Kintail, including the Castle of Ellandonnan, with his brother Hugh for lands in  Buchan.

These historical events could never have occurred had the  Mackenzies occupied the position as immediate vassals of the Crown  contended for by the supporters of the Fitzgerald theory of the origin of the clan. It is admitted by those who uphold the claims of Colin Fitzgerald  that the half of Kintail belonged to Farquhar O'Beolan, Earl of Ross, after  what they describe as the other half had been granted by the King to Colin  Fitzgerald.  But as it is conclusively established that the ten pennylands,  being the whole extent of Kintail were all the time, before and after, in possession of the Earls of Ross, this historical myth must follow the rest.

Even the Laird of Applecross, in his MS. history of the clan, written in  1669, although he adopts the Fitzgerald  theory from his friend and  contemporary the Earl of Cromartie, has his doubts. After quoting the  statement, that "the other half of Kintail at this time belonged to  O'Beolan, whose chief, called Farquhar, was created  Earl of Ross, and  that his lands in Kintail were given by the King to Colin Fitzgerald," he says, "this tradition carries enough of probability to found historical credit,  but I find no charter of these lands purporting any such grounds for that the first charter of Kintail is given by this King Alexander to this Colin,  anno 1266."  That is, Alexander III.  But enough has been said on this part of the subject.  Let us,  however, briefly quote two well-known modern writers.  The late Robert  Carruthers, LL.D., Inverness, had occasion several years ago to examine  the Seaforth family papers for the purpose of reviewing them in the North British Quarterly Review.  He did not publish all that he had written on the subject, and he was good enough to present the writer, when preparing the first edition of this work, with some valuable MS. notes on the clan  which had not before appeared in print.  In one of these notes Dr  Carruthers says --

"The chivalrous and romantic origin of the Clan Mackenzie,  though vouched for by certain charters and local histories, is now believed to be fabulous. It seems to have been first advanced in the 17th century, when there was an absurd desire and ambition in Scotland to fabricate or  magnify all ancient and lordly pedigrees.  Sir George Mackenzie of  Tarbat, the Lord Advocate, and Sir George Mackenzie, the first Earl of  Cromartie, were ready to swear to the descent of the Scots nation from  Gathelus, son of Cecrops, King of Athens, and Scota his wife, daughter of Pharaoh, King of Egypt; and, of course, they were no less eager to claim a  lofty and illustrious lineage for their own clan.  But authentic history is  silent as to the two wandering Irish Knights, and the reputed charter (the  elder one being palpably erroneous) cannot now be found.  For two  centuries after the reigns of the Alexanders, the district of Kintail formed  pin of the lordship of the Isles, and was held by the Earls of Ross.  The Mackenzies, however, can he easily traced to their wild mountainous and  picturesque country--Ceann-da-Shail--the Head of the two Seas."

This is from an independent, impartial writer who had  no interest whatever in supporting either the one theory or the other.  Sir William  Fraser, the well-known  author of so many valuable  private family histories, incidentally refers to the forged charter in his  Earls of Cromartie, written specially for the late Duke of Sutherland.  He  was naturally unwilling to offend the susceptibilities of the Mackenzie  chiefs, all of whom had hitherto claimed Colin Fitzgerald as their  progenitor, but he was forced to admit the inconclusive character of the  disputed charter, and that no such charter was granted to Colin Fitzgerald  by Alexander III.  Sir William says:--"In the middle of the seventeenth  century, when Lord Cromartie wrote his history, the means of  ascertaining, by the names of witnesses and other ways, the true granter of  a charter and the date were not so accessible as at present.  The mistake of  attributing the Kintail charter to King Alexander the Third, instead of  King Alexander the Second, cannot be regarded as a very serious error in  the circumstances."  Sir William, it will be observed, gives up the charter  from Alexander III.  The mere admission that it is not of Alexander III.  is  conclusive against its ever having been granted to Colin Fitzgerald at all,  for, as already pointed out, that adventurer, if he ever existed, did not, even according to his stoutest supporters, cross the Irish Channel, nor was  he ever heard of on this side of it, for more than thirty years after the date  written on the face of the document itself could possibly have been  genuine, the witnesses whose names appear as attesting it having been in  there graves for more than a generation before the battle of Largs was  fought.

When the ablest upholders of the Colin Fitzgerald theory are  obliged to make  such admissions and explanations as these, they explain away their whole case and they must be held to have practically given it  up for once admit, as Sir William Fraser does, that the charter is of the reign of Alexander II. (1230), it cannot possibly have any reference to  Colin  Fitzgerald, who, according to those who support the Irish origin of  the clan, only arrived in Scotland from Ireland in 1262 and it is equally absurd and impossible to maintain that a charter granted in 1230 could  have been a reward for services rendered or valour displayed at the battle  of Largs, which was fought in 1263, to say nothing of the now admittedly impossible date and signatures written on the face of the document itself;  and Sir William Fraser having, by the logic of facts, been forced to give up  that crucial point, should in consistency have at the same time given up  Colin Fitzgerald.  And in reality he practically did so, for having stated  that the later reputed charters of 1360 and 1380 are not now known to  exist, he adds, "But the terms of them as quoted in the early histories of  the family are consistent with either theory of the origin of the  Mackenzies, whether descended from Colin Fitzgerald or Colin of the  Aird." In this he is quite correct; but it is impossible to say the same thing  of the earlier charter, which all the authorities worth listening to now  admit to be a palpable forgery of the seventeenth century; and Sir William  virtually admits as much.

There is one other fact which alone would be almost conclusive against the Fitzgerald theory.  Not a single man of the name Colin is  found, either among the chiefs or members of the clan from their first  appearance in history until we come to Colin cam Mackenzie XI. of  Kintail, who succeeded in June, 1568--a period of three hundred years  after the alleged date of the reputed charter to Colin Fitzgerald.  Colin Cam was a second son, his eldest brother, Murdoch, having died during  his father's life and before he attained majority, when Colin became heir to the estates.  It was then, as now, a common custom to name the second  son after some prominent member of his mother's family, and this was, no  doubt, what was done in the case of Colin Cam, the first Colin who  appears--as late as the middle of the sixteenth century--in the genealogy of the Mackenzies.  His mother was Lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John, Earl of Atholl, by Lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald, second, and sister of Colin, third Earl of Argyll.  Colin Cam Mackenzie  XI. of Kintail, and the first of the name in the family genealogy, was thus  called Colin by his mother, Lady Elizabeth Stewart, after her uncle Colin,  third Earl of Argyll.  It scarcely needs to be pointed out how very improbable it is that,  had Colin Fitzgerald been really the progenitor of the Mackenzies, his  name would have been so completely ignored as a family name for more than  three  hundred years in face of the invariable custom among all other  notable Highland houses of honouring their direct ancestors by continuing their names as the leading names in the family genealogy.

It is believed that no one who brings an  independent,  unprejudiced. mind to bear upon the question discussed in the preceding  pages can help coming to the conclusion that the Colin Fitzgerald theory is completely disposed of.  It is indeed extremely doubtful whether such a  person ever existed, but in any case it has been conclusively proved by the  evidence of those who claim him as their ancestor that he never could  have been what they allege--the progenitor of the Mackenzies, whom all  the best authorities now maintain to be of purely native Celtic origin.  And  if this be so, is it not unpatriotic in the highest degree for the heads of our  principal Mackenzie families to persist in supplying Burke, Foster, and  other authors of Peerages, Baronet ages, and County Families, with the details of an alien Irish origin like the impossible Fitzgerald myth upon which they have, in entire error, been feeding their vanity since its  invention by the first Earl of Cromartie little more than two hundred years  ago.   For be it remembered that all these Norman and Florentine  pedigrees and  descents are supplied to the compilers of such genealogical  works as those by members of the respective families themselves, and that the editors are not personally responsible for nor do they in any way  guarantee their accuracy.   It is really difficult to understand the feeling  that has so long prompted most of our leading Highlanders to show such an unnatural and unpatriotic preference for alien progenitors--claiming the Norman enemies and conquerers of their country, or mythical Irish adventurers, as ancestors to be proud of.  Writing of the clans who claim this alien origin the late Dr W. F. Skene, Historiographer Royal for  Scotland, says--

"As the identity of the false aspect which the true tradition, assumes in all these cases implies that the case was the same all, we may assume that wherever these two circumstances are to he found combined,  of a clan claiming a foreign origin and asserting a marriage with the  heiress of a Highland family whose estates they possessed and whose  followers they led, they must invariably have been the oldest cadet of that  family, who, by usurpation or otherwise, had become de facto chief of the clan, and who covered their defect by right of blood by denying their  descent from the clan, and asserting that the founder had married the  heiress of its chief." [Highlands and Highlanders.]

In his later and more important work the same learned historian discusses this question at great length.  He analyses all the doubtful  pedigrees and origins claimed by the leading clans. Regarding the  Fitzgerald theory he says, "But the most remarkable of these spurious  origins is that claimed by the Mackenzies.  It appears to have been first put forward by Sir George Mackenzie, first Earl of Cromarty," who, in his first manuscript, made Colin a son of the Earl of Kildare, but in a later edition, written in 1669, "finding that there was no Earl of Kildare until  1290, he corrects it by making him son of John Fitz-Thomas, chief of the Geraldines in Ireland, and father of John, first Earl of Kildare, who was slain in 1261."  Dr Skene then summarises the story already known at   length to the reader, quotes the Record of Icolmkill and the forged charter,  and concludes --

"The same mistake is here committed as is usual in manufacturing these pedigree charters, by making it a crown charter erecting the lands  into a barony.  Kintail could not have been a barony at that time, and the  Earl of Ross and not the king was superior, for in 1342 the Earl of Ross  grants the ten davochs of the lands of Kintail to Reginald, son of Roderick  of the Isles, and we find that the Mackenzies held their lands of the Earls  of Ross and afterwards of the Duke of Ross till 1508, when they were all erected into a barony by King James the Fourth, who gave them a crown  charter.  An examination of the witnesses usually detects these spurious  charters, and in this case it is conclusive against the charter.  Andrew was  bishop of Moray from 1223 to 1242 and there was no bishop of that name  in the reign of Alexander the Third.  Henry de Baliol was chamberlain in  the reign of Alexander the Second, and not of Alexander the Third.   Thomas Hostarius belongs to the same reign, and has been succeeded by  his son Alan long before the date of this charter."

Dr Skene adds that if the Earl of Cromartie was not himself the actual inventor of the whole story, it must have taken its rise not very long  before his day, for, he says, "no trace of it is to be found in the Irish MSS.,  the history of the Geraldine family knows nothing of it, and MacVureach,  who must have been acquainted with the popular history of the western  clans, was equally unacquainted with it." [Celtic Scotland, Vol. III., pp.  351-354.]

This fully corroborates all that was said in the preceding  pages regarding the Fitzgerald-Irish origin of the Mackenzies and which every  intelligent clansman, however biassed, must now admit in his inner  consciousness to be fully and finally disposed of.  Having, however, quoted Skene's earlier views on the general  claim by the Highland chiefs for alien progenitors it may be well to give here his more mature conclusions from his later and greater work, especially as some people, who have not taken the trouble to read what he writes, have  been  saying that the great Celtic historian had seen cause to  change his views on these important points in Highland genealogy since  he wrote his Highlands and Highlanders in 1839.  After examining them  all very closely and exhaustively in a long and learned chapter of some  forty pages, he says --

"The conclusion, then, to which this analysis of the clan pedigrees which have been popularly accepted at different times has brought us, is  that, so far as they profess to show the origin of the different clans, they  are entirely artificial and untrustworthy, but that the older genealogies may be accepted as showing--the descent of the clan from its eponymus  or founder, and within reasonable limits for some generations beyond him, while the later spurious pedigrees must be rejected altogether.  It may  seem surprising that such spurious and fabulous origins should be so  readily credited by the clan families as genuine traditions, and receive  such prompt acceptance as the true fount from which they sprung;  but we  must recollect that the fabulous history of Hector Boece was as rapidly and universally adopted as the genuine annals of the national history, and  became rooted in those parts of the country to which its fictitious events  related as local traditions." [Celtic Scotland, Vol. III., p. 364.]

The final decision to which Dr Skene comes in his great work is that the clans, properly so called, were of native origin, and that the  surnames adopted by them were partly of native and partly of foreign  descent.  Among these native Highland clans he unhesitatingly classes the Mackenzies, the clan Gillie-Andres or Rosses, and  the Mathesons, all of  whom belong, he says, to the tribe of Ross.  In his first work on the  Highlands and Highland Clans he draws the general deduction, based on  all our existing MS. genealogies, that the clans were divided into several  great tribes, descended from a common ancestor, but he at the same time  makes a marked distinction between the different tribes which, by indica-tions traceable in each, can be identified with the earldoms or  maormorships into which the North of Scotland was originally divided.   By the aid of the old genealogies he divides the clans into five different tribes in the following order:--(1) The descendants of Conn of the Hundred Battles; (2) of Ferchar Fata Mac Feradaig; (3) of Cormaig Mac  Obertaig; (4) of Fergus Leith Dearg; and (5) of Krycul.  In the third of  these divisions he includes the old Earls of Ross, the Mackenzies, the  Mathesons, and several other clans, and to this classification he adheres,  after the  most mature consideration, in his later and greater work, the  History of Celtic Scotland.


THE  REAL  CELTIC  ORIGIN.


It is now most interesting to know who the ancient Earls of Ross, from whom the Mackenzies are really descended, were.  The first of these  earls of whom we have any record is Malcolm Mac Heth to whom Malcolm IV. gave Ross in 1157, with the title of Earl of Ross, but the  inhabitants rose against him and drove him out of the district. Wyntoun  mentions an Earl "Gillandrys," a name which we believe is derived from  the common ancestor of the Mackenzies and Rosses, "Gilleoin-Ard-Rois,"  as one of the six Celtic earls who besieged King Malcolm at Perth in  1160.  Skene is also of opinion that this Gillandres represented the old  Celtic earls of Ross, as the clan bearing the name of Ross are called in  Gaelic Clann Ghilleanrias, or descendants of Gillandres, and may, he  thinks, have led the revolt which drove Malcolm Mac Heth out of the  earldom. The same King, two years after the incident at Perth, gave the  earldom of Ross to Florence, Count of Holland, on that nobleman's  marriage with His Majesty's sister Ada, in 1162, but the new earl never  secured practical possession [Celtic Scotland, Vol. III., pp. 66-67.]  He is,  however, found claiming it as late as 1179, in the reign of William the  Lion.

The district of Ross is often mentioned in the Norse Sagas along with the other parts of the country then governed by Maormors or Jarls,  and Skene in his earlier work says that it was only on the downfall of  those of Moray that the chiefs of Ross appear prominent in historical  records, the Maormors of Moray being in such close proximity to them  and so great in power and influence that the less powerful Maormor of  Ross held only a comparatively subordinate position, and his name was in  consequence seldom or never associated with any of the great events of  that early period in Highland history.  It was only after the disappearance  of those district potentates  that  the chiefs appear under  the appellation  of Comites or Earls. That most, if not all, of these earls were the descendants of the ancient maormors there can be little doubt, and the  natural presumption in this instance is strengthened by the fact that all the  old authorities concur in asserting that the Gaelic name of the original  Earls of Ross was O'Beolan--a corruption of Gilleoin, or Gillean, na h`Airde--or the descendants of Beolan.  "And we  actually find," says the same authority, "from the oldest Norse Saga connected with Scotland that  a powerful chief in the North of Scotland named O'Beolan, married the  daughter of Ganga Rolfe, or Rollo, the celebrated pirate who became  afterwards the celebrated Earl of Normandy."  If this view is well-founded the ancestor of the Earls of Ross was chief in Kintail as early as the  beginning of the tenth century.  We have seen that the first Earl of Ross recorded in history was  Malcolm Mac Heth, to whom a precept is found, directed by Malcolm IV.,  requesting him to protect the monks of Dunfermline and defend them in  their lawful privileges and possessions.  The document is not dated, but  judging from the names of the witnesses attesting it, the precept must have been issued before 1162.  It will be remembered that Mac Heth was one of  the six Celtic earls who besieged the King at Perth two years before, in  1160.  William the Lion, who seems to have kept the earldom in his own  hands for several years, in 1179 marched into the district at the head of his  earls and barons, accompanied by a large army, and subdued an  insurrection fomented by the local chiefs against his authority.  On this occasion he built two castles within its bounds, one called Dunscath on  the northern Sutor at the entrance to the Cromarty Firth, and Redcastle in  the Black Isle.  In the same year we find Florence, Count of Holland, complaining that he had been deprived of its nominal ownership by King  William.  There is no trace of any other earl in actual possession until we  come to Ferquard or "Ferchair Mac an t' Sagairt," Farquhar the son of the Priest, who rose rapidly to power on the ruins of the once powerful Mac  Heth earls of Moray, of which line Kenneth Mac Heth, who, with Donald  Ban, led a force into Moray against Alexander  II., son  of William  the  Lion,  in 1215, was the last.  Of this raid the following account is given in  Celtic Scotland, Vol. I. p. 483:--

"The young king had barely reigned a year when be had to  encounter the old enemies of the Crown, the families of Mac William and Mac Eth, who now combined their forces under Donald Ban, the son of  that Mac William who bad been slain at Mamgarvie in 1187, and Kenneth  Mac Eth, a son or grandson of Malcolm Mac Eth, with the son of one of  the Irish provincial kings, and burst into the Province of Moray at the bead  of  a large band of malcontents.  A very important auxiliary, however, now  joined the party of the king. This was Ferquhard or Fearchar Macintagart,  the son of the `Sagart' or priest who was the lay possessor of the extensive  possessions of the old monastery founded by the Irish Saint Maelrubba at Applecross in the seventh century.  Its possessions lay between the district  of Ross and the Western Sea and extended from Lochcarron to Loch Ewe  and Loch Maree, and Ferquhard was thus in reality a powerful Highland  chief commanding the population of an extensive western region.  The  insurgents were assailed by him with great vigour, entirely crushed, and  their leaders taken, who be at once beheaded and presented their heads to the new king as a welcome gift on the 15th of June, when he was knighted  by the king as a reward for his prompt assistance."

The district then known as North Argyle consisted chiefly of the possessions of this ancient monastery of Appercrossan or Applecross. Its inhabitants had hitherto--along with those of South Argyle, which  extended from Lochcarron to the Firth of Clyde--maintained a kind of  semi-independence, but in 1222 they were, by their lay possessor, Ferchair  Mac an t'Sagairt, who was apparently the grandson or great-grandson of  Gillandres, one of the six earls who besieged Malcolm IV. at Perth in  1160, brought into closer connection with the crown.  The lay Abbots of  which Ferquhard was the head were the hereditary possessors of all the  extensive territories which had for centuries been ruled and owned by this old and powerful Celtic monastery.  As a reward for his services against  the men of Moray in 1215 and for the great services which, in 1222, he  again rendered to the King in the subjugation of the whole district then  known as Argyle, extending from the Clyde to Lochbroom, he received  additional honours.  In that campaign known as "the Conquest of Argyle,"  Ferquhard led most of the western tribes, and for his prowess, the Celtic earldom, which was then finally annexed to the Crown and made a feudal  appanage, was conferred on him with the title of Earl of Ross, and he is so  designated in a charter dated 1234.  He is again on record, under the same  title, in 1235 and 1236.  Regarding an engagement which took place be-tween Alexander II. and the Gallowegians, in 1235, the Chronicle of Melrose says, that "at the beginning of the battle the Earl of Ross, called  Macintagart, came up and attacked the enemies (of the King) in the rear,  and as soon as they perceived this they took to flight and retreated into the  woods and mountains, but they were followed up by the Earl and several  others, who put many of them to the sword, and harassed them as long as  daylight lasted." In Celtic Scotland, Vol. II, p.412, it is stated that the  hereditary lay priests of which he was the chief "according to tradition, bore the name of O'Beollan"; and MacVuirich, in the Black Book of Clanranald, says that from Ferquhard was descended Gillapatrick the Red,  son of Roderick, and known traditionally as the Red Priest, whose  daughter, at a later date, married and carried the monastery lands of  Lochalsh and Lochcarron to the Macdonalds of the Isles.

In one of the Norse Sagas the progenitor of Ferquhard is  designated " King," just the same as the great Somerled and some of his descendants had been called at a later date.  Referring to Helgi, son of  Ottar, the Landnamabok Saga records that "he made war upon Scotland  and carried off prisoner Nidbjorga, the daughter of King Bjolan, and of  Kadliner, daughter or Ganga Rolf," or Rollo, who, as already stated, afterwards became the celebrated Earl of Normandy.  Writing of Alexander, third Earl of Ross and Lord of the Isles,  Hugh Macdonald, the Sleat historian, says that --

"He was a man born to much trouble all his life time. First he took  to him the concubine daughter of Patrick Obeolan, surnamed the Red,  who was a very beautiful woman.  This surname Obeolan was the surname  of the Earls of Ross, till Farquhar, born in Ross, was created earl by King  Alexander, and so carried the name of Ross since, as best answering the  English tongue.  This Obeolan had its descent of the ancient tribe of  Manapii; of this tribe is also St. Rice or Ruffus. Patrick was an Abbot and  had Carlebay in the Lewis, and the Church lands in that country, with 18  mark lands in Lochbroom. He bad two sons and a daughter.  The sons were called Normand and Austin More, so called from his excessive strength and corpulency.  This Normand had daughters that were great  beauties, one of whom was married to Mackay of Strathnavern one to  Dugall MacRanald, Laird of Mudort; one to MacLeod of Assint; one to  MacDuffie; and another, the first, to Maclean of Bororay. Patrick's  daughter bore a son to Alexander, Lord of the Isles and Earl of Ross, who was called Austin (Uisdean or Hugh) or as others say, Augustine.  She was twice before the King, as Macdonald could not be induced to part with  her, on occasion of her great beauty. The King said, that it was no wonder  that such a fair damsel had enticed Macdonald." [Collectanea de Rebus  Albanicis, pp. 304-305.]

It is not intended here to discuss whether Hugh of Sleat and his elder brother Celestine of Lochalsh were illegitimate or not. They were so  called by their father, Earl Alexander, and by their brother, Earl John.  The  first describes Celestine as "filius naturalis" in a charter preserved in the   Mackintosh charter chest, dated 1447, and Earl John calls his brother  Austin or Hugh "frater carnalis" in two charters, dated respectively 1463 and 1470.  This goes far to corroborate the Sleat historian, who was not the least likely to introduce illegitimacy into his own favourite family  unless the charge was really true.  It is instructive to find that Celestine  succeeded to all the lands of the monastery of Applecross in Lochalsh,  Lochcarron, and Lochbroom. These lay abbots are also said to have held,  under the old Earls of Ross, the Sleat district of the Isle of Skye, which  Hugh, first of that family, is alleged to have inherited  through his mother,  daughter of the Red Priest and a descendant of Farquhar Mac an t'Sagairt, Earl of Ross.  It will be observed also that Austin, Uisdean, or Hugh, a  common name among the Applecross and old Earl of Ross dynasty, comes  into the Macdonald family for the first time at this period, after Earl  Alexander of the Macdonald line had formed a union with the daughter of  the last lay Abbot of Applecross.  Skene distinctly affirms that Hugh  Macdonald of Sleat was the son of Earl Alexander by a daughter of this  Gille-Padruig (Celtic Scotland, Vol. III. p. 298) while Gregory suggests  that the words naturalis and carnalis used by Hugh's father and brother in  the charters already quoted "were used to designate the issue of those  handfast or left-handed marriages which appear to have been so common  in the Highlands and Isles." [Western Highlands and Isles, p.41]  Whether the Sleat district of Skye was or was not carried for the first time to the Macdonald Earls of Ross and Lords of the Isles by this union with a  member of the family of the original O'Beolan Earls, it is perfectly clear  that the latter had an intimate connection with the Sleat district at a much  earlier period.

Saint Maelrubba, who is first heard of in Britain in 671, two years later, in 673, founded the original Church of Applecross "from which as a centre he evangelised the whole of the western districts lying between  Loch Carron and Loch Broom, as well as the south and west parts of the  Island of Skye, and planted churches in Easter Ross and elsewhere."  [Celtic Scotland, Vol. II. p. 166.]  It is at least interesting to find these  lands going to and afterwards remaining in possession of the two sons of  Earl Alexander who are said to have  been  illegitimate, when all their  other enormous possessions were in 1493 finally forfeited to the Crown.   Hugh, who possessed Sleat during the life of his father and brother, receives a Crown charter of these lands under the Great Seal two years  after, in 1495, although his brother John, fourth and last Lord of the Isles,  was still alive, his death not having occurred until 1498, three years later.  Sir Robert Gordon (Earldom  of Scotland, p. 36) shows that the  Rosses were originally designated O'Beolan and Gillanders  indiscriminately, according to the writer's or speaker's fancy.  He says  that--

"From the second son of the Earl of Ross the lairds of Balnagowan are descended, and had by inheritance the lands of Rariechies and Coulleigh, where you may observe that the laird of Balnagowan's surname  should not be Ross, seeing that there was never any Earl of Ross of that  surname; but the Earls of Ross were first of the surname of Beolan, then  they were Leslies, and last of all that earldom fell by inheritance to the  Lords of the Isles, who resigned the same unto king James the Third's  bands, in the year of God 1477.  So I do think that the lairds of  Balnagowan, perceiving the Earls of Ross decayed, and that earldom,  fallen into the Lords of the Isles' hands, they called themselves Ross  thereby to testify their descent from the Earls of Ross. Besides, all the Rosses in that province are Unto this day called in the Irish (Gaelic)  language Clan Leandries, which race by their own tradition is sprung from another stock."

In the same work, p. 46, we find that the Earls of Ross were called O'Beolans as late as 1333, for Sir Robert informs us, writing of the battle  of Halidon Hill, that "in this field was Hugh Beolan, Earl of Ross, slain." It is established to the satisfaction of all reasonable men that the  Applecross and O'Beolan Earls  of Ross were one and the same, and that  they were descended from Gilleoin na h' Airde, corrupted in the Norse  Sagas into "Beolan," the general designation by which they were known,  until Earl William, the last of his line, died without surviving male issue  on the 9th of February, 1372,  when  the  title  devolved  upon  his   daughter, Euphemia, Countess of Ross in her own right, whose daughter,   Mary, or  Margaret, by Sir Walter  Leslie, carried the earldom to Donald of Harlaw, second Lord of the Isles.  That the O'Beolan Earls of Ross, of whom Ferquhard Mac an t'Sagairt was the first, descended from the same  ancestor, Gilleoin na h' Airde, as the older "Gillandres" earl of 1160, is  equally certain.  Earl Gillandres was probably forfeited for the part he  took against Malcolm IV. on that occasion, and Ferquhard having  rendered such important services to Alexander II. was restored probably  quite as much in virtue of his ancient rights as the grandson of Ferquhard  as on account of his valiant conduct in support of the crown in Moray, in Argyle, and in Galloway, in  1215, 1222, and 1235.

The surname Ross has in early times been invariably rendered in Gaelic as Gilleanrias, or Gillanders, and the Rosses appear under this  appellation in all the early Acts of Parliament.  There is also an unvarying  tradition that on the death of the last Earl of the O'Beolan line a certain  Paul Mac Tire was for some years head of the Rosses, and this tradition is  corroborated by the fact that there is a charter on record by Earl William  of the lands of Gairloch in 1366 in favour of Paul Mac Tire and his heirs by Mary Graham, in which the Earl styles Mac Tire his cousin.  This grant was confirmed by King Robert II. in 1372.  In  the manuscript of 1467 the genealogy of Clann Gille-Anrias, or the descendants of Gillean-Ard-Rois,  begins with a Paul Mac Tire.  The clan whose genealogy is there given is  undoubtedly that of the Rosses, and in the manuscript they are traced  upwards from Paul MacTire in a direct line to Gilleon na h'Airde, the  "Beolan" of the Norse Sagas, who lived in the tenth century, and who will be shown to be also the remote progenitor of the Mackenzies.  The Aird  referred to is said to be the Aird of Ross.

In the manuscript of  1467 the name Gille-Anrias appears in the  genealogies of both the Mackenzies and the Rosses exactly contemporaneous with the generation which preceded the original grant to  "Ferchair Mac an t'Sagairt" of the Earldom of Ross.  The name Gille--Anrias has been rendered as the Gaelic equivalent for Servant of Andrew,  or St. Andrew, and that, according to Skene, would seem to indicate that  the first of that name, if not a priest himself, must have belonged to the  priestly house of Appercrossan or Applecross, of which Earl Farquhar  ultimately became the head. The dates exactly correspond; and when, in  addition to this, it is remembered that of the earls who besieged Malcolm IV. at Perth in 1160 one was named "Gillandres" it seems fully  established that Ferchard Mac an t'Sagairt was descended from the  original  earls and that he was entitled to the earldom by ancient right on  the failure or forfeiture of the direct representative of the old line, as well  as by a new creation.  Although there may have been one or two usurpers--a common event in those turbulent times--Ferquhard was undoubtedly a  near relative and the legitimate successor of the Celtic "Gillandres" earl of  1160.  He is described in the Chronicle of Melrose as "Comes Rossensis  Machentagard," and in Dalrymple's Annals of Scotland as "Mc Kentagar,"  a designation which the author describes in a footnote as "an   unintelligible word," though its meaning is perfectly plain to every Gaelic-speaking Celt.

Ferquhard founded the Abbey of Fearn, in Easter Ross, about  1230, and died there in 1251.  Referring to his position during the first half of the thirteenth  century even the Earl of Cromartie is forced to admit in his MS., a copy of  which we possess, that "it cannot be disputed that the Earl of Ross was the  Lord paramount under Alexander II., by whom Farquhard Mac an  t'Sagairt was recognised in the hereditary dignity of his predecessors, and  who, by another tradition, was a real progenitor of the noble family of  Kintail." And this was said and written by an author, who, in another part of the same manuscript, stoutly maintains that the king granted these  identical lands to Colin Fitzgerald by a charter which, if it was ever signed  at all, must have been signed a full generation before the date which the forged document bears--thirty years after the witnesses whose names  attest it had gone to their last home.


THE  O'BEOLAN  EARLS  OF  ROSS.


It must now be most interesting to every member of the Clan  Mackenzie to know who these O'Beolan Earls of Ross were and all that  can be ascertained regarding themselves and their family alliances. Leaving out Earl Gillanders, of whom so little is known, let us begin with I.  FERQUHARD,  OR  FARQUHAR  O'BEOLAN, "Mac an  t'Sagairt," who, as already stated, founded the Abbey of Fearn, and died  there in 1251.  By his wife, whose name has not come down to us, he had issue, at least,

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Malcolm, of whose life nothing is known.

3.  Euphemia, who married Walter de Moravia, Lord of Duffus  from 1224 to 1262.

4.  Christina, who married Olave the Red, King of Man, with issue. Farquhar was succeeded by his eldest son,

II. WILLIAM  O'BEOLAN,  EARL  OF  ROSS.  He obtained Skye  and Lewis from Alexander III. and died at Earles Allane in 1274.  He married Joan daughter of the first Red Comyn, who died in 1273, and  sister of John, the Black Comyn, Lord of Badenoch and Earl of Buchan,  who married Marjory, sister of King John  Baliol, with issue--the  Red   Comyn, who was killed by Robert the Bruce in the Church of Dumfries in  1306.  Another sister of the Countess of Ross was married to John  Macdougall, Lord of Lorn, on record 1251, usually styled " King Eoin or  Ewin."  By his wife Earl William had issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Dorothea, who married her cousin, Torquil Macleod II. of  Lewis, with issue.

He was succeeded by his only son, III.  WILLIAM  O'BEOLAN,  EARL OF  ROSS,  who fought  alternately with Edward I. and Robert the Bruce, and was imprisoned in  London 1296-97.  In 1306 he delivered up to the English King, Robert  Bruce's Queen, Isabella, his daughter Marjory, his sister Mary, the brave Countess of Buchan, and other ladies of distinction, who bad for a time  found shelter and protection in the Sanctuary of St. Duthus, at Tain, from  the English oppressors of their country.  In 1309 he obtained a new grant of his lands.  By his wife, one of the Grahams of Montrose, he had issue--

1.  Hugh, his heir and successor.

2.  Sir John, who married his second cousin, Margaret, daughter of Alexander, Earl of Buchan.

3.  Isabella,  who  married  Edward  Bruce, Earl of Carrick, brother of King Robert the Bruce.

4.  A daughter who, as her second husband, married Malise, Earl  of Stratherne, with issue--four daughters, the eldest of whom married William St. Clair, Baron of Roslin, whose son Henry afterwards succeeded in right of his mother to the earldom of Stratherne.

He died at Delny, in Easter Ross, in 1323, and was succeeded by his eldest son, IV.  HUGH  O'BEOLAN,  EARL  OF  ROSS.  He received charters, of Strathglass and of the Isle of Skye.  He married first, in 1308,  Maud or Matilda, sister of King Robert the Bruce, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Hugh Ross of Rarichies, from whom the Old Rosses of  Balnagown, of whom the last representative in the male line was the late George Ross of Pitcalnie.  This Hugh obtained the lands of Philorth in  Aberdeen-shire, and between 1362 and 1372 he exchanged them with his  brother, Earl Hugh, for the lands of North Argyle, including the Castle of  Ellandonnan.  The territories exchanged included Strathglass, Kintail.  and  other lands in Wester Ross.

3.  Janet, who married, first, Monimusk of Monimusk and,  secondly, Sir Alexander Murray of Abercairny.

4.  Euphemia or Eupham, who married, first, Randolph, Earl of  Moray, who was killed at the battle of Durham, and secondly, her cousin, King Robert II., grandson of Robert the Bruce and first of the Stuart  dynasty.  This marriage being within the prohibited degrees of  consanguinity a special dispensation was obtained from Pope Innocent VI.  for its celebration in 1355.  She died in 1372. Earl Hugh married, secondly, also by dispensation from the Pope, in 1329, Margaret, daughter of Sir David de Graham.  The Earl was killed at the battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, when he  was succeeded by his eldest son, V.  WILLIAM  O'BEOLAN,  EARL  OF  ROSS  AND LORD  OF   SKYE, banished to Norway for some serious offence, but in 1336 he is  found in actual possession of the earldom.  He was afterwards Justiciar of  Scotland, and in a charter of 1374 he is designated "frater Regis," or the  King's brother, no doubt from the fact that his sister Euphemla was the  wife of Robert II.  He rebuilt the Abbey of Fearn, and married his cousin Isobel, daughter of Malise, Earl of Stratherne, Orkney, and Caithness, with  issue--

1.  William, who died before his father

2.  Euphemia, who became Countess of Ross in her own right on  the death of her father.

3.  Johanna, who, in  1375, married Sir Alexander Fraser, Lord of Cowie and Durris,  ancestor of the Frasers of Philorth and Pitsligo, now  represented by Lord Saltoun.  Johanna first carried the lands of Philorth to  that family.  She has a charter in 1370.

William died on the 9th of February, 1372, without surviving male issue, when he was succeeded by his eldest daughter, VI.  EUPHEMIA O'BEOLAN,  COUNTESS  OF  ROSS in her  own right.  She married first, by dispensation, dated 1367, Sir Walter  Leslie, son of Sir Andrew Leslie, who in right of his wife became Earl of Ross.  They have a charter of the earldom of Ross and of the lands of Skye  dated 1370, two years before Earl William's death, in their own favour and that of their heirs male and female in reversion.  Her first husband  predeceased her in 1382, whereupon she married, secondly, Alexander,  Earl of Buchan, better known in history as "The Wolf of Badenoch."  He  died, without issue, in 1394.  She died Abbess of Elcho in 1398, and was  buried in Fortrose Cathredral.  By Sir Walter Leslie she had issue--

1.  Sir Alexander Leslie, who became Earl of Ross in right of his mother.

2.  Margaret Leslie, who married Donald, second Lord of the Isles, who in her right, after fighting the battle of Harlaw, succeeded to the  earldom of Ross, and carried it to a new family, the Macdonald Lords of  the isles.

When the Countess Euphemia died, in 1398, she was succeeded by her only son, VII.  SIR  ALEXANDER  LESLIE,  EARL  OF  ROSS, who married Isabella, daughter of Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany, Governor  of Scotland, and by her had issue an only daughter, Lady Euphemia, or  Mary, who became a nun, and resigned the earldom in favour of her  maternal uncle, John, Earl of Buchan.  Donald, Lord of the Isles, who   married  her  father's  sister,  Margaret, disputed Euphemia's right to put  the earldom past her aunt, and the battle of Harlaw was fought in 1411 to decide the issue, which, as already stated, turned, so far as the possession  of the great earldom was concerned, in favour of the Lord of the Isles,  since known as Donald of Harlaw.  From this point the history of the earldom falls properly to be dealt with and is given at length in The  History of the Macdonalds and Lords of the Isles. But thus far it cannot  fail to be extremely interesting to all the members of the clan Mackenzie,  whether they believe in the Gillanders and O'Beolans or in the Fitzgeralds  as the progenitors of the race; for in any case the clan was in its earlier  annals closely allied with the O'Beolan Earls of Ross by descent and  marriage.

It has been established that Gillanders and O'Beolan were the  names of the ancient and original Earls of Ross, and they continued to be represented in the male line by the Old Rosses of Balnagowan down to the  end of the eighteenth century, when the last heir male of that family,  finding that the entail ended with himself, sold the estates to General  Ross, brother of Lord Ross of Hawkhead, who, although possessing the  same name, was of a different family and origin.  It will, it is believed, be  now admitted with equal certainty that the Rosses and the  Mackenzies are descended from the same progenitor, Beolan or Gilleoin na h'Airde, the  undoubted common ancestor of the old Earls of Ross, the Gillanders, and  the Rosses.  The various steps in the earliest portion of the genealogy connecting the Mackenzies with the common ancestor will be given with  the same detail as that of the Rosses, and it will be stated with sufficient  accuracy to justify  the  conclusions at which, in common with  Dr Skene  and all the best authorities on the subject, we have arrived.  The genealogy  of the Clan Andres or Rosses in the manuscript of 1467, is as follows:--

"Pol ic Tire, ic Eogan, ic Muiredaigh, ic Poil, ic Gilleanrias, ic  Martain, ic Poil, ic Cainig, ic Cranin, ic Eogan, ic Cainic, ic Cranin, McGilleoin na h'Airde, ic Eirc, ic Loirn, ic Fearchar, Mc Cormac, ic  Abertaig, ic Feradaig."

Dr Skene's translation--

"Paul son of Tire, son of Ewen, son of Murdoch, son of Paul, son of Gillanrias, son of Martin, son of Paul, son of Kenneth, son of Crinan, son of Ewen, son of Kenneth, son of Crinan, son of Gilleoin of the Aird,  son of Erc, son of Lorn, son of Ferchar, son of Cormac, son of  Oirbeirtaigh, son of Feradach."

The Mackenzie genealogy in the same MS. is--

"Muiread  ic Cainig, Mc Eoin, ic Cainig, ic Aengusa, ic Cristin, ic  Agam, Mc Gilleoin Qig, ic Gilleon na h'Aird."

Skene's translation follows--

"Murdoch son of Kenneth, son of John, son of Kenneth, son of  Angus, son of Cristin, son of Adam, son of Gilleoin Og, son of Gilleoin of  the Aird."

Skene makes an important correction on this genealogy in his later  work, Celtic Scot/and, Vol. III., p. 485, by substituting Cainig--Kenneth,  for Agam--Adam, in his original reading.  In this form the genealogy of  1467 corresponds exactly, so far as it goes, with that given by MacVuirich  in the Black Book of Clanranald. In 1222 "Gilchrist filius Kinedi,"  Gillecriosd son of Kenneth, is on record as a follower of MacWilliam.   Cristean is the ordinary Gaelic form of Christopher, otherwise Gilchrist, or  Gillecriosd. There is thus no doubt that the "Cristin" of the Gaelic  genealogy is the same name as Gillecriosd, Gilchrist, and Christopher.

In  the MacVuirich manuscript, however, several names are given between  Gilleoin Og and Gilleoin na h'Airde which are absent from the manuscript  of 1467; for while we have thirteen generations in the Clan Anrias or Ross  genealogy in the latter between Paul Mac Tire and Gilleoin of the Aird,  we have only eight in the Mackenzie genealogy between Murdoch of the  Cave, who was contemporary with Mac Tire, and their common ancestor  Gilleoin of the Aird, or Beolan.  In the MacVuirich manuscript there are  fifteen generations, translated thus--

"Murdoch son of Kenneth, son of John, son of Kenneth, son of  Angus 'crom,' or the hump-backed, son of Kenneth, son of Gilleoin Og, son of Gilleoin Mor, or the Great, son of Murdoch, son of Duncan, son of  Murdoch, son of Duncan, son of Murdoch, son of Kenneth, son of Cristin,  or Christopher, son of Gilleoin of the Aird."

The genealogies of the three families as brought out by these manuscripts, are shown in the following table:--



                                GILLEOIN OF THE AIRD.                                          |           +------------------------------+------------------+           |CLAN ANRIAS.                  |    MACKENZIES.   |           +------------------------------+------------------+           |  Crinan                      |   Cristin        |           |  Kenneth                     |   Kenneth        |           |  Ewen                        |   Murdoch        |           |  Crinan                      |   Duncan         |           |  Kenneth                     |   Murdoch        |           |  Paul                        |   Duncan         |           |  Martin                      |   Murdoch        |           |  Gillanrias                  |   Gilleoin Mor   |           +---------|--------------------|   Gilleoin Og    |                     |                    |   Kenneth        | +-------------------+------------------+ |   Angus Crom     | | EARLS OF ROSS     |     ROSSES	   | |   Kenneth        | +-------------------+------------------+ |   John           | | The Priest-"An    |  Paul            | |   Kenneth        | | Sagart"           |  Murdoch         | |   Murdoch of the | | I. Ferquhard "Mac |  Ewen            | |   Cave who died  | | an t'Sagairt"     |  Tire            | |   in 1375        | | II. William       |  Paul Mac Tire   | +------------------+ | III. William      |  who has a       | | IV. Hugh          |  charter of the  | | V.  William who   |  lands of        | | died in 1372      |  Garloch from    | |                   |  the Earl of     | |                   |  Ross in 1366,   | |                   |  confirmed in    | |                   |  1372.           | +-------------------+------------------+

There would seem to be no doubt that "Tire" or Tyre, stands here and elsewhere for "An t'Oighre," or the Heir, and Paul "Mac Tire" for Pol " Mac-an-Oighre," or Son of the Heir.  It will be observed that Colin does  not appear once in these early genealogies, and it has been already pointed  out that no trace of it is found anywhere as a family name until the middle  of the sixteenth century, when it was introduced by the marriage of one of  the Mackenzie chiefs to a daughter of the Earl of Atholl, whose mother  was Lady Mary Campbell, and who, calling her second son  after her own  uncle Colin, third Earl of Argyll, for the first time brought that name into  the family genealogy of Kintail.

It will also be seen as we proceed, although the Earls of Ross were superiors of the lands of Kintail as part of the earldom, and that it was therefore impossible that Colin Fitzgerald or any other person than those earls could have had a gift of it from the Crown, that the Mackenzies  occupied the lands and the castle, not as immediate vassals; of the King, but of their own near relatives, the O'Beolan Earls of Ross and their  successors, for at least two hundred years before the Mackenzies received a grant of it for themselves direct from the Crown.  This is proved beyond  dispute by genuine historical documents.  Until within a few years of the final forfeiture of the Lords of the Isles in 1476, the Mackenzies  undoubtedly held their lands, first from the O'Beolan Earls and  subsequently from the Island Lords as Earls of Ross; for the first direct Crown charter to any chief of Kintail of which we have authentic record, is one dated the 7th of January, 1463, in favour of Alexander "Ionraic,"  the sixth Baron.

To show the intimate relations which existed between the original Earls of Ross and the ancestor of the Mackenzies, a quotation may be  given from a manuscript history of the clan written by Dr George  Mackenzie, nephew of Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth, in the  seventeenth century.  Although be is a supporter of the Fitzgerald origin,  he is forced to say that, "at the same time (1267) William, Earl of Ross, laying a claim of superiority over the Western Isles, thought this a fit  opportunity to seize the Castle of Ellandonnan.  He sent a messenger to his  Kintail men to send their young chieftain to him as being his nearest  kinsman by marriage with his aunt."  He then goes on to say, that  Kenneth, not Colin, was joined by the MacIvers, Macaulays, MacBeolans,  and Clan Tarlichs, "the ancient inhabitants of Kintail," and refused to surrender, when "the Earl of Ross attacked them and was beaten." Had  there been  no previous kinship between the two families--and no one will  now attempt with any show of reason to maintain that there was not--this marriage of William, the second Earl, to Kenneth's aunt would have made  the youthful Kenneth, ancestor of the Mackenzies, first cousin, on the  maternal side, to William O'Beolan, the third Earl of that line, whose wife  and therefore Kintail's aunt, was Joan, sister of John, the Black Comyn,  Lord of Badenoch.  It has further been proved to a demonstration, and it is  now admitted by all the best authorities, that the O'Beolan Earls of Ross were descended from Gilleoin na h `Airde; and so are the Mackenzies,  who from the first formed an integral and most important part of the  ancient powerful native Gaelic tribes of which the Earls of Ross were the chiefs.

It has been shown that Kenneth, from whom the Mackenzies  take their name, was  closely  allied  by marriage with William, second Earl of  Ross, the latter having married Kenneth's maternal aunt. This fact by  itself would be sufficient to establish the high position, which even at that  early period, was occupied by Kenneth, who was already very closely  connected with the O'Beolan Earls of Ross by blood and marriage.

Kenneth himself married Morna or Morba, daughter of Alexander Macdougall, styled, "De Ergedia," Lord of Lorn by a daughter of John, the first Red Comyn, Lord of Badenoch, who died in 1273. Kenneth's wife  was thus a sister of John, the Black Comyn, who died about 1299, having  married Marjory, daughter of John Baliol, by whom he had John, the  second Red Comyn, one of the competitors for the Scottish Crown, killed  by Robert the Bruce in the Church of Dumfries in 1306. Kenneth's issue  by Morna or Morba of Lorn was John Mackenzie, II. of Kintail, who was  thus, through his mother, third In descent from John, the first Red Comyn,  who died in 1273, and sixth from the great Somerled of the Isles, Thane of  Argyle, progenitor of the Macdougalls of Lorn and of all the Macdonalds, who died in 1164.

John made even a more illustrious alliance than his father, by which at that early date he introduced the Royal blood of Scotland and  England into the family of Kintail.  He married his relative, Margaret,  sister of David, twelfth Earl of Atholl, slain in 1335, and daughter of  David, the eleventh Earl, who died in 1327 (whose estates were forfeited  by Edward I.), by Joan Comyn (died  1323), daughter of the Red Comyn  killed by Robert the Bruce, and great granddaughter of John Baliol.

Margaret's father, David, eleventh Earl of Atholl who died in  1327, was  the oldest son of John de Strathbogie, tenth Earl, hanged by Edward I.   Earl John's mother was the Countess Isabel de Dover, who died at a very  old age in 1292, daughter of Richard Fitzroy de Chillam (died 1216), a  natural son of King John of England.

Kenneth Mackenzie, III of Kintail, the issue of this marriage, was sixth in descent from John Baliol of the Royal line of Scotland and sixth from King John of England.

The Norwegian blood of the Kings of Man was brought into the  family by the marriage of this Kenneth to Finguala, daughter of Torquil Macleod, I. of Lewis, who was the grandson of Olave the Black, Norwegian King of Man, who died about 1237, by his wife Christina, daughter of Ferquhard "Mac an t'Sagairt," first O'Beolan Earl of Ross.

The Royal blood of the Bruce was introduced by the marriage of Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Kintail, to Finguala, daughter of Malcolm Macleod, III. of Harris  (who has a charter in  1343), by Martha, daughter  of David, twelfth Earl of Mar, son of Gratney, eleventh Earl (whose sister  Isabel married Robert the Bruce) by his wife Christina, daughter of Robert  Bruce, Earl of Carrick, and sister of King Robert the Bruce.

The Plantaganet blood-royal of England was introduced later by  the marriage of Kenneth Mackenzie, X. of Kintail, to Lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John, second Earl of Atholl, fourth in descent from  John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, son of Edward III., and father of Henry IV. of England, and this strain was strengthened and continued by the  marriage of Kenneth's son, Colin Cam Mackenzie, XI. of Kintail, to his  cousin Barbara, daughter of John Grant of Grant by Lady Marjory Stewart,  daughter of John, third Earl of Atholl. It scarcely needs to be pointed out  that, through these inter-marriages, the Mackenzies are also descended  from the ancient Celtic MacAlpine line of Scottish Kings, from the  original Anglo-Saxon Kings of England, and from the oldest  Scandinavian, Charlemagne, and Capetian lines, as far back as the  beginning of the ninth century.

The origin of the O'Beolan Earls of Ross and the Mackenzies from the same source is strikingly illustrated by their inter-marriages into the  same families and with each other's kindred.  Both the O'Beolans and the  Mackenzies made alliances with the Comyns of Badenoch, with the  MacDougalls of Lorn, and subsequently with the Macleods of Lewis and  Harris, thus forming a network of cousinship which ultimately included all  the leading families in the Highlands, every one of which, through these  alliances, have the Royal blood of all the English, Scottish, and  Scandinavian Kings, and many of the earlier foreign monarchs, coursing  in their veins.

Surely this is a sufficiently ancient and illustrious origin and much  more satisfactory to every patriotic clansman than an Irish adventurer like  the reputed Colin Fitzgerald, who, if he ever existed, had not and never  could have had any connection with the real origin of the Mackenzies,  which was as purely native of the Highlands as it was possible for any  Scoto-Celtic family in those days to be.  The various genealogical steps  and marriage alliances already referred to will be confirmed in each  individual case as we proceed with the succession and history of the  respective chiefs of the family, beginning with the first of the line,


I.  KENNETH,  OR  COINNEACH,


Who gave his name to the clan.  His is the fourth ascending name in the  manuscript genealogy of 1467, which begins with  Murdoch of the Cave.

Murdoch died in 1375, and was thus almost contemporaneous with the author of the Gaelic genealogy, which, translated, proceeds up to this  Kenneth as follows:--Murdoch, son of Kenneth, son of John, son of  Kenneth, and so on, as already given at page 39 to Gilleoin of the Aird.

At this interesting stage it may be well to explain how the name Mackenzie came to be pronounced and written as it now is.  John, the son  of this Kenneth, would be called in the original native Gaelic, "Ian Mac  Choinnich," John, son of Kenneth.  In that form it was unpronounceable to those unacquainted with the native tongue. The nearest approach the  foreigner could get to its correct enunciation would be Mac Coinni or Mac Kenny, which ultimately came to be spelt Mac Kenzie, Z in those days  having exactly the same value and sound as the letter V; and the name,  although spelt with a Z instead of a Y would be pronounced Mac Kenny,  as indeed we pronounce in our own day, in Scotland, such names as  Menzies, Macfadzean, and several others, as if they were still written with the letter Y.  The two letters being thus of the same value, after a time came to be used indiscriminately in  the word Kenny or Kenzie, and the  letter z having subsequently acquired a different value and sound of its  own, more allied to the letter S than to the original Y, the name is  pronounced as if it were written Mackensie.

Kenneth was the son and heir of Angus, the direct representative of  a long line of ancestors up to Gilleoin na li'Airde, the common progenitor  of the O'Beolan Earls of Ross, the Clann Ghille-Andrais, who about the  end of the fourteenth century called themselves Rosses, and of the  Mackenzies.  The close connection by blood and marriage between the  O'Beolan Earls of Ross and Kenneth's family before and after this period  has been already shown, but the ancient ties of friendship had at this time  become  somewhat strained. Kenneth succeeded to the government of  Ellandonnan Castle, which was garrisoned by his friends and supporters,  the Macraes and the Maclennans, who, even at that early date in large  numbers occupied Kintail.  Kenneth, in fact, was Governor of the Castle,  and was otherwise becoming so powerful that his superior, the Earl, was getting very jealous of him.

At this time the first Earl William laid claim to the superiority of  the Western  Isles, which he and his father, Ferchair Mac an t'Sagairt;  were chiefly instrumental, among the followers of Alexander III., in  wresting from the Norwegians, and he was naturally desirous to have the  government of Ellandonnan Castle in his own hands, or under the charge  of some one less ambitious than Kenneth, and on whom he could implicitly rely.  Kenneth was advancing rapidly both in power and influence  among his more immediate neighbours, who were mainly composed of the  ancient inhabitants of the district, the Mac Beolains, who occupied Glenshiel and the south side of Loch Duich as far as Kylerhea; the Mac  Ivors, who inhabited Glen Lichd, the Cro of Kintail, and the north side of  Loch Duich; while the Mac Tearlichs, now calling themselves Mac  Erlichs or Charlesons, occupied Glenelchaig. These aboriginal natives  naturally supported Kenneth, who was one of themselves, against the  claims of his superior, the Earl, who though a pure Highland Celt was less  known in Kintail than the Governor of the Castle.  This only made the  Earl more determined than ever to obtain possession of the stronghold,  and he peremptorily requested the garrison to surrender it and Kenneth to him at once. The demand was promptly refused; and finding that the  Governor was resolved to hold it at all hazards the Earl sent a strong detachment to take it by storm.

Kenneth was readily joined by the surrounding tribes, among  whom were, along with those whose names have been already given, the brave Macaulays of Lochbroom, who were distantly related to him. By  the aid of these reinforcements Kenneth was able to withstand a desperate and gallant onset by the Earl and his followers, who were defeated and  driven back with great slaughter. This exasperated the enemy so much that he soon after returned to the charge with a largely increased force, at the  same time threatening the young governor with the utmost vengeance and  final extirpation unless he immediately capitulated.  But before the Earl was able to carry his threats into execution, be was overtaken by a severe  illness of which he very soon after died, in 1274.  His son, the second Earl   William, did  not persevere in his father's policy against Kintail, and it  was not long before his attention was diverted into another channel.  On  the death of Alexander III., in 1286, the affairs of the nation became  confused and distracted.  This was rather an advantage to Kenneth than  otherwise, for, in the general disorder which followed he was able to  strengthen his position among the surrounding tribes.  Through a  combination of native prudence, personal popularity, and a growing power  and influence heightened by the eclat of his having so recently defeated the powerful Earl of Ross, he succeeded in maintaining good order in his  own district, while his increasing influence was felt over most of the  Western Isles.

Kenneth married Morna or Morba, daughter of Alexander  Macdougall of Lorn, "de Ergedia," by a daughter of John the first Red  Comyn, and sister of John the Black Comyn, Earl of Badenoch.  He died in 1304 and was buried in Icolmkill, when he was succeeded by his only  son,


II.  JOHN  MAC  KENNETH,  OR  MAC  KENZIE,


The  first of the race called Mac Kenny or Mac Kenzie.  Dr George Mackenzie, already quoted, says that "the name Coinneach is common to  the Pictish and Scottish Gael," and that "Mackenzie, Baron of Kintail,  attached himself to the fortunes of the heroic Robert the Bruce,  notwithstanding MacDougall's (his father-in-law) tenacious adherence to  the cause of Baliol, as is believed, in resentment for the murder of his  cousin, the Red Comyn, at Dumfries"; while the Earl of Cromartie says  that he "not only sided with Robert Bruce in his contest with the Cumins  but that he was one of those who sheltered him in his lurking and assisted  him in his restitution; `for in the Isles,' says Boethius `he had supply from  a friend; and yet Donald of the Isles, who then commanded them, was on  the Cumin's side, and raised the Isles to their assistance, and was beat at  Deer by Edward Bruce, anno  1308.'"  All this is indeed highly probable.

After Bruce left the Island of Rachrin he was for a considerable time lost sight of, many believing that he had perished during his wanderings, from the great hardships which he necessarily endured in his  ultimately successful attempts to escape the vigilant efforts and search of  his enemies.   That Bruce found shelter in Ellandonnan Castle and was  there protected for a considerable time by the Baron of Kintail--until he  found opportunity again to take the field against his enemies--has ever  since been the unbroken tradition in the Highlands, and it has always been  handed down from one generation to another as a proud incident in the  history of the clan.  The Laird of Applecross, who wrote his manuscript history of the Mackenzies in 1669, follows the earlier family historians.     He says that this Baron of Kintail "did own the other party, and was one of  those who sheltered the Bruce, and assisted in his recovery.  I shall not say  he was the only one, but this stands for that assertion that all who were considerable in the Hills and Isles were enemies to the Bruce, and so  cannot be presumed to be his friends.  The Earl of Ross did most  unhandsomely and unhumanly apprehend his lady at Tain and delivered  her to the English, anno 1305.  Donald of the Isles, or Rotholl, or rather Ronald, with all the Hebrides, armed against the Bruce and were beat by  Edward  Bruce in Buchan, anno 1308.  Alexander of Argyll partied (sided  with) the Baliol; his country, therefore, was wasted by Bruce, anno 1304, and himself taken by him, 1309.  Macdougall of Lorn fought against the  Bruce, and took him prisoner, from whom he notably escaped, so that  there is none in the district left so considerable as this chief (Mackenzie)  who had an immediate dependence on the Royal family and had this  strong fort, which was never commanded by the Bruce's enemies, either  English or Scots; and that his shelter and assistance was from a remote  place and friend is evident from all our stories.  But all their neighbours being stated on a different side from the Mackenzies engendered a feud  betwixt him and them, especially with the Earl of Ross and Donald of the  Isles, which never ended  but with the end of the Earl of Ross and  lowering of the Lord of the Isles."  That this is true will be placed beyond  question as we proceed.

It may, indeed, be assumed from subsequent events in the history of these powerful families and the united testimony of all the genealogists  of the Mackenzies, that the chief of Kintail did befriend Robert the Bruce  against his enemies and protected him in his castle of Ellandonnan, in  spite of the commands of his immediate superior, the Earl of Ross, and the  united power of all the other great families of the Western Isles and  Argyle.  And in his independent stand at this important period in the  history of Scotland will be found the true grounds of the local rancour  which afterwards prevailed between Mackenzie and the Island Lord, and which only terminated in the collapse of the Earls of Ross and the Lords  of the Isles, upon the ruins of which, as a reward for proved loyalty to the  reigning monarch, and as the result of the characteristic prudence of the race of MacKenneth, the House of Kintail gradually rose in power, subsequently absorbed the ancient inheritance of all the original possessors of  the district, and ultimately extended their influence more widely over the  whole provinces of Wester and Central Ross.

The genealogists further say that this chief waited on the King during his visit to Inverness in  1312.  [The MS. histories of the Mackenzies give the date of Robert Bruce's visit to Inverness as 1307, but  from a copy of the "Annual of Norway," at the negotiation and  arrangement of which "the eminent Prince, Lord Robert, by the like grace, noble King of Scors (attended) personally on the other part," it will be seen that the date of the visit was 1312.--See Invernessiana, by Charles Fraser-Mackintosh, F,S.A. Scot., pp. 36-40.]  This may now be accepted as correct, as also that  he fought at the head of his followers at the battle of  Inverury, where Bruce defeated Mowbray and the Comyn in  1303.  After  this important engagement, according to Fenton, "all the nobles, barons, towns, cities. garrisons, and castles north of the Grampians submitted to Robert the Bruce," when, with good reason, the second chief of Clan  Kenneth was further confirmed in the favour of his sovereign, and in the  government of Ellandonnan.

The Lord of the Isles had in the meantime, after his capture in Argyle, died while confined in  Dundonald Castle, when  his brother and  successor, Angus Og, declared for Bruce.  Argyll and Lorn left, or were  driven out of the country, and took up their residence in England.  With  Angus Og of the Isles now on the side of Bruce, and the territories of  Argyll and Lorn at his mercy in the absence of their respective chiefs, it  was an easy matter for the King, during the varied fortunes of his heroic struggle, defending Scotland from the English, to draw largely upon the  resources of the West Highlands and Isles, flow unmolested, particularly  after the surprise at Perth in the winter of 1312, and the reduction of all  the strongholds in Scotland--except Stirling, Berwick, and Dunbar--during the ensuing summer.  The decisive blow, however, yet to be struck  by which the independence and liberties of Scotland were to be for ever  established and confirmed, and the time was drawing nigh when every  nerve would have to be strained for a final effort to clear it, once for all, of  the bated followers of the tyrant Edwards, roll them back before an  impetuous wave of Scottish valour, and for ever put an end to England's  claim to tyrannise over a free-born people whom it was found impossible  to crush or cow.  Nor, in the words of the Bennetsfield manuscript, "will we affect a morbid indifference to the fact that on the 24th of June, 1314,  Bruce's heroic band of thirty thousand warriors on the glorious field of  Bannockburn contained above ten thousand Western Highlanders and men  of the Isles," under Angus Og of the Isles, Mackenzie of Kintail (who led five hundred of his vassals), and other chiefs of the mainland, of whom  Major specially says, that "they made an incredible slaughter of their  enemies, slaying heaps of them around wherever they went, and running  upon them with their broadswords and daggers like wild bears without any  regard to their own lives."  Alluding to the same event, Barbour says--

Angus of the Is'es and Bute alsae, And of the plain lands he had mae Of armed men a noble route, His battle stalwart was and stout.

General Stewart of Garth, in a footnote, Sketches of the  Highlanders, says that the eighteen Highland chiefs who fought at  Bannockburn were--Mackay, Mackintosh, Macpherson, Cameron,  Sinclair, Campbell, Menzies, Maclean, Sutherland, Robertson, Grant,  Fraser, Macfarlane, Ross, Macgregor, Munro, Mackenzie, and Macquarrie  and that "Cumming, Macdougall of Lorn, Macnab, and a few others were  unfortunately in opposition to Bruce, and suffered accordingly."  In due  time the Western chiefs returned home, where on their arrival, many of them found local feuds still smouldering--encouraged by the absence of  the natural protectors of the people--amidst the surrounding blaze.  John lived peaceably at home during the remainder of his days.  He  married Margaret, daughter of David de Strathbogie, XIth Earl of Atholl,  by Joan, daughter of John, the Red Comyn, last Earl of Badenoch, killed  by Robert the Bruce in 1306.  He died in 1328, and was succeeded by his  only son,


III.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE,


Commonly called Coinneach na Sroine, or Kenneth of the Nose, from the  size of that organ.  Very little is known of this chief.  But he does not appear to have been long in possession when he found himself serious  trouble and unable to cope successfully with the Earl of Ross, who made  determined efforts to re-establish the original position of his house over  the Barons of Kintail.  Wyntoun says that in 1331, Randolph, Earl of  Moray, nephew of Robert the Bruce, and at that time Warden of  Scotland,  sent his Crowner to Ellandonnan, with orders to prepare the castle for his  reception and to arrest all "misdoaris" in the district, fifty of whom the Crowner beheaded, and, according to the barbarous practice of even much  later times, exposed their heads for the edification of the surrounding  lieges high upon the castle walls.  Randolph himself soon after arrived  and, says the same chronicler, was "right blithe" to see the goodly show of  heads "that flowered so weel that wall"--a ghastly warning to all  treacherous or plundering "misdoaris."  From what occurred on this  occasion it is obvious that Kenneth either did not attempt or was not able  to govern his people with a firm hand and to keep the district free from plunderers and lawlessness.

It is undoubted that at this time the Earl of Ross succeeded in gaining a considerable hold in the district over which he had all along  claimed superiority; for in 1342 William, the fifth and last O'Beolan Earl,  is on record as granting a charter of the whole ten davochs of Kintail to Reginald, son of Roderick of the Isles. The charter was granted and dated  at the Castle of Urquhart, witnessed by the bishops of Ross and Moray,  and confirmed by David II. in 1344. [Invernessiana, p.56.]  From all this it  may fairly be assumed that the line of Mac Kenneth was not far from the breaking point during the reign of Kenneth of the Nose.

Some followers of the Earl of Ross about this time made a raid to  the district of Kenlochewe and carried away a great herschip. Mackenzie  pursued them, recovered a considerable portion of the spoil. and killed  many of the raiders.  The Earl of Ross was greatly incensed at Kenneth's  conduct in this affair, and he determined to have him apprehended and  suitably punished for the murders and other excesses committed by him.

In this he ultimately succeeded.  Mackenzie was captured, chiefly through the instrumentality of Leod Mac Gilleandrais--a desperate character, and a  vassal and relative of the Earl--and executed at Inverness in 1346, when the lands of Kenlochewe, previously possessed by Kintail, were given to  Mac Gilleandrais as a reward for Mackenzie's capture.

On this point the author of the Ardintoul manuscript says, that the  lands of Kenlochewe were held by Kenneth Mackenzie "and his predecessors by tack, but not as heritage, for they had no real or heritable  right of them until Alexander of Kintail got heritable possession of them from John, Earl of Ross," at a much later date. Ellandonnan Castle,  however, held out during the whole of this disturbed and distracted period,  and until Kenneth's heir, who at his father's death was a mere boy, came  of age, when he fully avenged the death of his father, and succeeded to the  inheritance of his ancestors.  The garrison meanwhile maintained  themselves on the spoil of the enemy.  The brave defenders of the castle  were able to hold their own throughout and afterwards to hand over the stronghold to their chief when he arrived at a proper age and returned  home.

The Earl of Cromarty, who gives a very similar account of this period, concludes his notice of Kenneth in these terms--" Murdered thus, his estate was possessed by the oppressor's followers; but Island Donain  keeped still out, maintaining themselves on the spoyle of the enemie.  All  being trod under by insolince and oppression, right had no place.  This  was during David Bruce's imprisonment in England," when chaos and  disorder ruled supreme, at least in the Highlands.

Kenneth married Finguala, or Florence, daughter of Torquil  Macleod, II. of Lewis. by his wife Dorothea, daughter of William, second O'Beolan Earl of Ross by his wife, Joan, daughter of John the  first Red  Comyn, and sister of John the Black Comyn, Lord of Badenoch and Earl  of Buchan, with issue, an only son,


IV.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE,

Usually called "Murchadh Dubh na h' Uagh," or Black Murdoch of the Cave, from his habits of life, which shall be described presently.

Murdoch  was very young when his father was executed at Inverness. During  Kenneth's absence on that occasion, and for some time afterwards,  Duncan Macaulay, a great friend, who then owned the district of  Lochbroom, had charge of Ellandonnan Castle.  The Earl of Ross was  determined to secure possession of Murdoch, as he previously did of his  father, and Macaulay becoming apprehensive as to his safety sent him,  then quite young, accompanied by his own son, for protection to  Mackenzie's relative, Macdougall of Lorn.  While here the Earl of Ross  succeeded in capturing young Macaulay, and in revenge for his father's  gallant defence at Ellandonnan during Kenneth's absence, and more  recently against his own futile attempts to take that stronghold, he put  Macaulay to death, whereupon Murdoch, who barely escaped with his life, left Lorn and sought the protection of his uncle, Macleod of Lewis.

The actual murderer of Macaulay was the same desperate  character, Leod Macgilleandrais, a vassal of the Earl of Ross, who had in 1346 been mainly instrumental in the capture and consequent death of  Mackenzie's father at Inverness.  The Earl of Cromarty describes the  assassin as "a depender of the Earl of Ross, and possessed of several lands  in Strathcarron (of Easter Ross) and some in Strathoykell."  When he  killed Macaulay, Leod possessed himself of his lands of Lochbroom and  Coigach "whereby that family ended." Macaulay's estates should have  gone to Mackenzie in right of his wife, Macaulay's daughter, but "holding of the Earl of Ross, the earl disponed the samen in lyfrent by tack to Leod,  albeit Murdo Mackenzie acclaimed it in right of his wyfe."

Leod kept possession of Kenlochewe, which, lying as it did,  exactly between Kintail and Lochbroom, he found most convenient as a  centre of operations against both, and he repeatedly took advantage of it, though invariably without success so far at least as his main object was  concerned--to get possession of the stronghold of Ellandonnan. On the  other hand, the brave garrison of the castle made several desperate  reprisals under their heroic commander, Macaulay, and held out in spite of  all the attempts made to subdue them, until the restoration of David II., by  which time Murdoch Mackenzie had grown up a brave and intrepid youth,  approaching majority.

The author of the Ardintoul MS. informs us that he was called  Murdo of the Cave; being perhaps not well tutored, he preferred sporting and hunting in the hills and forests to going to the Ward School, where the  ward children, or the heirs of those who held their lands and wards from  the King, were wont or bound to go, and he resorted to the dens and caves about Torridon and  Kenlochewe, hoping to get a hit at Leod Mac-gilleandrais, who was instrumental, under the Earl of Ross, to apprehend  and cut off his father.  In the meantime Leod hearing of Murdo's resorting  to these bounds, that he was kindly entertained by some of the inhabitants,  and fearing that he  would  withdraw the services and affections of the  people from himself, and connive some mischief against him for his ill-usage of his father, he left no means untried to apprehend him, so that Mackenzie was obliged to start privately to Lochbroom, from whence, with only one companion, he went to his uncle, Macleod of Lewis, by  whom, after he had revealed himself to him alone, he was well received,  and both of them resolved to conceal his name until a fit opportunity  offered to make known his identity.  He, however, met with a certain man  named Gille Riabhach who came to Stornoway with twelve men, about  the same time as himself, and he, in the strictest confidence, told Gille Riabhach that he was Mackenzie of Kintail, which secret the latter kept  strictly inviolate.  Macleod entertained his nephew, keeping it an absolute  secret from others who he was, that his enemies might think that he was  dead, and so feel the greater security till such time as they would deem it wise that he should act for himself and make an attempt to rescue his  possessions from Macgilleandrais, who now felt quite secure, thinking  that Mackenzie had perished, having for so long heard nothing concerning  him.  When a suitable time arrived his uncle gave Murdo two of his great  galleys, with as many men (six score) as he desired, to accompany him,  his cousin german Macleod, the Gille Riabhach and his twelve followers,  all of whom determined to seek their fortunes with young Kintail.  They  embarked at Stornoway, and securing a favourable wind they soon arrived  at Sanachan, in Kishorn (some say at Poolewe), where they landed, marched straight towards Kenlochewe, and arrived at a thick wood near  the place where Macgilleandrais had his residence.  Mackenzie commanded his followers to lie down and watch, while he and his companion, Gille Riabhach, went  about in search of intelligence. He  soon found a woman cutting rushes, at the same time lamenting his own  supposed death and Leod Macgillearidrais' succession to the lands of  Kenlochewe in consequence.  He at once recognised her as the woman's  sister who nursed or fostered him, drew near, spoke to her, sounded her,  and discovering her unmistakeable affection for him he felt that he could with perfect safety make himself known to her.  She was overjoyed to find that it was really he, whose absence and  loss she had so intensely and so  long lamented.  He then requested her to go and procure him information of Leod's situation and occupation that night.  This she did with great  propriety and discretion.  Having satisfied herself, she returned at the  appointed time and assured him that Macgilleandrais felt perfectly secure,  quite unprepared for an attack, and bad just appointed to meet the adjacent  people next morning at a place called Ath-nan-Ceann (the Ford of the  Heads), preparatory to a hunting match, having instructed those who might arrive before him to wait his arrival.  Mackenzie considered this an  excellent opportunity for punishing Leod.  He in good time went to the ford accompanied by his followers.  Those invited by Leod soon after  arrived, and, seeing Mackenzie before them, thought he was Macgilleandrais with some of his men, but soon discovered their mistake.

Mackenzie killed all those whom he did not recognise as soon as they appeared.  The natives of the place, who were personally known to him,  he pardoned and dismissed.  Leod soon turned up, and seeing such a  gathering awaiting  him, naturally thought that they were his own friends,  and hastened towards them, but on approaching nearer he found himself  "in the fool's hose."  Mackenzie and his band fell upon them with their  swords, and after a slight resistance Macgilleandrais and his party fled, but  they were soon overtaken at a place called to this day Featha Leoid or  Leod's Bog, where they were all slain, except Leod's son Paul, who was  taken prisoner and kept in captivity for some time, but was afterwards  released upon plighting his faith that he would never again trouble  Mackenzie or resent against him his father's death.  Murdoch Mackenzie  being thus  re-possessed of Kenlochewe, "gave Leod Macgilleandrais'  widow to Gillereach to wife for his good services and fidelity, whose posterity live at Kenlochewe and thereabout, and to this day some of them live there."  According to the Cromarty MS., Mackenzie possessed  himself of Lochbroom in right of his wife and disposed of Coigach to his  cousin Macleod, "for his notable assistance in his distress; which lands  they both retained but could obtain no charters from the Earls of Ross, of  whom they held, the Earls of Ross pretending that they fell to themselves in default of male heirs, the other retaining possession in right of his wife  as heir of line."

Paul Macgilleandrais some years after this repaired to the confines of Sutherland and Caithness, prevailed upon Murdo Riabhach, Kintail's illegitimate son, to join him, and, according to one authority, became "a common depredator," while according to another, he became what was  perhaps not inconsistent in those days with the character of a desperado --a  person of considerable state and property. They often "spoiled"  Caithness.  The Earl of Cromarty, referring to this raid,  says that Paul "desired to make a spoil on some neighbouring country, a barbarous  custom but most ordinary in those days, as thinking thereby to acquire the  repute of valour and to become formidable as the greatest security amidst their unhappy feuds.  This, their prentice try or first exhibition, was called in Irish (Gaelic) `Creach mhacain' the young man's herschip." Ultimately Murdo Riabhach and Paul's only son were killed by Budge of Toftingall.   Paul was so mortified at the death of his young depredator son that he  gave up building the fortress of Duncreich, which he was at the time  erecting to strengthen still more his position in the county.  He gave his  lands of Strathoykel, Strathcarron, and Westray, with his daughter and  heiress in marriage, to Walter Ross, III. of Balnagown, on which condition  he obtained pardon from the Earl of Ross, the chief and superior of both. Mackenzie, after disposing of Macgilleandrais, returned to his own  country; where he was received with open arms by the whole population  of the district.  He then married the only daughter of his gallant friend and  defender, Duncan Macaulay--whose only son, Murdoch, had been killed   by Macgilleandrais--and through her his son ultimately succeeded to the  lands of Lochbroom and  Coigeach granted to Macaulay's predecessor by  Alexander II.  Mackenzie was now engaged principally in preserving and  improving his possessions, until the return of David II. from England,  1357-8, when Murdoch laid before the King a complaint against the Earl  of Ross for the murder of his father, and claimed redress but the only  satisfaction he ever obtained was a confirmation of his rights previously granted by the King to "Murdo filius Kennethi de Kintaill, etc.," dated "Edinburg 1362, et Regni Domini Regis VI., Testibus Waltero Senescollo et allis." [MS. History of the Mackenzies.]

Of Murdoch Dubh's reign, the Laird of Applecross says:--"During this turbulent age, securities and writs, as well as laws, were little  regarded; each man's protection lay in his own strength." Kintail  regularly attended the first Parliament of Robert II., until it was decreed by  that King and his Privy Council that the services of the "lesser barons"  should not be required in future Parliaments or General Councils.  He then  returned home, and spent most of his time in hunting and wild sports, of  which he was devotedly fond, living peaceably and undisturbed during the remainder of his days.  This Baron of Kintail took no share in the recent rebellion under  the Lord of the Isles, who, backed by most of the other West Highland  chiefs, attempted to throw off his independence and have himself  proclaimed King of the Isles.  The feeble and effeminate Government of  David II., and the evil results consequent thereon throughout the country,  encouraged the island lord in this desperate enterprise, but, as Tytler says,  the King on this occasion, with an unwonted energy of character,  commanded the attendance of the Steward, with the prelates and barons  of the realm, and surrounded by this formidable body of vassals and retainers, proceeded against the rebels in person."  The expedition proved  completely successful, and John of the Isles, with a numerous train of  chieftains who joined him in the rebellion, met the King at Inverness, and  submitted to his authority.  He there engaged in the most solemn manner,  for himself and for his vassals, that they should yield themselves faithful  and obedient subjects to David their liege lord, and not only give due and  prompt obedience to the ministers of the  King in suit and service, as well  as in the payment of taxes and public burdens, but that they would coerce and put down all others, and compel all who dared to rise against the  King's authority to make due submission, or pursue them from their  respective territories."  For the fulfilment of these obligations, the Lord of  the Isles not only gave his most solemn oath before the King and his  nobles, on condition of forfeiting his whole possessions in case of failure,  but offered his father-in-law, the High Steward, in security and delivered  his son Donald, his grandson Angus, and his natural son, also named  Donald, as hostages for the strict performance of the articles of the treaty,  which was duly signed, attested and dated, the 15th November, 1369. [For a full copy of this instrument, see  Invernessiana, pp. 69-70.] Fordun says that in order to crush the Highlanders, and the more easily, as the King thought, to secure obedience to the laws, he used  artifice by dividing the chiefs and promising high rewards to those who  would capture or kill their brother lords; and, that writer continues "this  diabolical plan, by implanting the seeds of disunion amongst the chiefs,  succeeded, and  they gradually destroyed one another."

Before his marriage Murdoch had three illegitimate sons.  One of them was called Hector or Eachainn Biorach.  He acquired the lands of  Drumnamarg by marrying Helen, daughter of Loban or Logan of Drum-namarg, who, according to the Earl of Cromarty, "was one of the Earl of  Ross's feuars.  This superior having an innate enmity with Kenneth's race,  was the cause that this Hector had no peaceable possession of  Drumnamarg, but turning outlaw, retired to Eddirachillis, where he left a son called Henry, of whom are descended a race yet possessing there,  called Sliochd Ionraic, or Henry's race."  The second bastard was named  Dugald Deargshuileach, "from his red eyes."  From him descended John  Mackenzie, Commissary-Depute of Ross, afterwards in Cromarty, Rev.  Roderick Mackenzie, minister of Croy, John Mackenzie, a writer in   Edinburgh, and  several others of the name.  The third bastard  was named Alexander, and from him descended Clann Mhurchaidh Mhoir in  Ledgowan, and many of the common people who resided in the Braes of  Ross.

Murdoch had another son Murdoch Riach, after his wife's death, by a daughter of the Laird of Assynt, also illegitimate, although the Laird  of Applecross says that he was "by another wife."  This Murdoch retired  to Edderachillis and married a Sutherland woman there, "where, setting  up an independent establishment, he became formidable in checking the  Earl of Ross in his excursions against his clan, till he was killed by a  Caithness man named Budge of Toftingall.  His descendants are still  styled Clann Mhuirich, and among them we trace Daniel Mackenzie, who  arrived at the rank  of Colonel in the service of the Statholder, who had a  son Barnard, who was Major in Seaforth's regiment, and killed at the  battle of Auldearn.  He too left a son, Barnard, who taught Greek and  Latin for four years at Fortrose, was next ordained by the Bishop of Ross and presented to the Episcopal Church of Cromarty, where, after a variety of fortunes, he died, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Fortrose.    Alexander, eldest son of this last (Barnard), studied medicine under  Boerhave, and retired to practice at Fortrose. He married Ann, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie of Belmaduthy, purchased the lands of Kinnock,  and left a son, Barnard, and two daughters, Catherine and Ann."  [Bennetsfield MS. of the Mackenzies.]

This was the turbulent and insecure state of affairs throughout the Kingdom when the chief of Mackenzie was  peaceably  and  quietly enjoying  himself in  his Highland home.  He died in 1375.  [Murdo became a great favourite latterly with all those with whom he came in  contact.  "He fell in company with the Earl of Sutherland, who became his very good friend afterwards, as that he still resorted his court. In end  (being comely of person and one active young man) the Earl's lady (who  was King Robert the Bruce's young daughter) fell in conceit of him, and  both forgetting the Earl's kindness, by her persuasion, he got her with  child, who she caused name Dougall," and the earl suspecting nothing  amiss "caused bred him at schools with the rest of his children but  Dougall being as ill-given as gotten, he still injured the rest, and when the  earl would challenge or offer to beat him, the Ladie still said, `Dear heart,  let him alone, it is hard to tell Dougall's father,' which the good earle always took in good part.  In end, he comeing to years of discretion, she to'd her husband that Mackenzie was his father, and shortly thereafter, by  way of merriment, to'd the King how his lady cheated him. The King,  finding him to be his own cousine and of parts of learning, with all to  pleasure the earle and his lady, he made Dougall prior of Beauly."--Ancient MS.]

By his wife Isabel, only child of Macaulay of Loch. broom,  Murdoch Dubh had a son and successor,

V.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE,

Known as "Murchadh na Drochaid," or Murdoch of the Bridge.  The author of the Ardintoul MS. say's that "he was called Murdo na Droit by  reason of some bad treatment his lady met with at the Bridge of Scatwell, which happened on this occasion.  He having lived for many years with  his lady and getting no' children, and so fearing that the direct line of his  family might fail in his person, was a little concerned and troubled thereat,  which being understood by some sycophants and flatterers that were about  him and would fain curry his favour, they thought that they could not  ingratiate themselves more on him than putting his lady out of the way, whereby he might marry another, and they waited an opportunity to put  their design in execution (some say not without his connivance), and so on  a certain evening or late at night as she was going to Achilty, where her laird lived, these wicked flatterers did presumptuously and barbarously  cast her over the Bridge of Scatwell, and then their conscience accusing  them for that horrid act they made off with themselves.  But the wonderful  providence of God carried the innocent lady (who was then with child)  nowithstanding the impetuousness of the river, safe to the shore, and  enabled her in the night-time to travel the length of Achilty, where her husband did impatiently wait her coming, that being the night she promised to be home, and entertained her very kindly, being greatly offended at the maltreatment she met with.  The child she had then in the womb was afterwards called Alexander, and some  say agnamed Inrick   because by a miracle or Providence he escaped that danger and afterwards  became heir to his father and inherited his estate." The author of the  Applecross MS. says that this Baron was called "Murchadh no Droit"  from "the circumstances that his mother being with child of him, had been saved after a fearful fall from the Bridge of Scattal into the Water of  Conon."  The writer of the "Ancient" MS. history of the Mackenzies, the  oldest in existence, suggests that Mackenzie himself may have instigated  the ruffians to do away with his wife.  "They lived," he says, "a  considerable time together childless, but men in those days (of whom he  reason) preferred succession and manhood to wedlock.  He caused to  throw her under silence of night over the Bridge of Scatwell, but by Providence and by the course of the river she was cast ashore and escaped,  went back immediately to his house, then at Achilty, and went to his  bedside in a fond condition.  But commiserating her case and repenting  over the deed he gave her a hearty reception, learned from her that she  expected soon to become a mother, and "so afterwards they lived together  contentedly all their days."

During his earlier years Murdoch appears to have lived a peaceful life, following the example of loyalty to the Crown set him by his father,  keeping the laws himself, and compelling those over whom his  jurisdiction extended to do the same.  Nor, if we believe the MS.  historians of the family, was this dutiful and loyal conduct allowed to go  unrewarded.  All the successors of the Earl of Cromarty follow his  lordship in saying that a charter was given by King Robert to Murdo,  "filius Murdochi de Kintail," of Kintail and Laggan Achadrom, dated at  Edinburgh, anno 1380, attested by "Willielmus de Douglas, et Archibaldo  de Galloway, et Joanne, Cancellario Scotiae."  As already stated, however,  no such charter as this, or the one previously mentioned on the same  authority as having been granted to Murdoch IV. of Kintail, in 1362, is on record.

Murdoch was one of the sixteen Highland chiefs who accompanied  the Scots under James, second  Earl of Douglas, in his famous march to England and defeated Sir Henry Percy, the renowned Hotspur, at the memorable battle of Otterburn, or Chevy Chase, in 1388.

The period immediately following this historical raid across the Border was more than usually turbulent even for those days in the Scottish  Highlands, but Mackenzie managed to escape involving himself seriously  with either party to the many quarrels which culminated in the final  struggle for the earldom of Ross between the Duke of Albany and Donald,  Lord of the Isles, in 1411, at the battle of Harlaw.

As soon as the news of the disaster to the Earl of Mar, who  commanded at Harlaw, reached the ears of the Duke of Albany, at the  time Regent for Scotland, he set about collecting an army with which, in the following autumn, he marched in person to the north determined to bring the Lord of the Isles to obedience. Having taken possession of the  Castle of Dingwall, he appointed a governor to it, and from thence  proceeded to recover the whole of Ross.  Donald retreated before him,  taking up  his winter quarters in the Western Islands. Hostilities were  renewed next summer, but the contest was not long or doubtful,  notwithstanding some little advantages obtained by the Lord of the Isles.    He was compelled for a time to give up his claim to the earldom of Ross,  to become a vassal of the Scottish Crown, arid to deliver hostages for his  good behaviour in the future.

Murdoch must have felt secure in his stronghold of Ellandonnan, and been a man of great prudence, sagacity, and force of character, when, in spite of the commands of his nominal superior--the  Lord of the Isles--to support him in these unlawful and rebellious proceedings against the  King and threats of punishment in case of refusal, he resolutely declined to join him in his desperate and treasonable adventures.  He went the  length of saying that even if his lordship's claims were just in themselves,  they would not justify a rebellion against the existing Government; and he  further informed him that, altogether independently of that  important consideration, he felt no great incentive to aid in the cause of the  representative of his grandfather's murderer. Mackenzie was in fact one of  those prudent and loyal chiefs who kept at home in the Highlands, looking

after his own affairs, the comfort of his followers, and laying a solid  foundation for the future prosperity of his house, "which was so  characteristic of them that they always esteemed the authority of the  magistrate as an inviolable obligation."

Donald of the Isles never forgave Mackenzie for thus refusing to assist him in obtaining the Earldom of Ross, and he determined to ruin  him if he could.  On this subject the Earl of Cromartie says that at the  battle of Harlaw Donald was assisted by almost "all the northern people,  Mackenzie excepted, who because of the many injuries received by his  predecessors from the Earls of Ross, and chiefly by the instigation and  concurrence of Donald's predecessors, he withdrew and  refused concurrence.  Donald resolved to ruin him, but deferred it till his return,  which falling out more unfortunately than he expected, did not allow him  power nor opportunity to use the vengeance he intended, for on his return to Ross he sent Mackenzie a friend with fair speeches desiring his  friendship, thinking no enemy despicable as he then stood."  Murdoch, at  Donald's request, proceeded to Dingwall, where the Island Lord urged  him to join and promise him to support his interest.  This Mackenzie firmly refused, "partly out of hatred to his family for old feuds, partly dissuaded by Donald's declining fortunes" at that particular period ;  whereupon the Lord of the Isles made Murdoch prisoner in an  underground chamber in the Castle of Dingwall.   He was not long here,  however, when he found an opportunity of making his plight known to  some of his friends, and he was soon after released in exchange for some  of Donald's immediate relatives who had been purposely captured by  Mackenzie's devoted vassals.

Here it may be appropriate to give the traditionary account of the origin of the Macraes and how they first found their way to Kintail and  other places in the West; for their relationship with the Mackenzies has  from the earliest times been of the closest and most loyal character.   Indeed, from the aid they invariably afforded them they have been aptly  described as "Mackenzie's shirt of mail."  According to the Rev. John  Macrae, minister of Dingwall, who died in 1704, and wrote the only  existing trustworthy history and genealogy of his own clan, the Macraes  came originally from Clunes, in the Aird of Lovat, recently acquired from patriotic family reasons by Horatio Macrae, W.S., Edinburgh, the  representative in this country of the Macraes of Inverinate, who were  admittedly the chiefs of that brave and warlike race.  The Rev. John  Macrae, who was himself a member of the Inverinate family, says that the Macraes left the Aird under the following circumstances:--A dispute had  arisen in the hunting field between Macrae of Clunes and a bastard son of Lovat, when a son of Macrae intervened to protect his father, and killed  Fraser's son in the scuffle.  The victor "immediately ran oft; and calling  himself John Carrach, that he might be less known, settled on the West  Coast, and of him are descended the branch of the Macraes called Clann  Ian Charraich. It was some time after this that his brethren and other  relatives began seriously to consider that Lovat's own kindred and friends became too numerous, and that the country could not accommodate them  all, which was a motive for their removing to other places according as  they had encouragement.  One of the brothers went to Brae Ross and lived  at Brahan, where there is a piece of land called Knock Vic Ra, and the  spring well which affords water to the Castle is called Tober Vic Ra.

His  succession spread westward to Strathgarve, Strathbraan, and Strathconan,  where several of them live at this time.  John Macrae, who was a merchant in Inverness, and some of his brethren, were of them, and some others in  Ardmeanach.  Other two of MacRa's sons, elder than the above, went off  from Clunes several  ways; one  is said  to have gone to Argyleshire and  another to Kintail.  In the meantime their father remained at Clunes all his  days, and bad four Lords Fraser of Lovat fostered in his house.  He that  went to Argyle, according to our tradition, married the heiress of Craignish, and on that account took the surname of Campbell.  The other  brother who went to Kintail, earnestly invited and encouraged by  Mackenzie, who then had no kindred of his own blood, the first six  Barons, or Lords of Kintail, having but one lawful son to succeed the  father, hoping that the MacRas, by reason of their relation, as being  originally descended from the same race of people in Ireland would prove  more faithful than others, wherein he was not disappointed, for the  MacRas of Kintail served him and his successors very faithfully in every  quarrel they had with neighbouring clans, and by their industry, blood, and  courage, have been instrumental in raising that family."  The writer adds that he does not know Macrae's christian name, but that he married "a  daughter or grand-daughter of MacBeolan, who possessed a large part of  Kintail before Mackenzie's predecessors got a right of it from Alexander  III."  This  marriage, and their common ancestry from a native Celtic  source, and not from "the same race of people in Ireland" seems a much  more probable explanation of the early and continued friendship which  existed between the two families than that suggested by the rev. author of  "The Genealogy of the Macraes," above quoted.

But the curious circumstance to which he directs attention  regarding the first five Mackenzie chiefs is quite true.  It is borne out by every genealogy of the House of Kintail which we have ever seen. There  is not a trace of any legitimate male descendant from the first of the name  down to Alexander, the sixth baron, except the immediately succeeding  chief, so that their vassals and followers in the field and elsewhere must,  for nearly two hundred years, have been men of different septs and tribes and names, except the progeny of their own illegitimate sons, such as  "Sliochd Mhurcbaidh Riabhaich" and others of similar base origin.  Murdoch married Finguala or Florence, daughter of Malcolm  Macleod, III. of Harris and Dunvegan, by his wife, Martha, daughter of  Donald Stewart, Earl of Mar, nephew of King Robert the Bruce.  By this  marriage the Royal blood of the Bruce was introduced for the first time  into the family of Kintail, as also that of the ancient Kings of Man.

Tormod Macleod, II. of Harris, who was grandson of Olave the Black, last  Norwegian King of Man, and who, as we have seen, had married Christina, daughter of Ferquhard O'Beolan, Earl of Ross, married Finguala Mac Crotan, the daughter of an ancient and powerful Irish chief.   By this  lady Malcolm Macleod, III. of Harris and Dunvegan, had issue, among  others, Finguala, who now became the wife of Murdoch Mackenzie and  mother of Alexander Ionraic, who carried on the succession of the ancient line of Kintail.

Murdoch died in 1416 when he was succeeded by his only son,

VI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE,

Alastair Ionraic, or Alexander the Upright, so called "for his righteousness."  He was among the Western barons summoned in 1427, to  meet King James I. at Inverness, who, on his return from a long captivity in England, in 1424, determined to put down the rebellion and oppression  which was then and for some time previously so rampant in the Highlands.

To judge by the poceedings of a Parliament held at Perth on the 30th  September 1426, James exhibited a foresight and appreciation of the  conduct of the lairds in those days, and passed laws which might with  good effect, and with equal propriety, be applied to the state of affairs in  our own time.  In that Parliament an Act was passed which, among other  things, ordained that, north of the Grampians, the fruit of those lands  should be expended in the country where those lands lie.  The Act is as  follows:--"It is ordanit be the King ande the Parliament that everilk lorde  hafande landis bezonde the mownthe (the Grampians) in the quhilk landis  in auld  tymes there  was  castellis,  fortalyces  and  manerplaicis, big,  reparell and reforme their castellis and maneris, and duell in thame, be  thameself, or be ane of thare frendis for the gracious gournall of thar  landis, be gude polising and to expende ye fruyt of thar landis in the  countree where thar landis lyis." [Invernessiana, p.102.]

James was determined to bring the Highlanders to submission, and Fordun relates a characteristic anecdote in which the King pointedly declared his resolution. When the excesses in the Highlands were first  reported to him by one of his nobles, on entering Scotland, he thus  expressed himself :--" Let God but grant me life, and there shall not be a  spot in my dominions where the key shall riot keep the castle, and the  furze bush the cow, though I myself should lead the life of a dog to  accomplish it"; and it was in this frame of mind that he visited Inverness  in 1427, determined to establish good government and order in the North,  then in such a state of insubordination that neither life nor  property was  secure.  The principal chiefs, on his order or invitation met him, from  what motives it is impossible to determine--whether hoping for a reconciliation by prompt compliance with the Royal will, or from a dread, in case of refusal, to suffer the fate of the Southern barons who had  already fallen victims to his severity.  The order was in any case obeyed,  and all the leading chiefs repaired to meet him at the Castle of Inverness.

As they entered the ball, however, where the Parliament was at the time  sitting, they were, one by one, by order of the King, arrested, ironed, and  imprisoned in different apartments, and debarred from having any  communications with each other, or with their followers.

Fordun says that James displayed marks of great joy as these turbulent and haughty spirits, caught in the toils which he had prepared for  them, came voluntarily within reach of his regal power, and that be  "caused to be arrested Alexander of the Isles, and his mother, Countess of  Ross, daughter and heiress of Sir Walter Lesley, as well as the more  notable men of the north, each of whom he wisely invited singly to the  Castle, and caused to be put in strict confinement apart.  There he also  arrested Angus Duff (Angus Dubh Mackay) with his four sons, the leader  of 4000 men from Strathnarven (Strathnaver.)  Kenneth More, with his  son-in-law, leader of two thousand men; [All writers on the Clan  Mackenzie have hitherto claimed this Kenneth More as their Chief, and  argued from the above that Mackenzie had a following of two thousand fighting men in 1427.  It will be seen that Alexander was Chief at this  time, but Kenneth More may have been intended for MacKenneth More,  or the Great Mackenzie.  He certainly could have had no such following of his own name.] John Ross, William Lesley, Angus de Moravia, and  Macmaken, leaders of two thousand men; and also other lawless caterans  and great captains in proportion, to the number of about fifty Alexander  Makgorrie (MacGodfrey) of Garmoran, and John Macarthur (of the family  of Campbell), a great chief among his own clan, and the leader of a  thousand and more, were convicted, and being adjudged to death were  beheaded.  Then James Cambel was hanged, being accused and convicted  of the slaughter of John of the Isles (John Mor, first of the Macdonalds of  Isla.) The rest were sent here and there to the different castles of the noblemen throughout the kingdom, and were afterwards condemned to different kinds of death, and some were set at liberty."  Among the latter  was Alexander of Kintail.  The King sent him, then a mere youth, to the  High School at Perth, at that time the principal literary seminary in the kingdom, while the city itself was frequently the seat of the Court.

During Kintail's absence it appears that his three bastard uncles ravaged the district of Kinlochewe, for we find them insulting and troubling "Mackenzie's tenants in  Kenlochewe and Kintail   Macaulay, who was still Constable in Ellandonnan, not thinking it proper to leave his  post, proposed Finlay Dubh Mac Gillechriost as the fittest person to be  sent to St. Johnston, now Perth, and by general consent he accordingly  went to inform his young master, who was then there with the rest of the  King's ward children at school, of his lordship's tenants being imposed on  as above, which, with Finlay's remonstrance on the subject, prevailed on  Alexander, his young master, to come home, and being backed with all the assistance Finlay could command, soon brought his three bastard uncles to condign punishment." [Genealogical Account of the Macraes.]

The writer of the Ardintoul MS. says that Finlay "prevailed on him to go home without letting the master of the school know of it. Trysting with him at a certaiu place and set hour they set off, and, lest any should  surprise them, they declined the common road and went to Macdougall of  Lorn, he being acquainted with him at St. Johnston.  Macdougall  entertained him kindly, and kept him with him for several days.  He at that  time made his acquaintance with Macdougall's daughter, whom  afterwards he married, and from thence came to his own Kintail, and  having his authority and right backed with the power of the people, he  calls his bastard uncles before him, and removes their quarters from  Kenlochewe, and gave them possessions in Glenelchaig in Kintail  prescribing measures and rule for them how to behave, assuring them,  though he pardoned them at that time, they should forfeit favours and be  severely punished if they transgressed for the future; but after this, going  to the county of Ross to their old dwelling at Kenlochewe, they turned to practice their old tricks and broke loose, so that he was forced to correct  their insolency and make them shorter by the heads, and thus the people  were quit of their trouble."

The young Lord of the Isles was at the same time that Mackenzie  went to Perth sent to Edinburgh, from which he soon afterwards escaped to the North, at the instigation of his mother, the Countess, raised his  vassals, and, joined by all the outlaws and vagabonds in the country,   numbering a formidable body of about ten thousand, he laid waste the  country, plundered and devastated the crown lands, against which his  vengeance was specially directed, razed the Royal burgh of Inverness to  the ground, pillaged and burned the houses, and perpetrated every  description of cruelty. He then besieged the Castle, but without success, after which he retired precipitately towards Lochaber, where he was met  by the Royal forces, commanded by the King in person.  The Lord of the  Isles prepared for battle, but he had the mortification to notice the desertion of Clan Chattan and Clan Cameron, who had previously joined  him, and of seeing them going over in a body to the Royal standard.  The  King immediately attacked the island chief and completely routed his  forces, while their leader sought safety in flight.  He was vigorously  pursued, and finding escape or concealment equally impossible, and being  reduced to the utmost distress, hunted from place to place by his vigilant  pursuers, the haughty chief resolved to throw himself entirely on the  mercy of His Majesty, and finding his way to Edinburgh in the most secret manner, and on the occasion of a solemn festival on Easter Sunday, in  1429, at Holyrood, he suddenly appeared in his shirt and drawers before  the King and Queen, surrounded by all the nobles of the Court, while they were engaged in their devotions before the High Altar, and implored, on  his knees, with a naked sword held by the point in his hand, the  forgiveness of his sovereign.  With bonnet in hand, his legs and arms quite  bare, his body covered only with a plaid, and in token of absolute  submission, he offered his sword to the King.  His appearance,  strengthened by the solicitations of the affected Queen and all the nobles,   made such an impression on His Majesty that he submitted to the  promptings of his heart against the wiser and more prudent dictates of his  judgment.  He accepted  the sword offered him, and spared the life of his captive, but immediately committed him to Tantallon Castle, under the  charge of William Douglas, Earl of Angus.  The spirit of Alexander's followers, however, could not brook this mortal offence, and the whole  strength of the clan was promptly mustered under his cousin Donald  Balloch, who led them to Lochaber, where they met the King's forces  under the Earls of Mar and Caithness, killed the latter, gained a complete  victory over the Royal army, and returned to the Isles in triumph, with an  immense quantity of spoil.

James soon after proceeded north in person as far as Dunstaffnage; Donald Balloch fled to Ireland; and, after several encounters with the  rebels, the King obtained the submission of the  majority of the  chiefs  who were engaged in the rebellion, while others were promptly  apprehended and executed to the number of about three hundred.  The  King thereupon released the Lord of the Isles from Tantallon Castle, and  granted him a free pardon for all his rebellious acts, confirmed him in all  his titles and possessions, and further conferred upon him, in addition, the  Lordship of Lochaber, which had previously, on its forfeiture, been  granted to the Earl of Mar.  After his first escape from Edinburgh, the Lord of the Isles again in  1429 raised the standard of revolt.  He for the second time burnt the town  of Inverness, while Mackenzie was "attending to his duties at Court."

Kintail was recalled by his followers, who armed for the King, and led by their young chief on his return home, they materially aided in the  overthrow of Alexander of the Isles at the same time securing peace and  good government in their own district, and among most of the surrounding  tribes.  Alexander is also found actively supporting the King, and with the  Royal army, during the turbulent rule of John, successor to Alexander,  Lord of the Isles, who afterwards, in 1447, died at peace with his  sovereign.

James I. died in 1460, and was succeeded by James II. When, in 1462, the Earl of Douglas, the Lord of the Isles, and Donald Balloch of  Isla entered into a treaty with the King of England for the subjugation of  Scotland, on condition, in the event of success, that the whole of Scotland,  north of the Firth of Forth, should be divided between them, Alexander  Mackenzie stood firm in the interest of the ruling monarch, and with such success that nothing came of this extraordinary compact.  We soon after  find him rewarded by a charter in  his favour, dated 7th January 1463,  confirming him in his lands of Kintail, with a further grant of the "5 merk lands of Killin, the lands of Garve, and the 2 merk lands of Coryvulzie,  with the three merk lands of Kinlochluichart, and 2 merk lands of Ach-na-Clerich, the 2 merk lands of Garbat, the merk lands of Delintan, and the 4  merk lands of Tarvie, all lying within the shire and Earldom of Ross, to be  holden of the said John and his successors, Earls of Ross."  This is the first  Crown charter in favour of the Mackenzie chief of which any authentic  record exists.

Alexander continued to use  his great influence at Court, as well as  with John Lord of the Isles, for the purpose of bringing about a  reconciliation between his Majesty and his powerful subject during the  unnatural rebellion of Angus Og against his father. The King, however,  proved inexorable, and refused to treat with the Earl on any condition  other than the absolute and unconditional surrender of the earldom of  Ross to the Crown, of which, however, he would be allowed to hold all his other possessions in future. These conditions the island chief haughtily refused, again flew to arms, and in 1476 invaded Moray, but finding that  he could offer no effectual resistance to the powerful forces sent against  him by the King, he, by the seasonable grants of the lands of Knapdale and  Kintyre, secured the influence of Colin, first Earl of Argyll, in his favour,  and with the additional assistance of Kintail, procured remission of his  past offences on the conditions previously offered to him and resigning for  ever, in 1476, the Earldom of Ross to the King, he "was infeft of new" in the Lordship of the Isles and the other possessions which he had not been called upon to renounce.  The Earldom was in the same year, in the 9th  Parliament of James III., irrevocably annexed to the Crown, where the title and the honours still remain, held by the Prince of Wales.

The great services rendered by the Baron of Kintail to the reigning family, especially during these negotiations, and generally throughout his  long rule at Ellandonnan, were recognised by a charter from the Crown,  dated Edinburgh, November 1476, of some of the lands renounced by the  Earl of Ross, viz., Strathconan, Strathbraan, and Strathgarve; and after this  the Barons of Kintail held all their lands quite independently of any  superior but the Crown.  During the long continued disputes between the Earl of Ross and  Kintail no one was more zealous in the cause of the island chief than  Allan Macdonald of Moydart, who, during Mackenzie's absence, made  several raids into Kintail, ravaged the country, and carried away large numbers of cattle.  After the forfeiture of the Earldom of Ross, Allan's  youngest brother, supported by a faction of the tenantry, rebelled against  his elder brother, and possessed himself for a time of the Moydart estates.

The Lord of the Isles was unwilling to appear so soon in these broils; or perhaps he favoured the pretentions of the younger brother, and refused to  give any assistance to Allan, who, however, hit upon a device as bold as it  ultimately proved successful.   He started for Kinellan, "being ane ile in  ane loch," where Mackenzie at the time resided, and presented himself  personally before his old enemy, who was naturally surprised beyond  measure to receive such a visit from one to whom he had never been  reconciled.  Allan, however, related how he had been oppressed by his  brother and his nearest friends and how he had been refused aid from  those to whom he had a natural right to look for it.  In these desperate circumstances he resolved to apply to his greatest enemy, who, he argued,  might for any assistance he could give gain in return as faithful a friend as  he bad previously been his "diligent adversary." Alexander, on hearing  the story, was moved to pity by the manner in which Allan had been  oppressed by his own relatives, promised him the required support,  proceeded in person with a sufficient force to repossess him, and finally accomplished his purpose.  The other Macdonalds, who had  been   dispossessed  thereupon  represented to the King that Alexander  Mackenzie had invaded their territory as a "disturber of the peace, and ane  oppressor," the result being that he was cited before His Majesty at  Edinburgh, "but here was occasion given to Allan to requite Alexander's  generosity,  for Alexander  having raised armies to assist him, without  commission, he found in it a transgression of the law, though just upon the matter; so to prevent Alexander's prejudice, he presently went to Holyrood  house, where the King was, and being of a bold temper, did  truly relate how his and Alexander's affairs stood, showing withal that he,  as being the occasion of it, was ready to suffer what law would exact  rather than to expose so generous a friend to any hazard.  King James was so taken with their reciprocal heroisms, that he not only forgave, but  allowed Alexander, and of new confirmed Allan in the lands of Moydart."  [Cromartie MS. of the Mackenzies.]  The two were then allowed to return  home unmolested.

Some time before this a desperate skirmish took place at a place called Bealach nam Brog, "betwixt the heights of Fearann Donuil and  Lochbraon" (Dundonald and Lochbroom), which was brought about by  some of Kintail's vassals, instigated by Donald Garbh M'Iver, who  attempted to seize the Earl of Ross.  The plot was, however, discovered,  and M'Iver was seized by the Lord of the Isles' followers, and imprisoned in the Castle of Dingwall.  He was soon released, however, by  his  undaunted countrymen from Kenlochewe, consisting of Macivers,  Maclennans, Macaulays, and Macleays, who, by way of reprisal, pursued  and seized the Earl's relative, Alexander Ross of Balnagown, and carried  him along with them. The Earl at once apprised Lord Lovat, who was  then His Majesty's Lieutenant in the North, of the illegal seizure of  Balnagown, and his lordship promptly dispatched northward two hundred  men, who, joined by Ross's vassals, the Munroes of Fowlis, and the  Dingwalls of Kildun, pursued and overtook the western tribes at Bealach  nam Brog, where they were resting themselves.  A sanguinary conflict ensued, aggravated and more than usually exasperated by a keen and bitter recollection of ancient feuds and animosities.  The Kenlochewe men seem  to have been almost extirpated.  The race of Dingwall were actually  extinguished, one hundred and forty of their men having been slain, while the family of Fowlis lost eleven members of their house alone, with many  of the leading men of their clan. ["Among the rest ther wer slain eleven  Monroes or the House or Foulls, that wer to succeed one after another; so that the succession of Foulls fell into a chyld then lying in his cradle."--Sir  Robert Gordon's History 0f the Earldom of Sutherland, p. 36.]

An interesting account of this skirmish and the cause which led to it is given in one of the family manuscripts.  It says Euphemia Leslie,  Countess Dowager of Ross, lived at Dingwall.  She would gladly have  married Alexander of Kintail, he being a proper handsome young man,  and she signified no less to himself.  He refused the offer, perhaps,  because  he plighted  his faith to Macdougall's daughter, but though he  had not had done so, he had all the reason imaginable to  reject the  Countess's offer, for besides that she was not able to add to his estate, being but a life-rentrix, she was a turbulent woman, and therefore, in the  year 1426, the King committed her to prison in St. Colin's Isle (Dingwall),  because she had instigated her son, Alexander Earl of Ross, to rebellion. She invited Kintail to her Court in Dingwall to make a last effort, but  finding him obstinate she converted her love to hatred and revenge, and  made him prisoner, and either by torturing or bribing his page, he  procured the golden ring which was the token between Mackenzie and  Macaulay, the governor of Ellandonnan, who had strict orders not to quit  the castle or suffer any one to enter it until he sent him that token.

The  Countess sent a gentleman to Ellandonnan with the ring, who, by her  instructions, informed Macaulay that his master was, or shortly would be, married to the Countess of Ross, desiring the Governor to repair to his  master and to leave. the stronghold with him.  Macaulay seeing and  receiving the ring believed the story, and gave up the castle, but in a few  days he discovered his mistake and found that his chief was a prisoner  instead of being a bridegroom.  He went straight to Dingwall, and finding an opportunity to communicate with Mackenzie, the latter made  allegorical remarks by which Macaulay understood that nothing would  secure his release but the apprehension of Ross of Balnagown, who was  grand uncle, or grand uncle's son to the Countess.  Macaulay returned to  Kintail, made up a company of the "prettiest fellows" he could find of Mackenzie's family, and went back with them to Easter Ross, and in the  morning apprehended Balnagown in a little arbour near the house, in a  little wood to which he usually resorted for an airing, and, mounting him on horseback, carried him westward among the hills. Balnagown's friends  were soon in pursuit, but fearing capture, Macaulay sent Balnagown away  under guard, resolving to fight and detain the pursuers at Bealach nam  Brog, as already described, until Balnagown was safely out of their reach.

After his success here Macaulay went to Kintail, and at Glenluing, five  miles from Ellandonnan, he overtook thirty men, sent by the Countess,  with meal and other provisions for the garrison, and the spot, where they seized them is to this day called Innis nam Balg.  Macaulay secured them, and placed his men in their upper garments and plaids, who took the sacks of meal on their backs, and went straight with them to the garrison, whose  impoverished condition induced  the Governor to admit them without any  enquiry, not doubting but they were his own friends.  Once inside they  threw down their burdens, drew their weapons from under their plaids, seized the new Governor and all his men and kept them in captivity until  Mackenzie was afterwards exchanged for the Governor and Balnagown.  [Ardintoul MS.]

There has been considerable difference of opinion as to the date of  this encounter, but it is finally set at rest by the discovery of a positive  date in the Fowlis papers, where it is said that "George, the fourth Laird,  and his son, begotton on Balnagown's daughter, were killed at the conflict  of Beallach na Brog, in the year 1452, and Dingwall of Kildun, with  several of their friends and followers, in taking back the Earl of Ross's second son from Clan Iver, Clan Tarlich or Maclennans, and Clan Leod."  [The Earl of Cromarty gives a different version, and says that the battle or  skirmish took place in the year immediately after the Battle of Harlaw.

In  this he is manifestly in error.  The Highlanders, to defend themselves from  the arrows of their enemies, with their belts tied their shoes on their  breasts, hence the name "Bealach nam Brog," or the Pass of the Shoes.]   The Balnagown of that date was not the Earl of Ross's son, but a near  relative.

Angus Og, after many sanguinary conflicts with his father, finally overthrew him at the battle of the Bloody Bay, between Tobermory and Ardnamurchan, obtained possession of all the extensive territories of his clan, and was recognised as its legitimate head.  He then determined to  punish Mackenzie for having taken his father's part at Court, and  otherwise, during the rebellion, and swore that he would recover from him the great possessions which originally belonged to his predecessors, the  Lords of the Isles, but now secured by Royal Charter to the Baron of  Kintail.  With this object he decided to attack him, and marched to  Inverness, where he expected to meet the now aged Mackenzie returning  from attendance at Court.  Angus, however, missed his object, and instead of killing Mackenzie, he was himself assassinated by his harper, an  Irishman. This tragic, but well-merited, close to such a violent and  turbulent career, is recorded in the Red Book of Clan Ranald in the  following terms:--"Donald, the son of Angus that was killed at Inverness by his own harper, son of John of the Isles, son of Alexander, son of Donald, son of John, son of Angus Og;" an event which must have occurred about 1485.

Alexander was the first of the family who lived on the island In Loch Kinellan, while at the same time he had Brahan as a "maines," or  farm, both of which his successor for a time held from the King at a yearly  rent, until Kenneth feued Brahan, and Colin, his son, feued Kinellan.

The  Earl of Sutherland had been on friendly terms with Mackenzie, and  appointed him as his deputy in the management of the Earldom of Ross,  which devolved on him after the forfeiture.  On one occasion, the Earl of Sutherland being in the south at Court, the Strathnaver men and the men  of the Braes of Caithness took advantage of his absence and invaded  Sutherland.  An account of their conduct soon spread abroad, and reached  the ears of the Chief of Kintail, who at once with a party of six hundred men, passed into Sutherland, where, the Earl's followers having joined  him, he defeated the invaders, killed a large number of them, forced the  remainder to sue for peace, and compelled them to give substantial  security for their peaceful behaviour in future.

Kintail was now a very old man.  His prudence and sagacity well repaid the judicious patronage of the first King James, confirmed and  extended by his successors on the throne, and, as has been well said by his  biographer, secured for him "the love and respect of three Princes in  whose reign be flourished, and as his prudent management in the Earldom  of Ross showed him to be a man of good natural parts, so it very much  contributed to the advancement of the interest of his family by the  acquisition of the lands he thereby made; nor was he less commendable  for the quiet and peace he kept among his Highlanders, putting the laws  punctually in execution against all delinquents."  Such a character as this,  justly called Alastair Ionraic, or the just, was certainly well fitted to govern, and deserved to flourish in the age in which he lived.  Various important events occurred during the latter part of his life, but as Kenneth,  his brave son and successor, was the actual leader of the clan for many  years before his father's death, and especially at the celebrated battle of  Park, the leading battles and feuds in which the clan was engaged during  this period will be dealt with in the account of that Baron.  There has been much difference of opinion among the genealogists  and  family historians regarding Alexander's two wives.  Both Edmonston  in his Baronagium Genealogicum, and  Douglas  in  his  Peerage say  that Alexander's first wife was Agnes, sixth daughter of Colin, first Earl of  Argyll.  This we shall prove to be absolutely impossible within the  ordinary course of the laws of nature.  Colin, first Earl of Argyll,  succeeded as a minor in  1453, his uncle, Sir Colin Campbell of  Glenurchy, having been appointed his tutor.  Colin of Argyll was created  Earl in 1457, probably on his coming of age.  He married Isabel Stewart of  Lorn, had two sons, and, according to Crawford, five daughters. If he had  a daughter Agnes she must have been his sixth daughter and eighth child,  Assuming that Argyll married when he became of age, about 1457, Agnes,  as his eighth surviving child, could not have been born before 1470.  Her reputed husband, Alexander of Kintail, was then close upon 70 years of  age, having died in 1488, bordering upon 90, when his alleged wife would  barely have reached a marriageable age, and when her reputed son,  Kenneth a Bhlair, pretty well advanced in years, had already fought the famous battle of Park.  John of Killin, her alleged grandson, was born  about 1480, when at most the lady said to have been his grandmother  could only have been 10 to 15 years of age, and, in 1513, at the age of 33,  he distinguished himself at the battle of  Flodden, where Archibald  second Earl of Argyll, the lady's brother, at least ten years older than  Agnes, was slain.  All this is of course impossible.

A similar difficulty has arisen, from what appears to be a very simple cause, about  Alexander's second marriage.  The authors of all the family MS. histories are unanimous in stating that his first wife was Anna,  daughter of John Macdougall of Lorn, or Dunollich, known as John Mac  Alan Mac Cowle, fourth in descent from Alexander de Ergedia and Lord  of Lorn (1284), and eighth from Somerled, Thane of Argyle, who died in  1164.  Though the direct line of the house of Lorn ended in two heiresses who, in 1388, carried away the property to their husbands, the  Macdougalls of Dunollich became the male representatives of the ancient  and illustrious house of Lorn ; and this fully accounts for the difference  and confusion which has been introduced about the families of Lorn and   Dunollich in some of the Mackenzie family manuscripts.

The same authorities who affirm that Agnes of Argyll was  Alexander's first wife assert that Anna Macdougall, was his second.   There is ample testimony to show that the latter was his first, although some confusion has again arisen in this case from a similarity of names  and patronymics.   Some of the family MSS. say that Alexander's second  wife was Margaret, daughter of "M'Couil," "M'Chouile," or  "Macdougall" of Morir, or Morar, while others, among them the Allangrange Ancient  MS. have it that she was "MacRanald's daughter." The Ardintoul MS. describes her as "Muidort's daughter."  One of the  Gairloch MSS. says that she was "Margarite, the daughter of Macdonald  of Morar, of the Clan Ranald Race, from the stock of Donald, Lord of the  Aebudae Islands," while in another MS. in Sir Kenneth  Mackenzie's  possession  she  is designated "Margaret Macdonald, daughter of  Macdonald of Morar."  There is thus an apparent contradiction, but it can be conclusively shown that the lady so variously described was one and  the same person.  Gregory in his Highlands and Islands of Scotland, p.  158, states that "Macdougall" was the patronymic of one of the families of  Clan Ranald of Moydart and Morar.  Speaking of Dugald MacRanald, son and successor to Ranald Ban Ranaldson of Moydart, he says, "Allan the  eldest son of Dougal, and the undoubted male heir of Clan Ranald,  acquired the estate of Morar, which he transmitted to his descendants.

He  and his successors were always styled, in Gaelic, MacDhughail Mhorair,  ie., MacDougal of Morar, from their ancestor, Dougald MacRanald."  At  p. 65 he says that "the Clan Ranald of Garmoran comprehended the  families of Moydart, Morar, Knoydart, and Glengarry."  This family was  descended from Ranald, younger son of John of the Isles, by his marriage  with the heiress of the MacRorys or MacRuaries of Garmoran whose  ancestry, from Somerled of the Isles, is as illustrious as that of any family  in the kingdom.  A district north of Arisaig is still known among  the Western Islanders as "Mor-thir Mhic Dhughail" or the mainland possession of the son of Dougall.  The MS. histories of the Mackenzies having been all written after the patronymic of "MacDhughail" was acquired by the Macdonalds of Moydart and Morar, they naturally enough  described Alexander of Kintail's second wife as a daughter of Macdougall  of Morar, of Muidort, and of Clan Ranald, indiscriminately.  But in point of fact all these designations describe one and the same person.

Alexander  married  first, Anna, daughter of John Macdougall of Dunolly, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Duncan, progenitor of the Mackenzies of Hilton, and their branches, and of whom in their order as the senior cadet family of the  clan.

He married secondly Margaret, daughter of Macdonald of Morar, a cadet of Clanranald, with issue--

3.  Hector Roy or "Eachainn Ruadh," from whom are descended  the Mackenzies of Gairloch and their various offshoots, of whom in their  proper place.

4. A daughter, who married Allan Macleod, Hector Roy's  predecessor in Gairloch.

He is also said to have had a natural son, Dugal, who became a priest and was Superior of the Priory of Beauly, which he repaired about  1478, and in which he is buried.  This ecclesiastic is said by others to have  been Alexander's brother. (Anderson's History of the Frasers, p. 66; and  MS. History of the Mackenzies.)

Alexander died in 1488 at Kinellan, having attained the extreme old age of 90 years, was buried in the Priory of Beauly, and was succeeded  by his eldest son by the first marriage,

VII.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE,

Better known as "Coinneach a' Bhlair," or Kenneth of the Battle, from his prowess and success against the Macdonalds at the Battle of Park during  his father's life-time.  He was served heir to his predecessor and seized in  the lands of Kintail at Dingwall on the 2nd of September, 1488.  He  secured the cognomen "Of the Battle" from the distinguished part he took  in "Blar-na-Pairc" fought at a well-known spot still pointed out near  Kinellan, above Strathpeffer. His father was advanced in life before  Kenneth married, and as soon as the latter arrived at twenty years of age Alexander thought it prudent, with the view of establishing peace between the two families, to match Kenneth, his heir and successor, with Margaret, daughter of John Lord of the Isles and fourth  Earl  of Ross, and for  ever   extinguish  their ancient feuds in that alliance.  The Island chief willingly  consented and the marriage was in due course solemnised. About a year  after, the Earl's nephew and apparent heir, Alexander Macdonald of  Lochalsh, came to Ross, and, feeling more secure in consequence of this  matrimonial alliance between the family of Mackenzie and his own, took  possession of Balcony House and the adjoining lands, where, at the  following Christmas, he provided a great feast for his old dependants,  inviting to it also most of the more powerful chiefs and barons north of the Spey, and among others, Kenneth Mackenzie, his cousin's husband. The  house of Balcony being at the time very much out of repair, he could not  conveniently lodge all his distinguished guests within it, and had  accordingly to arrange for some of them in the outhouses as best he could.

Kenneth did not arrive until Christmas Eve, accompanied by a train of  forty able bodied men, according to the custom of the times, but without  his lady, which deeply offended Macdonald.  Maclean of Duart had chief  charge of the arrangements in the house and the disposal of the guests.   Some days previously he had a disagreement with Kenneth at some  games, and, on his arrival, Maclean told the heir of Kintail that, taking advantage of his connection with the family, they had taken the liberty of  providing him with lodgings in the kiln.  Kenneth considered this an  insult, and, divining that it proceeded from Maclean's illwill to him, he instantly struck him a blow on  the ear, which threw him to the ground.   The servants in the house viewed this as a direct insult to their chief, Macdonald, and at once took to arms.  Kenneth, though sufficiently bold,  soon perceived that he had no chance to light successfully or to beat a  retreat, and, noticing several boats lying on the shore, which had been  provided for the transport of the guests, he took as many of them as he  required, sank the rest, and passed with his followers to the opposite  shore, where he remained over night in the house of a tenant, who, like a good many more in those days, had no surname, but was simply known by  a patronymic. Kenneth, boiling with passion, was sorely affronted at the insult which he had received, and at being from his own house at Christmas, staying with a stranger, and off his own property.  In these  circumstances, he requested his host to adopt the name of Mackenzie,  promising him protection in future, so that be might thus be able to say  that he slept under the roof of one of his own name.  The man at once  consented, and his posterity were ever after known as Mackenzies.

Next morning (Christmas Day) Kenneth went to the hill above Chanonry, and sent word to the Bishop, who was at the time enjoying his  Christmas with some of his clergy, that he desired to speak to him.  The  Bishop knowing his man's temper and the turbulent state of the times  thought it prudent to comply with this request, though be considered it  very strange to receive such a message on such a day, and wondered much  what his visitors object could be. He soon found that Kenneth simply  wanted a feu of the small piece of land on which was situated the house in  which he had lodged the previous night, stating, as his reason, "lest  Macdonald should brag that he had forced him on Christmas Day to lodge  at another man's discretion, and not on own heritage."  The Bishop,  willing to oblige him probably afraid to do otherwise, and perceiving him in such a rage, at once sent for his clerk and there and then granted him a  charter of the township of Cullicudden, whereupon Kenneth returned to  the place and remained in it all day, lording over it as his own property.

The place was kept by him and his successors until Colin "Cam" acquired  more of the Bishop's lands in the neighbourhood, and afterwards  exchanged the whole with the Sheriff of Cromarty for lands in  Strathpeffer.

Next day Kenneth started for Kinellan, where his father, the old chief Alexander, resided, and related to him what had taken place. His  father was much grieved, for he well knew that the smallest difference  between the families would revive their old grievances, and, although  there was less danger since Macdonald's interest in Ross was smaller than in the past, yet he knew the clan to be a powerful one still, more so than  his own, in their number of able-bodied warriors; but these considerations,  strongly impressed upon the son by the experienced and aged father, only  added fuel to the fire in Kenneth's bosom, which was already fiercely  burning to avenge the insult offered him by Macdonald's servants.  His natural impetuosity could ill brook any such insult and he considered himself wronged so much that he felt it his duty personally to retaliate and  avenge it.  While this was  the  state  of his  mind matters  were suddenly  brought to a crisis by the arrival on the fourth day of a messenger from  Macdonald with a summons requesting Alexander and his son Kenneth to  remove from Kinellan, with all their families, within twenty-four hours,  allowing only that the young Lady Margaret, Macdonald's own cousin,  might remain until she had more leisure to remove, and threatening war to the knife in case of noncompliance.

Kenneth's rage now became ungovernable, and, without consulting  his father or waiting his counsel, he bade the messenger tell Macdonald that his father would remain where he was in spite of him and all his  power. As for himself, he accepted no rules as to his staying or going, but  Macdonald would be sure enough to hear of him wherever he was.  As for  Macdonald's cousin, Lady Margaret, since he had no desire to keep  further peace with his family he would no longer keep his relative.

Such was the defiant message sent to young Macdonald, and  immediately after its despatch, Kenneth sent away Lady Margaret, in the  most ignominious manner, to Balcony House.  The lady was blind of an eye, and, to insult her cousin to the utmost, he sent her back to him  mounted on a one-eyed horse, accompanied by a one-eyed servant, followed by a one-eyed dog.  She was in a delicate state of health, and this  inhumanity grieved her so much that she never after wholly recovered.  Her son, recently born, the only issue of the marriage, was named  Kenneth, and to distinguish him from his father was called "Coinneach   Og" or Kenneth the younger.

It appears that Kenneth had no great affection for Lady Margaret, for a few days after he sent her away he went to Lord Lovat accompanie by two hundred of his followers and besieged his house.  Lovat was naturally surprised at his conduct and demanded an explanation, when he  was informed by Kenneth that he came to demand his daughter Agnes in  marriage now that he had no wife, having, as he told him, disposed of  Lady Margaret in the manner already described. He insisted upon an  immediate and favourable reply to his suit on which condition he  promised to be on strict terms of friendship with the family; but, if his demand was refused he would swear mortal enmity against Lovat and his  house; and, as evidence of his intention in this respect, he pointed out to  his lordship that he already bad a party of his vassals outside gathering together the men, women, and goods that were nearest in the vicinity, all of whom, be declared, should "be made one fyne to evidence his  resolution." Lovat, who had no particularly friendly feelings towards  Macdonald of the Isles, was not at all indisposed to procure Mackenzie's friendship on the terms proposed, and considering the exigencies and  danger of his retainers, and knowing full well the bold and determined  character of the man he had to deal with, he consented to the proposed  alliance, provided the voting lady herself was favourable.  She fortunately  proved submissive.  Lord Lovat delivered her up to her suitor, who  immediately returned borne with her, and ever after they lived together as  husband and wife.

Macdonald was naturally very much exasperated by Kenneth's  defiant answer to himself and the repeated insults heaped upon his  relative, and through her upon her family.  He therefore dispatched his great steward, Maclean, to collect his followers in the Isles, as also to advise and request the aid of his nearest relations on the mainland-the  Macdonalds of Moidart and Clan Jan of Ardnamurchan. In a short time  they mustered a force between them of about fifteen hundred men--some  say three thousand--and arranged with Macdonald to meet him at Contin.   They assumed that Alexander Mackenzie, now so old, would not have  gone to Kintail, but would stay in Ross, judging that the Macdonalds, so  recently come under obligations to the King to keep the peace would not  venture to collect their forces and invade the low country.  But Kenneth, foreseeing the danger from the rebellious temper of Macdonald, went to  Kintail at the commencement of his enemy's preparations, and placed a  strong garrison, with sufficient provisions, in Ellandonnan Castle; and the  cattle and other goods in the district he ordered to be driven and sent to  the most remote hills and secret places.  He took all the remaining able-bodied men along with him, and on his way back to Kinellan he was  joined by his dependants in Strathconan, Strathgarve, and other glens in  the Braes of Ross, all fully determined to defend Kenneth and his aged  father at the expense, if need be, of their lives, small as their united forces  were in comparison with that against which they knew they would soon  have to contend.

Macdonald had meanwhile collected his friends, and, at the head of a large body of Western Highlanders, advanced through Lochaber into  Badenoch, where he was joined by the Clan Chattan; marched to  Inverness, where they were met by the young laird of Kilravock and some  of Lovat's people;  reduced the Castle (then a royal fortress), placed a  garrison in it, and proceeded to the north-east, plundering the lands of Sir  Alexander Urquhart, Sheriff of Cromarty. They next marched westward  to the district of Strathconan, ravaged the lands of the Mackenzies as they  went, and put the inhabitants and more immediate retainers of the family  to the sword, resolutely determined to punish Mackenzie for his ill-treatment of Lady Margaret and recover possession of that part of the  Earldom of Ross forfeited by the earls of that name, and now the property of Mackenzie by Royal charter.  Having wasted Strathconan, Macdonald arrived on Sunday morning at Contin, where he found the people in great  terror and confusion; and the able-bodied men having already joined  Mackenzie, the aged, the women, and the children took refuge in the  church, thinking themselves secure within its precincts from any enemy  professing Christianity.  They soon, to their horror, found out their  mistake.  Macdonald, having little or no scruples on the score of religion,  ordered the doors to be closed and guarded, and then set fire to the  building.  The priest, together with the hapless crowd of helpless and aged  men, women and children, were all burnt to ashes.

Some of those who were fortunate enough not to have been in  Contin church immediately started for Kinellan, and informed Mackenzie of the hideous massacre.  Alexander, though deeply grieved at the cruel  destruction of his people, expressed his gratitude that the enemy, whom he  had hitherto considered too numerous to contend with successfully, had  now engaged God against them by their impious conduct.  Contin was not  far from Kinellan, and Macdonald, thinking that Mackenzie would not  remain at the latter place with such a comparatively small force, ordered Gillespic to draw up his followers on the large moor, now known as "Blar-na-Pairc," that he might review them, and send out a detachment to pursue the enemy. Kenneth Mackenzie, who had received the command of the  clan from the old chief, had meantime posted his men in a strong position --on ground where he considered he could defend himself against a superior force, and conveniently situated to attack the enemy if a  favourable opportunity occurred.  His followers only amounted to six  hundred, while his opponent had at least three times that number, but he  had the advantage in another respect inasmuch as he had sufficient  provisions for a much longer period than Macdonald could possibly  procure for his larger force, the country people having driven their cattle  and all the provender that might be of service to the enemy out of his  reach.  About mid-day the Islesmen were drawn up on the moor, about a  quarter of a mile distant from the position occupied by the Mackenzies,  the opposing forces being only separated from each other by a peat moss,  full of deep pits and deceitful bogs.  Kenneth, fearing a siege, had shortly  before this prevailed upon his aged father to retire to the Raven's Rock, above Strathpeffer, to which place, strong and easily defended, he resolved to follow him in case he were compelled to retreat before the  numerically superior force of his enemy.  This the venerable Alexander  did, recommending his son to the assistance and protection of a Higher  Power, at the same time assuring him of success, notwithstanding the far  more numerous numbers of his adversary.

By the nature of the ground, Kenneth perceived that Macdonald  could not bring all his forces to the attack at once, and he accordingly resolved to maintain his ground and try the effects of a stratagem which he  correctly  calculated  would  mislead  his opponent and place him at a  serious disadvantage.  He acquainted his younger brother, Duncan, with  his resolution and plans, and sent him off, before the struggle commenced,  with a body of archers to be placed in ambush, while he determined to  cross the peat-bog himself and attack Macdonald in front with the main  body, intending to retreat as soon as his adversary returned the attack, and  thus entice the Islesmen to pursue him.  He informed Duncan of his own  intention to retreat and commanded him to be in readiness with his archers to charge the enemy whenever they got fairly into the moss and entangled  among the pits and bogs.

Having made these preliminary arrangements, he boldly advanced  to meet the foe, leading his resolute band in the direction of the intervening moss.  Macdonald, seeing him, cried in derision to Gillespic to  see "Mackenzie's impudent madness, daring thus to face him at such  disadvantage." Gillespic, being a more experienced leader than the  youthful and impetuous Alexander, said that "such extraordinary boldness  should be met by more extraordinary wariness in us, lest we fall into  unexpected inconvenience."  Macdonald, in a towering passion, replied to  this wise counsel--"Go you also and join with them, and it will not need our care nor move the least fear in my followers; both of you will not be a  breakfast to me and  mine."  Meanwhile Mackenzie advanced a little  beyond the moss, avoiding, from his intimate knowledge of it, all the dangerous pits and bogs, when Maclean of Lochbuy, who led the van of  the enemy's army, advanced and charged him with great fury. Mackenzie,  according to his pre-arranged plan, at once retreated, but in so masterly a  manner that, in doing so, he inflicted as much damage on the enemy as he  received.  The Islesmen speedily got entangled in the moss, and Duncan  Mackenzie observing this, rushed forth from his ambush and furiously  attacked them in flank and rear, killing most of those who had entered the  bog.  He then turned his attention to the main body of the Islesmen, who  were quite unprepared  for so sudden  an  onslaught. Kenneth, setting this,  charged with his main body, who were all well instructed in their leader's  design, and, before the enemy were able to form in order of battle, he fell  on their right flank with such impetuosity and did such execution among  them that they were compelled to fall back in confusion before the  splendid onset of the small force which they had so recently sneered at  and despised.  Gillespic, stung by Alexander Macdonald's taunt before the engagement began, to prove to him that "though he was wary in council  he was not fearful in action," sought out Kenneth Mackenzie, that he  might engage him in single combat, and followed by some of his bravest followers he, with signal valour, did great execution among the Mackenzies in course of his approach to Kenneth, who was in the hottest  of the fight, and who, seeing Gillespic coming in his direction, advanced to meet him, killing, wounding, or scattering any of the Macdonalds that  came in his way.  He made a signal to Gillespic to advance and meet him  hand-to-hand, but, finding him hesitating, Kenneth, who far exceeded him  in strength while he equalled him in courage, would brook no tedious  debate but pressed on with fearful eagerness, at one blow cut off  Gillespic's arm arid passed very far into his body so that he fell down dead  on the spot.

At this moment Kenneth noticed his standard-bearer close by,  without his colours, and fighting desperately to his own hand.  He turned round to him, and angrily asked what had become of his colours, when he  was coolly answered--" I left Macdonald's standard-bearer, quite  unashamed of himself, and without the slightest concern for those of his  own chief, carefully guarding mine." Kenneth naturally demanded an  explanation of such an extraordinary state of matters, when the man  informed him that he had met Macdonald's standard-bearer in the conflict, and had been fortunate enough to slay him; that he had thrust the staff of  his own standard through his opponent's body  and as there appeared to be some good work to do among the enemy, he had left some of his  companions to guard the standard, and devoted himself to do what little he  could to aid his master, and protect him from his adversaries.  Maclean of  Lochbuy (Lachlainn MacThearlaich) was killed  by "Duncan mor na  Tuaighe," Mackenzie's "great scallag," of whom we have the following  curious account:--

Shortly before the battle, a raw, ungainly, but powerful looking youth from Kintail was seen staring about, as the Mackenzies were starting to meet the enemy, in an apparently idiotic manner, as if looking  for something.  He ultimately came across an old rusty battle-axe, of great  size, and, setting off after the others, he arrived at the scene of strife just  as the combatants were closing with each other.  Duncan Macrae (for such  was his name), from his stupid and ungainly appearance, was taken little  notice of, and was wandering about in an aimless, vacant, half-idiotic  manner. Hector  Roy, Alexander's third son, and progenitor of the  Gairloch Mackenzies, observing him, asked why he was not taking part in  the fight, and supporting his chief and clan.  Duncan replied--"Mar a faigh  mi miabh duine, cha dean mi gniomh duine."  (Unless I get a man's  esteem, I shall not perform a man's work.)  This was in reference to his  not having been provided with a proper weapon. Hector answered him--"Deansa gniomh duine `s gheibh thu miabh duine."  (Perform a man's  work and you will get a man's esteem.) Duncan at once rushed into the  strife, exclaiming--"Buille mhor bho chul mo laimhe,  `s ceum leatha, am fear nach teich rombam, teicheam roimhe."  (A heavy stroke from the  back of my hand [arm] and a step to [enforce] it  He who does not get out of my way, let me get out of his.)  Duncan soon killed a man, and, drawing the body aside, he coolly sat upon it.  Hector Roy, noticing this peculiar  proceeding as be was passing by in the heat of the contest, accosted  Duncan, and asked him why he was not still engaged with his comrades.   Duncan answered--"Mar a faigh mi ach miabh aon duine cha dean mi ach  gniomh aon duine."  (If I only get one man's due I shall only do one man's  work).  Hector told him to perform two men's work, and be would get two  men's  reward.  Duncan returned again to the field of carnage, killed  another, pulled his body away, placed it on the top of the first, and sat upon the two.  The same question was again asked, and the answer given:  --"I have killed two men, and earned two men's wages."  Hector answered --"Do your best, and we shall not be reckoning with you."  Duncan instantly  replied--"Am  fear nach  biodh  ag cunntadh rium cha bhithinn ag cunntadh ris"--(He that would not reckon with me, I would not reckon  with him)--and rushed into the thickest of the battle, where he mowed  down the enemy with his rusty battle-axe like grass; so much so that  Lachlan Maclean of Lochbuy (Lachlainn MacThearlaich), a most  redoubtable warrior, placed himself in Duncan's way to check him in his  murderous career.  The two met in mortal strife, but, Maclean being a very  powerful man, clad in mail, and well versed in arms, Duncan could make  no impression upon him  but, being lighter and more active than his  heavily mailed opponent, he managed to defend himself, watching his  opportunity, and retreating backwards until he arrived at a ditch, where his  opponent, thinking he had him fixed, made a desperate stroke at him,  which Duncan parried, at the same time jumping backwards across the  ditch.  Maclean, to catch his enemy, made a furious lunge with his  weapon, but, instead of entering Duncan's body, it got fixed in the  opposite bank of the ditch.  In withdrawing it, he bent his head forward, when the helmet, rising, exposed the back of his neck, upon which  Duncan's  battle-axe descended with the velocity of lightning, and with  such terrific force as to sever Maclean's head from his body. This, it is said, was the turning-point of the struggle, for the Macdonalds, seeing the  brave leader of their van falling, at once retreated, and gave up all for lost. The hero was ever afterwards known as "Donnchadh Mor na Tuaighe," or  Big Duncan of the Axe, arid many a story is told in Kintail and Gairloch  of the many other prodigies of valour which he performed in the after  contests of the Mackenzies and  the  Macraes against their common  enemies.  "Such of Macdonald's men as escaped the battle fled together,  and as they were going homeward  began to spulzie Strathconan, which   Mackenzie hearing, followed them with a party, overtakes them at  Invercorran, kills shoals of them and the rest fled divers ways."

That night, as Mackenzie sat at supper, he missed Duncan Mor,  and said to the company--"I am more vexed for the want of my scallag mar (big servant) this night than any satisfaction I had of this day."  One  of those present said, "I thought, (as the people fled) I perceived him  following four or five men that ran up the burn." He had not well spoken the word when Duncan Mor came in with four heads "bound on a woody"  and threw them before his master, saying--"Tell me now if I have not  deserved my supper," to which, it is said of him, he fell with great gusto.

This reminds me, continues the chronicler, "of a cheat he once played on an Irishman, being a traveller, withal a strong, lusty fellow,  well-proportioned, but of an extraordinary stomach.  He resorted into  gentlemen's houses, and (was) very oft in Mackenzie's. Having come on  a time to the same Mackenzie's house in Islandonain two or three years  after this battle (of Park), he was cared for as usual, and when the laird  went to dinner, he was set aside, at a side-table to himself, and a double  proportion allowed him, which this Duncan Mor envying, went on a day  and sat side for side with him, drew his skyn or short dagger and eats with  him.  `How now,' says the Irishman, `how comes it that you fall in eating in any manner of way.'  ` I cannot tell,' says Duncan, `but I do think I have  as good will to eat as you can have.'  `Well,' says the other, `we shall try  that when we have done.'  So when the laird had done of his dinner, the   Irishman  went where he was and said, `Noble sir, I have travelled now  almost among all the clans in Scotland, and was resorting their houses, as  I have been several times here, where I cannot say but I was sufficiently cared for, but I never met with such an affront as I have this day.'  The laird asked what he meant.  So he tells him what injury Duncan had done  him in eating a share of his proportion.  `Well,' says the laird, `I hope M'ille Chruimb,' for so the Irishman was called, `you will take no notice of him that did that; for he is but a fool that plays the fool now and then.'

`I cannot tell,' says he, `but he is no idiot at eating, nor will I let my  affront pass so; for I must have a turn or two of wrestling with him for it in  your presence.'  Whereupon a stander-by asks Duncan if he would wrestle  with him.  `I will,' says he, `for I think I was fit sides with him in eating  and might be so with this.'  They yocks, and Duncan threw him thrice on  his back.  The Irishman was so angry he wist not what to  say.  He invites  him to put the stone, and at the second cast he worried him four feet, but  could never reach him.  Then he was like to burst himself. Finding this, he invites him to lop so that he outlopped him as far a length.  The  Irishman then said, `I have travelled as far as any of my equals, both in Scotland, England, and Ireland, and tried many hands, but I never met  with my equal till this day, but comrade,' say's he `let us now go and  swim a little in the laird's presence.'  `With all my heart,' say's Duncan,  `for I never sought better' (with this Duncan could swim not at all), but down to the shore they go to the next rock, and being full sea, was at least  three fathoms deep, but before the Irishman had off half of his clothes  Duncan was stark naked, lops over the rocks and ducks to the bottom and  up again.  Looking about him he calls to a boy that stood by, and said,  `Lad, go where the Lady is, and bid her send me a butter and four cheese.'

The  Irishman, hearing  this,  asks `what purpose.'  `To what purpose,'  says he, `yons the least we will need this night and to-morrow wherever  we be,' `Do you intend a journey,' say's the Irishman.  `Aye, that I do,' answered the other, `and am in hopes to cross the Kyle ere night.'  Now,  this Kyle was 20 leagues off with a very ill stream, as the Irishman very well knew, so that he said, with a very great oath, lie would not go with him that length, but if he liked to sport the laird with several sorts of swimming, he would give a trial.  `Sport here, sport there, wherever I go you must go.'  With this the cheese and butter come, and Duncan desires  the Irishman to make ready, but all his persuasions (not against his will)  would not prevail with Mac a Chruimb, whereupon all the company gave  over with laughter, knowing the other could swim none at all, but the  fellow thought they jeered  him.  The laird made Duncan forbear him; but  Duncan swore a great oath he would make him swim or he left the town,  otherwise he would want of his will.  So it came to pass for the Irishman got away that same night, was seen on the morrow in Lochalsh, but none  (was) found that ferried him over.  But never after resorted Mackenzie's house." [Ancient MS. of the Mackenzies.]

What remained of the Macdonalds after the battle of Park were completely routed and put to flight, but most of them were killed, "quarter  being no ordinar complement in thos dayes."

The night before the battle young Brodie of Brodie, accompanied  by his accustomed retinue, was on a visit at Kinellan, and as be was preparing to leave the next morning be noticed Mackenzie's men in arms,  whereupon he asked if the enemy were known to be so near that for a  certainty they would fight before night.  Being informed that they were  close at hand, he determined to wait and take part in the battle, replying to  Kenneth's persuasions to the contrary, "that be was an ill fellow and  worse neighbour that would leave his friend at such a time,"  He took a  distinguished part in the fight and behaved "to the advantage of his friend  and notable loss of his enemy," and the Earl of Cromarty informs us that  immediately after the battle be went on his journey.  But his conduct  produced a friendship between the Mackenzies and the family of Brodie,  which continued among their posterity, "and even yet remains betwixt them, being more sacredly observed than the ties of affinity and consanguinity amongst most others," and a bond of manrent was entered  into between the families.  Some authorities assert that young Brodie was slain, but of this no early writer makes any mention and neither in Sir  Robert Gordon's Earldom of Sutherland, in the Earl of Cromartie or other  MS. Histories of the Mackenzies, nor in Brown's History of the Highland  Clans, is there any mention made of his having been killed, though they  all refer to the distinguished part be took in the battle.  He was, however,  seriously wounded.

The morning after the battle Kenneth, fearing that the few of the Macdonalds who escaped might rally among the hills and commit cruelties and robberies on those of his people whom they might come across, marched to Strathconan, where he found, as he had expected, that  about three hundred of the enemy had rallied, and were destroying  everything they had passed over in their eastward march before the battle.

As soon, however, as they noticed him in pursuit they took to their heels,  but they were overtaken and all killed or made prisoners.

Kenneth then  returned to Kinellan, carrying with him Alexander Macdonald of Lochalsh, whom he had taken prisoner, in triumph.  His aged father, Alastair Ionraic, had now returned from the Raven's Rock,  and warmly congratulated his valiant son upon his splendid victory;  adding, however, with significant emphasis, that he feared they made two  days work of one," since, by sparing Macdonald, who was also a prisoner,  and his apparent heir, they preserved the lives of those who might yet give  them trouble.  But Kenneth, though a lion in the field, could not, from any  such prudential consideration, be induced to commit such a cowardly and  inhuman act as was here inferred.  He, however, had no great faith in the forbearance of his followers if an opportunity occurred to them, and he  accordingly sent Macdonald, under a strong guard, to Lord Lovat, to be  kept by him in safety until he should advise him how to dispose of him.

He kept Alexander of Lochalsh with himself, but, contrary to the expectations of their friends, he, on the intercession of old Macdonald,  released them both within six months, having first bound them by oath  and honour never to molest him or his, and never again to claim any right to the Earldom of Ross, which the Lord of the Isles had in 1475 forfeited to the Crown.

Many of the Macdonalds and their followers who escaped from the field of battle perished in the River Conon.  Flying from the close pursuit  of the victorious Mackenzies, they took the river, which in some parts was  very deep, wherever they came up to it, and were drowned.  Rushing to  cross at Moy, they met an old woman--still smarting under the insults and  spoliations inflicted on her and her neighbours by the Macdonalds on their  way north--and asked her where was the best ford on the river.  "O!  ghaolaich," she answered, "is aon ath an abhuinn; ged tha i dubh, cha `n  eil i domhain," (Oh! dear, the river is all one ford together; though it looks  black, it is not deep).  In their pitiful plight, and on the strength of this  misleading information, they rushed into the water in hundreds, and were  immediately carried away by the stream, many of them clutching at the  shrubs and bushes which overhung the banks of the river, and crying  loudly for assistance.  This amazon and a number of her sex who were  near at hand had meanwhile  procured their sickles, and now exerted  themselves in cutting away the bushes to which the wretched Macdonalds  clung with a death grasp, the old woman exclaiming in each case, as she  applied her sickle, "As you have taken so much  already which did not  belong to you, my friend, you can take that into the  bargain.  The   instrument of the old woman's revenge has been for many generations,  and still is by very old people in the district, called "Cailleach na Maigb,"  or the Old Wife of Moy.

The Mackenzies then proceeded to ravage the lands of  Ardmeanach and those belonging to William Munro of Fowlis--the  former because the young laird of Kilravock, whose father was governor  of that district, had assisted the Macdonalds; the latter probably because Munro, who joined neither party, was suspected secretly of favouring Lochalsh.  So many excesses were committed at this time by the Mackenzies that the Earl of Huntly, Lieutenant of the North, was compelled, notwithstanding their services in repelling the invasion of the  Macdonalds, to proceed against them as oppressors of the lieges.  [Gregory, p. 57.  Kilravock Writs, p.170, and Acts of Council.]

A blacksmith, known as Glaishean Gow or "Gobha," one of  Lovat's people, in whose father's house Agnes Fraser, Mackenzie's wife,  was fostered, hearing of the advance of the Macdonalds to the Mackenzie territory, started with a few followers in the direction of Conan, but  arrived too late to take part in the fight.  They were, however, in time to  meet those few who managed to ford or swim the river, and killed every  one of them so that they found an opportunity "to do more service than if

they had been at the battle."

This insurrection cost the Macdonalds the Lordship of the Isles, as  others had previously cost them the Earldom of Ross.  In a Parliament  held in Edinburgh in 1493, the possessions of the Lord of the Isles were  declared forfeited to the Crown.  In the following January the aged Earl  appeared before King James IV., and made a voluntary surrender of  everything, after which he remained for several years in the King's  household as a Court pensioner. By Act of the Lords of Council in 1492  Alexander Urquhart, Sheriff of Cromarty, had obtained restitution for  himself and his tenants for the depredations committed by Macdonald and  his followers. According to the Kilravock Papers, p. 162, the spoil  amounted to 600 cows and oxen, each worth 13s 4d, 80 horses, each worth  26s 8d; 1000 sheep, each worth 2s; 200 swine, each worth 3s; with plenishing to the value of ?00 and also 500 bolls of victual and ?00 of the mails of the Sheriff's lands.

The  Earl of Cromarty says of Kenneth, "that he raised great fears  in his neighbours by his temper and power, by which he had overturned so  great ane interest as that of Macdonald, yet it appearit that he did not  proceid to such attemptts but on just resentments and rationall grounds,  for dureing his lyfe he not only protected the country by his power, but he  caryed so that non was esteemed a better neighbour to his friends nor a  juster maister to his dependers.  In that one thing of his caryadge to his first wife he is justly reprowable; in all things else he merits justly to be  numbered amongst the best of our Scots patriots." The same writer  continues-- "The fight at Blairnapark put Mackenzie in great respect  through all the North.  The Earl of Huntly, George, who was the second  Earle, did contract a friendship with him, and when he was imployed by  King James 3d to assist him against the conspirators in the South, Kenneth  came with 500 men to him in summer 1488; but erre they came the  lengthe of Perth, Mackenzie had nottice of his father Alexander's death,  whereupon Huntly caused him retire to ordor his affaires, least his old enemies might tack advantage of such a change, and Huntly judgeing that  they were rather too numberous than weak for the conspirators, by which  occasion he (Kenneth) was absent from that vnfortunat battle wher King  James 3d wes kild, yet evir after this, Earl George, and his son Alexander,  the 3d Earl of Huntly, keipt a great kyndness to Kenneth and his  successors.  From the yeir 1489 the kingdom vnder King James 4d wes at  great peace, and thereby Mackenzie toock opportunity to setle his privat  affaires, which for many yeirs  befor, yea severall ages, had bein almost still disturbed by the Earls of Ross and Lords of the Illes, and so he lived  in peace and good correspondences with his neighbours till the yeir 1491, for in the moneth of February that yeir he died and wes buried at Bewlie.

All his predecessors wer buried at Icolmkill (except his father), as wer  most of the considerable chieffs in the Highlands.  But this Kenneth, after  his marriage, keipt frequent devotiones with the Convent of Bewlie, and at  his owin desyre wes buried ther, in the ille on the north syd of the alter,  which wes built by himselfe in his lyftyme or he died; after that he done pennance for his irregular marieing or Lovit's daughter.  He procured recommendationes from Thomas Hay (his lady's uncle), Bishop of Ross, to Pope Alexander the 6, from whom he procured a legittmatione of all the cheildrein of the mariadge, daited apud St Petri, papatus nostri primo,  anno Cristiano 1491."

Bishop Hay strongly impressed upon Mackenzie the propriety of  getting his marriage with Agnes of Lovat legitimized, and to send for a commission to the Pope for that purpose.  Donald Dubh MacChreggir, priest of Kirkhill, was despatched to Rome with that object, and, according to several of the family manuscripts, procured the legitimation of the marriage.  "This priest was a native of Kintail, descended from a  clan there called Clan Chreggir, who, being a hopefull boy in his younger days, was educat in Mackenzie's house, and afterwards at Beullie be the  forementioned Dugall Mackenzie, pryor yrof.  In end he was made priest  of Kirkhill.  His successors to this day are called Frasers.  Of this priest is  descended Mr William Fraser and Mr Donald Fraser." [Ancient MS.]

Another writer describes the messengers sent to Rome as Mr Andrew Fraser, priest of Kintail, a learned and eloquent man, who took in his  company Dugal Mackenzie, natural son to Alexander Inrig, who was a  scholar.  The Pope entertained them kindly and very readily granted them  what they desired and were both made knights to the boot of Pope  Clement the VIII., but when my knights came home, they neglected the  decree of Pope Innocent III. against the marriage and consentrinate of all  the clergy or otherwise they got a dispensation from the then Pope  Clement VIII., for both of them married--Sir Dugall was made priest of  Kintail and married nien (daughter) Dunchy Chaim in Glenmorriston.  Sir  Andrew likewise married, whose son was called  Donald Du Mac  Intagard, and was priest of Kirkhill and Chaunter of Ross.  His tack of the  vicarage of Kilmorack to John Chisholm of Comar stands to this day.  The present Mr William Fraser, minister of Kilmorack, is the fifth minister in  lineal and uninterrupted succession." [Ardintoul MS.]

Anderson, in his Account of the Family of Fraser, also says that "application was made to the Pope to sanction the second marriage, which  he did, anno 1491."  Sir James D. Mackenzie of Findon (note, p. 19)  however says that he made a close search in the Vatican and the Roman  libraries but was unable to find trace of any document of legitmation.  Of Roderick, Sir Kenneth's fourth son, who was an exceedingly  powerful man, the following interesting story is told--He was a man of  great strength and stature, and in a quarrell which took place between him  and Dingwall of Kildun, he killed the latter, and "that night abode with his  wife"  Complaint was made to King James the Fifth, who commanded the  Baron of Kintail to give Rory up to justice.  His brother, knowing he could  not do so openly and by force without trouble and considerable danger,  went to Kintail professedly to settle his affairs there, and when he was about returning home he requested Rory to meet him at Glassletter, that he  might privately consult and discourse with him as to his present state.   Rory duly met him on the appointed day with fifty men of his "coalds,"  the Macleays, besides ordinary servants and some Kintail men.  While the  two brothers went to discourse, they passed between the Kintail men and  the Macleays, who sat at a good distance from one another.  When  Mackenzie came near the Kintail men, he clapped Rory on the shoulder,  which was the sign between them, and Rory was immediately seized.  Gillecriost MacFhionnla instantly ran to the Macleays, who had taken to  their arms to relieve their Coald Rory Mor, and desired them in a friendly  manner to compose themselves, and not be rash, since Rory was seized  not by his enemies, but was in the hands of his own brother, and of those who had as great a kindness for him, and interest in him as they had  themselves; and further he desired them to consider what would be the  consequences, for if the least drop of blood was shed, Rory would be  immediately put to death, and so all their pains would be lost.  He thus  prevailed upon them to keep quiet. In the meantime Rory struggled with  the Kintail men, and would not be taken or go along with them, until John Mor, afterwards agnamed Ian Mor nan Cas, brother to Gillecriost  MacFhionnla, took Rory by the feet and cast him down.  They then bound  him and carried him on their shoulders, until he consented to go along  with them willingly, and without further objection.  They took him to Ellandonnan, whence shortly after he was sent south to the King, where he had to take his trial.  He, however, denied the whole affair, and in the  absence of positive proof, the judges declined to convict him; but the  King, quite persuaded of his guilt, ordered him to be sent a prisoner to the  Bass Rock, with strict injunctions to have him kept in chains.  This order  was obeyed, and Rory's hands and legs were much pained and cut with the  irons.  The governor had unpleasant feuds with one of his neighbours,  which occasioned several encounters and skirmishes between their  servants, who came in repeatedly with wounds and bruises.  Rory,  noticing this to occur frequently, said to one of them, "Would to God that  the laird would take me with him, and I should then be worth my meat to him and serve for better use than I do with these chains."  This was  communicated to the governor, who sent for Rory and asked him if he  would fight well for him.  "If I do not that," said he, "let me hang in these  chains."  He then took his solemn oath that he would not run away, and  the governor ordered the servants to set about curing Rory's wounds with  ointments.  He soon found himself in good condition to fight, and an  opportunity was not long delayed. The governor met his adversary  accompanied by his prisoner, who fought to admiration, exhibiting great  courage and enormous strength.  He soon routed the enemy, and the  governor became so enamoured of him that he was never after out of his  company whenever he could secretly have him unknown to the Court.

About this time an  Italian came to Edinburgh, who challenged  the whole nation  to a wrestling match for a large sum of money.  One or two  grappled with him, but he disposed of them so easily that no one else  could be found to engage him.  The King was much annoyed at this, and  expressed himself strongly in favour of any one who would defeat the  Italian, promising to give him a suitable reward.  The governor of the  Rock having heard of this, thought it an excellent opportunity for his  prisoner to secure his freedom, and at the same time redeem the credit of the nation, and he informed the King that a prisoner committed to the Bass  by his Majesty if released of his irons would, in his opinion, match the  Italian. The King immediately answered, "His liberty, with reward, shall he have if he do so."  The governor, so as not to expose his own intimate relations with and treatment of the prisoner, warily asked that time should  be allowed to cure him of his wounds, lest his own crime and Rory's  previous liberty should become known.  When sufficient time had elapsed  for this purpose a day was appointed, and the governor brought Rory to  Holyrood House to meet the King, who enquired if he "would undertake  to cast the Italian for his liberty?"  "Yes, sir," answered Rory "it will be a  hard task that I will not undertake for that; but, sir, it may be, it will not be so easy to perform as to undertake, yet I shall give him a fair trial."   "Well" said the King, "how many days will you have to fit yourself?"   "Not an hour" replied Rory.  His Majesty was so pleased with his  resolution that he immediately sent to the Italian to ask if he would accept  the challenge at once.  He who had won so many victories so easily  already did not hesitate to grapple with Rory, having no fear as to the  result.  Five lists were prepared.  The Italian was first on the ground, and  seeing Rory approaching him, dressed in his rude habit, without any of the usual dress and accoutrements, laughed loudly.  But no sooner was he in  the Highlander's grasp than the Italian was on his knee. The King cried  with joy; the Italian alleged foul play, and made other and frivolous  excuses, but His Majesty was so glad of the apparent advantage in his  favour that he was unwilling to expose Rory to a second hazard.  This did not suit the Highlander at all, and he called out, "No, no, sir; let me try  him again, for now I think I know his strength."  His Majesty hearing this,  consented, and in the second encounter Rory laid firm hold of the  foreigner, pulled him towards him with all his might, breaking his back,  and disjointing the back-bone.  The poor fellow fell to the ground groaning with pain, and died two day's after.  The King, delighted with  Rory's prowess, requested him to remain at Court, but this he refused,  excusing himself on the ground that his long imprisonment quite unfitted  him for Court life, but if it pleased his Majesty he would send him his son,  who was better fitted to serve him.  He was provided with money and  suitable clothing by Royal command.  The King requested him to hasten  his son to Court, which he accordingly did.  This son was named  Murdoch, and His Majesty became so fond of him that he always retained  him about his person, and granted him, as an earnest of greater things to follow, the lands of Fairburn, Moy, and others adjoining, also the Ferry of  Scuideal; but Murdoch being unfortunately absent from the Court when  the King died, he missed much more which his Majesty had designed for him. [Ardintoul and Cromartie MS. Histories of the Mackenzies.]

The following, told of Roderick and Kenneth, the fifth son, is also worth a place--Kenneth was Chaunter of Ross, and perpetual Curate of  Coinbents, which vicarage he afterwards resigned into the hands of Pope  Paulus in favour of the Priory of Beauly.  Though a priest and in holy  orders he would not abstain from marriage, for which cause the Bishop  decided to have him deposed.  On the appointed day for his trial he had  his brother Rory at Chanonry,, when the trial was to take place, with a  number of his followers.  Kenneth presented himself before the Bishop in  his long gown, but under it he had a two-edged sword, and drawing near   his  Lordship, who sat in  his presiding  chair, whispered in his ear, "It is best that you should let me alone, for my brother Rory is in the churchyard  with many ill men, and if you take off my orders he will take off your  head, and I myself will not be your best friend." He then coolly exposed  his penknife, as he called his great sword, "which sight, with Rory's  proximity, and being a person whose character was well enough known by  his Lordship, he was so terrified that he incontinently absolved and  vindicated the good Chaunter," who ever after enjoyed his office (and his wife) unchallenged.

Sir Kenneth of Kintail, who was knighted by James IV. "for being highly instrumental in reducing his fierce countrymen to the blessings of a  civilized life," was twice married; first, to Lady Margaret, daughter of  John, Lord of the Isles and Earl of Ross, with issue--

I.  Kenneth Og, his heir and successor.

He married secondly, Agnes or Anne Fraser, daughter of Hugh,  third Lord Lovat, with issue--

II.  John, who succeeded his brother Kenneth Og.

III.  Alexander, first of the family of Davochmaluag.

IV.  Roderick, progenitor of the families of Achilty, Fairburn, Ardross, etc.

V.  Kenneth, better know as "the Priest of Avoch," from whom the families of Suddie, Ord, Corryvulzie, Highfield, Inverlaul, Little Findon,  and others of lesser note.

VI.  Agnes, who married Roderick Macleod, VII. of Lewis, with issue.

VII.  Catherine, who married Hector Munro of Fowlis, with issue.

There has been a considerable difference of opinion among the family genealogists as to the date of Sir Kenneth's death, but it is now  placed beyond doubt that he died in 1491, having only ruled as actual  chief of the clan for the short space of three years. This is clearly proved  from  his tomb in the Priory of Beauly, where there is a full length  recumbent effigy of him, in full armour, with arms folded across his chest  as if in prayer, and on the arch over it is the following inscription "Hic  Jacet, Kanyans, m. kynch d'us de Kyntayl, q. oblit vii. die Februarii, a.  di. m.cccc.lxxxxi."  Sir William Fraser, in his history of the Earls of Cromartie, gives, in his genealogy of the Mackenzies of Kintail, the date of his death as "circa 1506," and ignores his successor Kenneth Og  altogether.  This is incomprehensible to readers of the work; for in the  book itself, in various places, it is indubitably established that Sir  William's genealogy is incorrect in this, as in other important particulars."  [Sir William Fraser appears to have adopted Douglas in his genealogies,  who, as already shown, in many instances, cannot be depended upon.]

The following, from the published "Acts of the Lords of Council," p. 327, under date 17th  June, 1494, places the question absolutely beyond  dispute.  "The King's Highness and Lords of Council decree and deliver  that David Ross of Balnagown shall restore and deliver again to Annas  Fresale, the spouse of THE  LATE Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, seven  score of cows, price of the piece (each), 20s; 30 horses, price of the piece,  2 merks; 200 sheep and goats, price of the piece, 25; and 14 cows, price of  the piece, 20s; spuilzied and taken by the said David and his complices  from the said Annas out of the lands of Kynlyn (? Killin or Kinellan), as was sufficiently proved before the Lords; and ordain that letters be written  to distrain the said David, his lands and goods therefor, and he was present  at his action by this procurators."  It is needless to point out that the man  who, by this undoubted authority, was THE LATE Kenneth Mackenzie of  Kintail, in 1494 could not have died about or "circa 1506," as Sir William  Fraser asserts in his Earls of Cromartie.  Kenneth died in 1491, and was  succeeded by his only son by his first wife, Margaret of Isla,


VIII.  KENNETH  OG  MACKENZIE,


Or KENNETH  THE  YOUNGER, who was also known as Sir Kenneth.   He was fostered in Taagan, Kenlochewe. [Ancient MS.]  When, in 1488, King James the IV. succeeded to the throne, he determined to attach to his  interest the principal chiefs in the Highlands.  "To overawe and subdue the  petty princes who affected independence, to carry into their territories,

hitherto too exclusively governed by their own capricious or tyrannical  institutions, the same system of a severe but regular and rapid  administration of civil and criminal justice which had been established in  his Lowland dominions was the laudable object of the King; and for this  purpose he succeeded, with that energy and activity which remarkably  distinguished him, in opening up an intercourse with many of the leading  men in the northern counties. With the Captain of the Clan Chattan,  Duncan Mackintosh with Ewen, the son of Alan, Captain of the Clan  Cameron with Campbell of Glenurghay; the Macgilleouns of Duart and  Lochbuy; Mackane of Ardnamurchan the Lairds of Mackenzie and Grant;  and the Earl of Huntly, a baron of the most extensive power in these  northern districts, he appears to have been in habits of constant and  regular communication -rewarding them by presents, in the shape either of money or of grants or land, and securing their services in reducing to obedience such of their fellow chieftains as proved contumacious, or  actually rose in rebellion." [Tytler, vol. iv., pp. 367-368.]

To carry out this plan he determined to take pledges for their good  behaviour from some of the most powerful clans, and, at the same time,  educate the younger lairds into a more civilized manner of governing their  people.  Amongst others he took a special interest in Kenneth Og, and  Farquhar Mackintosh, the young lairds of Mackenzie and Mackintosh,  who were cousins, their mothers being sisters, daughters of John, last Lord  of the Isles.  They were both powerful, the leaders of great clans, and  young men of great spirit and reckless habits.  They were accordingly  apprehended in 1495 ["The King having made a progress to the North,  was advised to secure these two gentlemen as hostages for securing the  peace of the Highlands, and accordingly they were apprehended at  Inverness and sent prisoners to Edinburgh in the year 1495, where they remained two years."--Dr George Mackenzie's MS. History,] and sent to  Edinburgh, where they were kept in custody in the Castle, until a  favourable opportunity occurring in 1497, they escaped over the ramparts  by the aid of ropes secretly conveyed to them by some of their friends.

This was the more easily managed, as they had liberty granted them to  roam over the whole bounds of the Castle within the outer walls; and the  young chieftains, getting tired of restraint, and ashamed to be idle while  they considered themselves fit actors for the stage of their Highland  domains, resolved to attempt an escape by dropping over the walls, when  Kenneth injured his leg, so as to incapacitate him from rapid progress; but  Mackintosh manfully resolved to risk capture himself rather than leave his fellow-fugitive behind him in such circumstances.  The result of this  accident, however, was that after three days journey they were only able to  reach the Torwood, where, suspecting no danger, they put up for the night in a private house.

The Laird of Buchanan, who was at the time an outlaw for a  murder he had committed, happened to be in the neighbourhood, and  meeting the Highlanders, entertained them with a show of kindness; by which means he induced them to divulge their names and quality.  A proclamation had recently been issued promising remission to any outlaw  who would bring in another similarly circumstanced, and Buchanan  resolved to procure his own freedom at the expenseof his fellow-fugitives;  for he knew well that such they were, previously knowing of them as his  Majesty's pledges from their respective clans.  In the most deceitful  manner, he watched until they had retired to rest, when he surrounded the house with a band of his followers, and charged them to surrender.  This  they declined; and Mackenzie, being of a violent temper and possessed of  more courage than prudence, rushed out with a drawn sword "refusing delivery and endeavouring to escape," whereupon he was shot with an  arrow by one of Buchanan's men.  His head was severed from his body,  and forwarded to the King in Edinburgh; while young Mackintosh, who  made no further resistance, was secured and sent a prisoner to the King.

Buchanan's outlawry was remitted, and Mackintosh was confined in Dunbar, where he remained until after the death of James the Fourth at the  battle of  Flodden  Field. [Gregory, p.93; and MS. History by the Earl of Cromartie.]  Buchanan's base conduct was universally execrated, while  the fate of young Mackenzie was lamented throughout the whole  Highlands, having been accused of no other crime than the natural  forwardness of youth, and having escaped from his confinement in  Edinburgh Castle.

It is admitted on all hands that Kenneth Og was killed, as above, in 1497, and he must, therefore--his father having died in 1491--have ruled  as one of the Barons of Kintail, though there is no record of his having  been formally served heir.  He was not married, but left two bastard sons--one, known as Rory Beag, by the daughter of the Baron of Moniack; and  the other by the daughter of a gentleman in Cromar, of whom are  descended the Sliochd Thomais in Cromar and Glenshiel, Braemar, the  principal families of which were those of Dalmore and Renoway. ["In his  going to Inverness, as I have said, to meet the King, he was the night  before his coming there in the Baron of Muniag's house, whose daughter  he got with child, who was called Rory Begg.  Of this Rory descended the  parson of Slate; and on the same journey going along with the King to  Edinburgh he got a son with a gentleman's daughter, and called him  Thomas Mackenzy, of whom descended the Mackenzies--in Braemar  called Slyghk Homash Vic Choinnich.  That is to say Thomas  Mackenzie's Succession.  If he had lived he would be heir to Mackenzie  and Macdonald (Earl of Ross)."--Ancient MS.]  He was succeeded by his eldest brother by his father's second marriage with Agnes or Anne, daughter of Hugh, third Lord Lovat,

IX.  JOHN  MACKENZIE  OF  KILLIN,

Known by that designation from his having generally resided at that place.

He was, as we have seen, the first son of Kenneth, seventh Baron of  Kintail, by his second wife Agnes, or Anne of Lovat, and his father being never regularly married, the great body of the clan did not consider John his legitimate heir.  Hector Roy Mackenzie, his uncle, progenitor of the  House of Gairloch, a man of great prudence and courage, was by Kenneth  a Bhlair appointed tutor to his eldest son Kenneth Og, then under age,  though Duncan, an elder brother by Alexander's first wife, had, according to custom, a prior claim to that honourable and important trust.  Duncan  is, however, described as one who was "of better hands than head"- more  brave than  prudent.  Hector took charge, and on the death of Kenneth Og  found himself in possession of valuable and extensive estates.  He had  already secured great popularity among the clan, which in the past he had often led to victory against the common enemy.  He objected to John's  succession on the ground that he was the illegitimate son of Lovat's  daughter, with whom his father, Kenneth, at first did "so irregularly and unlawfully cohabit," and John's youth encouraging him, it is said, [MS.  History by the Earl of Cromartie.]  Hector proposed an arrangement to  Duncan, whom he considered the only legitimate obstacle to his own  succession, by which he would transfer his rights as elder brother in  Hector's favour, in return for which he should receive a considerable  portion of the estates for himself and his successors.  Duncan declined to  enter into the proposed agreement, principally on the ground that the  Pope, in 1491, the year in which John's father died, had legitimised  Kenneth a Bhlair's marriage with Agnes of Lovat, and thereby restored the children of that union to the rights of succession.  Finding Duncan  unfavourable to his project, Hector declared John illegitimate, and held  possession of the estates for himself; and the whole clan, with whom he  was a great favourite, submitted to his rule. [Though we have given this  account on the authority of the MS. histories of the family, it is now  generally believed that Duncan was dead at this period, and that his son  Allan, who would have succeeded, failing John of Killin's legitimacy, was a minor when his father died.]

It can hardly be supposed that Lord Lovat would be a disinterested spectator of these proceedings, and in the interest of his sister's children  he procured a precept of clare constat from James Stewart, Duke of Ross,  [After the forfeiture of the ancient Earls of Ross, the district furnished  new titles under the old names, to members of the Royal family.  James  Stewart, second son of King James the Third, was created in 1487 Duke of  Ross, Marquis of Ormond, Earl of Ardmanach, and Lord of Brechin and  Navar.  The Duke did not long hold the territorial Dukedom of Ross.  On  the 13th of May 1503, having obtained the rich Abbey of Dunfermline, he  resigned the Dukedom of Ross into the hands of the King.  The Duke  reserved for his life the hill of Dingwall beside that town for the style of Duke, the hill of Ormond (above Avoch) for the style of Marquis, the  Redcastle of Ardmanach for the style of Earl, and the Castle of Brechin,  with the gardens, &c., for the name of Brechin and Navar.  The Duke of  Ross died in 1504.  It was said of him by Ariosto, as translated by Hoole--			 /*"The title of the Duke of Ross he bears, No chief like him in dauntless mind compares."*/

The next creation of the title of the Duke of Ross was in favour of  Alexander Stewart, the posthumous son of King James the Fourth. The  Duke was born on the 30th April 1514, and died on the 18th December  1515.  In the reign of Mary Queen of Scots, John, Earl of Sutherland,  acquired from Mary, the Queen Dowager, a certain right in the Earldom of  Ross, which might ultimately have joined in one family both Sutherland  and Ross.  Lord Darnley, on the prospect of his marriage with Queen  Mary, was created Earl of Ross, a title by which he is little known, as it  was only given to him a short time before he obtained the higher titles of  Duke of Albany and King of Scotland.--Fraser's Earls of Cromartie.] and Archbishop of St Andrews, in favour of his grandson, John, as heir to the estates.  The document is "daited the last of Apryle 1500 and seasin  thereon 16 Mey 1500 be Sir John Barchaw and William Monro of Foulls,  as Baillie to the Duk." [MS. History by the Earl of Cromartie.]  This  precept included the Barony of Kintail, as well as the lands held by  Mackenzie off the earldom of Ross, for, the charter chest being in the  possession of Hector Roy, Lovat was not aware that Kintail was held  direct from the Crown; but notwithstanding all these precautions and legal  instruments, Hector kept possession and treated the entire estates as his own.

Sir William Munro of Fowlis, the Duke's Lieutenant for the forfeited earldom of Ross, was dissatisfied with Hector's conduct, and  resolved to punish him.  Munro was in the habit of doing things with a  high hand, and on this occasion, during Hector's absence from home, he,  accompanied by his Sheriff, Alexander Vass, went to Kinellan, where  Hector usually resided, held a court at the place, and as a mulct or fine took away the couples of one of Hector's barns as a token of his power.

When Hector discovered what had taken place in his absence, he became  furious, and sent a messenger to Fowlis telling him that if he were a man of courage and a "good  fellow" he would come and take away  the  couples of the other barn when their owner was at home.

Munro, greatly offended at this message, determined to accept the bold challenge conveyed in it, and promptly collected his vassals, including the Dingwalls and the MacCullochs, who were then his dependants, to the number of nine hundred, and with this force started for  Kinellan, where he arrived much sooner than Hector, who hurriedly  collected all the men he could in the neighbourhood, anticipated.  Hector had no time to advise his Kintail men nor those at a distance from  Kinellan, and was consequently unable to bring together more than one  hundred and forty men.  With this small force he wisely deemed it  imprudent to venture on a regular battle, but decided upon a stratagem  which if it proved successful, as he anticipated, would give him an  advantage  that  would  more than counterbalance the enemy's superiority of numbers.  Having supplied his small but resolute band with provisions  for twenty-four hours, Hector led them secretly, during the night, to the top of Knock-farrel, a place so situated that Munro must needs pass near its north or south side in his march to and from Kinellan.  Early next  morning Fowlis marched past on his way to Kinellan, quite ignorant of  Hector's position, and expecting him to have remained at home to  implement the purport of his message.  Sir William was allowed to pass  unmolested, and imagining that Hector had fled, he proceeded to demolish  the barn at Kinellan, ordered its couples to be carried away.  Broke all the  utensils about the place, and drove out all the cattle, as trophies of his  visit.  In the evening he returned, as Hector had conjectured, carrying the  plunder in front of his party, accompanied by a strong guard, while he  placed the rest of his picked men in the rear, fearing that Hector might pursue him, little thinking that he was already between him and his destination.  On his way to Kinellan, Munro bad marched through Strathpeffer  round the north side of Knock-farrel, but for some cause he returned by  the south side where the highway touched the shoulder of the hill on  which Hector's men were posted.  He had no fear of attack from that  quarter, and his men feeling themselves quite safe, marched loosely and  out of order.  Hector seeing his opportunity, allowed them to pass until the  rear was within musket shot of him.  He then ordered his men to charge,  which they did with such furious impetuosity, that most of the enemy were cut to pieces before they were properly aware from whence they were  attacked, or could make any effectual attempt to resist the dashing onset of Hector's followers.  The groans of the dying in the gloaming, the uncertainty as well as the unexpectedness of the attack, frightened them so  much that they fled in confusion, in spite of every attempt on the part of  Fowlis, who was in front in charge of the spoil and its guard, to stop them.

Those from the rear flying in disorder soon confused the men in front, and  the result was a complete rout.  Hector's men followed, killing every one they met for it was ordered that no quarter should be given, the number  being so large that they might again turn round, attack and defeat the  victors.  In this retreat almost all the men of the clan Dingwall and  MacCullochs capable of bearing arms were killed, and so many of the  Munroes were slain that for a long time after "there could not be ane  secure friendship made up twixt them and the Mackenzies, till by frequent allyance and mutuall beneffets at last thes animosities are setled and in ordor to a reconciliation, Hector, sone to this William of Foulls, wes maried to John Mackenzie's sister Catherine."

At this conflict, besides that it was notable for its neat contrivance, the inequality of the forces engaged, and the number of the slain, there are  two minor incidents worth noting.  One is that the pursuit was so hot that  the Munroes not only fled in a  crowd, but there were so many of them  killed at a place on the edge of the hill where a descent fell from each  shoulder of it to a well; and most of Hector's men being armed with  battle-axes and two-edged swords, they had cut off so many heads in that  small space, that, tumbling down the slope to the well, nineteen heads  were counted in it and to this day the well is called "Tobar nan Ceann" or  the Fountain of the Heads.  The other incident is that Suarachan, better  known as "Donnchadh Mor na Tuaighe," or Big Duncan of the Axe,  previously referred to as one of the heroes of the battle of Park, pursued one of the enemy into the Church of Dingwall, to which he had fled for  shelter.  As he was entering in at the door, Suarachan caught him by the  arm, when the man exclaimed, "My sanctuary saves me!" "Aye," returned  Suarachan, "but what a man puts in the sanctuary against his will he can  take it out again; and so, pushing him back from the door, he killed him  with one stroke of his broadsword. [MS. History by the Earl or Cromartie.]

Sir William Munro returned that night to Fowlis, where happened to be, passing the evening, a harper of the name of MacRa, who, observing Sir William pensive and dispirited, advised him to be more cheerful and  submit patiently to the fortunes of war, since his defeat was not his own fault, nor from want of personal courage and bravery, but arose from the  timorousness of his followers, who were unacquainted with such severe  service.  This led Sir William to take more particular notice of the harper  than he had hitherto done, and he asked him his name.  On hearing it,  Munro replied, "You surely must have been fortunate, as your name  imports, and I am sure that you have been more so than I have been this  day; but it's fit to take your advice, MacRath." This was a play on the minstrel's name--MacRath literally meaning "Son of Fortune"--and the  harper being, like most of his kind, smart and sagacious, made the  following impromptu answer--

Eachainn le sheachd fichead fear, Agus thusa le d'ochd clad, Se Mac Rath a mharbh na daoine Air bathaois Cnoc faireal,

Which may be rendered in English as follows:--

Although MacRath doth "fortunate" import, It's he deserves that name whose brave effort Eight hundred men did put to flight With his seven score at Knockfarrel. [Ardintoul MS.]

In 1499, George, Earl of Huntly, then the King's Lieutenant, granted warrant to Duncan  Mackintosh of Mackintosh, John Grant of  Freuchie, and other leaders, with three thousand men, to pass against the Clan Mackenzie, "the  King's rebels," for the slaughter of Harold of  Chisholm, dwelling in Strathglass, "and for divers other heirschips,  slaughters,  spuilzies, committed on the King's poor lieges and tenants in  the Lordship of Ardmeanoch," [Kilravock Papers, p. 170.] but Hector Roy  and his followers gave a good account of them, and soon defeated and  dispersed them.  He seems to have held undisturbed possession until the  year 1507, when John and his brother Roderick were on a visit in the Aird,  at the house of their uncle, Lord  Lovat, when a fire broke out at the castle.  According to the Earl of Cromartie, when the house took fire, no one was found bold enough to approach the burning pile but John, who  rushed boldly through the flames and carried away the Lovat charter chest "a weight even then thought too much  for the strongest man, and that  cheist, yett extant, is a load sufficient for two.  His uncle, bothe obleiged  by the actione, and glad to sie such strength and boldnes in the young man,  desyred (him) to do as much for himself as he haid done for him, and to  discover his (own) charter cheist from his uncle, and that he should have all the concurrance which he (Lovat) could give to that effect."

Anderson's History of the Family of Fraser ascribes this bold act to  Roderick, for which he was "considered  amply recompensed by the gift  of a bonnet and a pair of shoes."  It matters little which is the correct version, but it is not unlikely that Lovat's valuable charter chest was saved  by one or other of them, and it is by no means improbable that his  Lordship's suggestion  that they should procure their own charter chest  and his offer to aid them in doing so was made and determined to be acted upon on this occasion.

John, who had proved himself most prudent, even in his youth, was satisfied that his uncle Hector, a man of undoubted valour and wisdom, in possession of the estates, and highly popular with the clan, could not be expelled without great difficulty and extreme danger to himself.  Any such  attempt would produce feuds and slaughter among his  people, with the  certain result of making himself personally unpopular with the clan, and  his uncle more popular than ever.  He therefore decided upon a more  prudent course resolving to strike only at Hector's person, judging that, if  his uncle failed, his claims and the personal respect of his followers would  fall with him.  To carry out his resolution, he contrived a scheme which  proved completely successful.  Having secured an interview with Hector,  who then resided at Wester Fairburn, he pleaded that since he had taken  his estates from him, and left him in such reduced circumstances, it was  not in accordance with his feelings and his ambition for fame to remain  any longer in his native country, where he had neither position nor  opportunities of distinguishing himself.  He therefore begged that his  uncle should give him a galley or birlinn, and as many of the ablest and most determined youths in the country as should voluntarily follow him in his adventures for fame and  fortune in a foreign  land. With these he  should pass to Ireland, then engaged in war, and "there purchase a  glorious death or a more plentiful fortune than he was likely to get at  home."  The idea pleased Hector exceedingly, and he not only gave him  his own galley, then lying at Torridon, but furnished him with all the  necessary provisions for the voyage, at the same time assuring him that, if  he prosecuted his intentions, he should annually transmit him a sufficient  portion to keep up his position, until his own personal prowess and fortune should  place him above any such necessity whereas, if he otherwise resolved or attempted to molest him in what he called his rights, he would  bring sudden and certain ruin upon himself.

Thirty brave and  resolute young men joined the supposed  adventurer, after having informed them that he would have none except  those who would do so of their own free will, from their affection for him,  and determination to support him in any emergency; for he well judged  that only such were suitable companions in the desperate aims which he  had laid out for himself to accomplish.  These he dispatched to the galley  then at Torridon, one of the most secluded glens on the West Coast, and  distant from any populated place; while he himself remained with his  uncle, professedly to arrange the necessary details of his journey, and the  transmission of his portion, but really to notice "his method and manner of converse."  John soon took farewell of Hector, and departed with every  appearance of simplicity.  His uncle sent a retinue to convoy him with   becoming respect, but principally to assure himself of his departure, and to  guard against surprise or design on John's part.  Accompanied by these, he  soon arrived at Torridon, where he found his thirty fellow adventurers and  the galley awaiting him. They at once set sail, and with a fair wind made  for the Isles, in the direction of, and as if intending to make for, Ireland.

The retinue sent by Hector Roy returned home, and informed their master  that they saw John and his companions started before a far wind, with  sails set, in the direction of Ireland when Hector exclaimed, referring to  Anne of Lovat, "We may now sleep without fear of Anne's children."

John, sailing down Loch Torridon, and judging that Hector's men  had returned home, made for a sheltered and isolated creek, landed in a  wood, and dispersed his men with instructions to go by the most private  and unfrequented paths in the direction of Alit Corrienarnich, in the braes  of Torridon, where he would meet them.  This done, they followed  Hector's men, being quite close up to them by the time they reached  Fairburn.  John halted at some little distance from Hector's house until  about midnight, when, calling his men together, he feelingly addressed  them thus:--"Now, my good friends, I perceive that you are indeed  affectionate to me, and resolute men, who have freely forsaken your  country and relations to share in my not very promising fortune  but my  design in seeking only such as would voluntarily go along with me was  that I might be certain of your affection and resolution, and since you are  they whom I ought only to rely upon in my present circumstances and danger, I shall now tell you that I was never so faint-hearted as to quit my  inheritance without attempting what is possible for any man in my  capacity.  In order to this I feigned this design for Ireland for three  reasons; first, to put my uncle in security, whom I have found ever hitherto  very circumspect and well guarded; next, to find out a select, faithful  number to whom I might trust and thirdly, that in case I fail, and that my  uncle shall prevail over my endeavours, that I might have this boat and  these provisions as a safe retreat, both for myself and you, whom I should  be loath to expose to so great a danger without some probability in the attempt, and some security in the disappointment.  I am resolved this night  to fall on my uncle for he being gone, there is none of his children who  dare hope to repose themselves to his place. The countrymen who now,  for fear, depend on him and disown me, will, no doubt, on the same  motives, promoved with my just title, own me against all other injurious  pretenders.  One thing I must require of you, and it is that albeit those on  whom we are to fall are all related both to you and to me, yet since on  their destruction depends the preservation of our lives, and the restitution of my estate, you must all promise not to give quarter to my uncle or to  any of his company."

To this inhuman resolution they all agreed, disregarding the natural ties of blood and other obligations, and, marching as quietly as possible,  they arrived at Hector's house, surrounded it, and set fire to it--guarding it  all round so that not a soul could escape. The house was soon in flames, and the inmates, Hector and his household, were crying out for mercy.   Their pitiful cries made an impression on those outside, for many of them had relatives within, and in spite of their previous resolution to give no quarter, some of them called out to their nearest friends to come out and surrender, on assurance of their lives being spared.  John seeing so many of his followers moved to this merciful conduct, and being unable to resist  them, exclaimed, "My uncle is as near in blood to me as any in the house  are to you, and therefore I will be as kind to him as you are to them."

He  then called upon Hector to surrender and come forth from the burning  pile, assuring him of his life.  This he did; but Donald Dubh  MacGillechriost Mhic Gillereach, a Kenlochewe man, made for the door  with his two-edged sword drawn, whereupon Hector seeing him called out  to John that he would rather be burned where he was than face Donald  Dubh.  John called the latter away, and Hector rushed out into his  nephew's arms and  embraced him.  That same night John and Hector,  without "Dysman," saving God and such commons as were then present,  agreed and condescended that Hector should have the estate till John was  twenty-one years of age, and that John should live on his own purchases  till then,   Hector was to set the whole estate immediately, as tutor to John,  which next day he went about.  "I cannot forget what passed betwixt him  and the foresaid Donald at the set of Kenlochewe, who was one of the first  that sought land from him, which when he sought, Hector says to him:  `I  wonder, Donald, how you can ask land this day, that was so forward  to  kill me the last day.'  Donald answered that `if he had such a leader this  day as he had that night he should show him no better quarters, for  Kenneth's death (meaning Kenneth Aack) struck nearer my heart than any  prejudice you can do me in denying me land this day.'  Hector said, `Well Donald, I doubt ye not if you had such coildghys (coldhaltas--fosterage) to  me as you had to that man but you would act the like for me.  Therefore you shall have your choice of all the land in the country.'  Hector having  set the whole estate as tutor, all things seemed fair, only that Allan and his  faction in Kintail, who previously urged John to possess himself of  Ellandonnan Castle, were not satisfied with the arrangement, as John was  still kept out of the stronghold, `which Hector would not grant, not being  condescended on (and as he alleged) lest John should fail on his part  but  the factions--the commons--within that country could not be satisfied  herewith, being, as it was said, moved hereto by an accident that fell out a year or two before.'" [Ancient MS.]   This "accident" is described further  on, and refers to Hector's alleged attempt to get Allan assassinated at  Invershiel.

Donald Dubh was Kenneth Og's foster-brother, and Imagining that Hector was accessory in an underhand way to Kenneth's captivity in Edinburgh Castle, and consequently to his death in the Torwood, he conceived an inveterate hatred for him, and determined to kill him in  revenge the first opportunity that presented itself.  Hector, knowing that  his resolution  proceeded from fidelity and affection to his foster-brother  and master, not only forgave him, but ultimately took an opportunity of  rewarding him  and, as we have seen, afterwards gave him his choice of  all the lands in Kenlochewe.

John immediately sent word of what had taken place to his uncle of Lovat, and next day marched for Kintail, where all the people there, as  well as in the other parts of his property, recognised him as their chief.

The Castle of Ellandonnan was delivered up to him, with the charter chest and other evidences of his extensive possessions.

It has been maintained by the family of Gairloch that there is no truth in the charge against their ancestor, Hector Roy, which we have just  given mainly on the authority of the Earl of Cromartie. The writer of the  Ardintoul MS. of the Mackenzies, [Dr George Mackenzie gives  substantially  the same account,] however corroborates his lordship, and  says that John  was but young when his father died; and Hector, his  younger uncle (Duncan, Hector's eldest brother, who should be tutor being dead, and Allan, Duncan's son, not being able to oppose or grapple with  Hector), meddled with the estate. It is reported that Hector wished Allan  out of the way, whom he thought only to stand in his way from being laird,  since he was resolved not to own my Lord Lovat's daughter's children,  being all bastards and gotten in adultery.  The reason why they entertained such thoughts of him was partly this:  Hector going to Ellandonnan (where he placed Malcolm Mac Eancharrich constable) called such of the country  people to him as he judged fit, under pretence of setting and settling the  country, but asked not for, nor yet called his nephew Allan, who lived at Invershiel, within a few miles of Ellandonnan, but went away.  Allan,  suspecting this to have proceeded from unkindness, sends to one of his  familiar friends to know the result of the meeting, or if there was any  spoken concerning him.  The man, perhaps, not being willing to be an ill instrument twixt so near relations, sends Allan the following Irish (Gaelic)  lines:--

Inversheala na struth bras, Tar as, `s fear foul ga d' fheitheamh, Nineag, ga caol a cas, Tha leannan aice gun thios, A tighinn ga'm fhaire a shios, Tha i, gun fhios, fo mo chrios Tha `n sar lann ghuilbneach ghlas,-- Bhehion urchair dha le fios.

Allan put his own construction on them, and thought a friend  warned him to have a care of himself, there being some designs  on him from a near relation; and so that very night, in the  beginning thereof, he removed himself and family and anything  he valued within the house to an bill above the town, where he  might see and bear anything that might befall the house; and that  same night about cock crow he saw bis house and biggings in  flames, and found them consumed to ashes on the morrow.  The  perpetrators could not be found;  yet it was generally thought to  be Hector his uncle's contrivance."

The writer then describes the legitimation of Agnes Fraser's children by the Pope, and continues--"Hector, notwithstanding of the  legitimation, refused to quit the possession of the estate," and he then  gives the same account of John's feigned expedition to Ireland, and the  burning of Hector's house at Wester Fairburn, substantially as already  given from another source, but adding--"That very night they both entered  upon terms of agreement without acquainting or sending for any, or to  advise a reconciliation betwixt them.  The sum of their agreement was,  that Hector, as a man able to rule and govern, should have (allowing John an aliment) the estate for five or six years, till John should be major, and that thereafter Hector should render it to John as the right and lawful  undoubted heir, and that Hector should ever afterwards acknowledge and  honour him as his chief, and so they parted, all being well pleased.  [John  and Hector did condescend that Hector should have the estate till John  were one and twentie years, and that John should live on his own purchase till then.  Letter from MS.]  But Allan and the most of the Kintail men  were dissatisfied that John did not get Ellandonnan, his principal house, in  his own possession, and so desired John to come to them and possess the  castle by fair or foul means wherein  they promised to assist him.  John  goes to Kintail, desires him to render the place to him, which he refused,  for which cause John ordered bring all his cattle to those he employed to besiege the castle till Malcolm (the governor) would be starved out of it.

Yet this did not prevail with the governor, till he got Hector's consent, who, being acquainted, came to Lochalsh and met with his nephew, and  after concerting the matter, Hector sends word to Malcolm to render the  place to John.  But Malcolm would not till he would be paid of his goods  that were destroyed.  But Hector sending to him the second time, after  considerable negotiation for several days, telling him he was a fool, that  he might remember how himself was used, and that that might be a means  to take his life also.  Whereupon Malcolm renders the house, but John was so much offended at him that he would not continue him governor, but gave the charge to Gillechriost Mac Fhionnla Mhic Rath, making him  Constable of the Isle.  So after that there was little or no debate twixt John  and Hector during the rest of the six years he was Tutor.' [Ardintoul and Ancient MSS. of the Mackenzies.]

The MS. Histories of the family are borne out by Gregory,  (Highlands and Isles of Scotland, p. 111) who informs us that "Hector Roy Mackenzie, progenitor of the House of Gairloch, had, since the death of  Kenneth Og Mackenzie of Kintail, in 1497, and during the minority of  John, the brother and heir of Kenneth, exercised the command of that  clan, nominally as guardian to the young chief. Under his rule the Clan  Mackenzie became involved in feuds with the Munroes and other clans,  and Hector Roy himself became obnoxious to Government as a disturber  of the public peace.  His intentions towards the young Laird of Kintail  were considered very dubious; and the apprehensions of the latter having  been roused, Hector was compelled by law to yield up the estate and the  command of the tribe to the proper heir."  Gregory gives the "Acts of the Lords of Council, xxii., fo. 142," as that upon which, among other autho-rities, he founds.  We give the following extract, except that the spelling is  modernised:--

"7th April  1511.--Anent the summons made at the instance of  John Mackenzie of Kintail against Hector Roy Mackenzie for the  wrongous intromitting, uptaking, and withholding from him of the mails `fermez,' profits, and duties of all and whole the lands of Kintail, with the  pertinents lying in the Sheriffdom of Inverness, for the space of seven  years together, beginning in the year of God 1501, and also for the space of two years, last bye-past, and for the masterful withholding from the said  John Mackenzie of his house and Castle of Ellandonnan, and to bring with  him his evidence if (he) any has of the constabulary and keeping thereof, and to hear the same decerned of none avail, and diverse other points like as at more length; is contained in the said summons, the said John  Mackenzie being personally present, and the said Hector Roy being  lawfully summoned to this action, oft-times called and not compearing,  the said John's rights, etc.  The Lords of Council decree and deliver, that  the said Hector has forfeited the keeping and constabulary of the said  Castle of Ellandonnan, together with the fees granted therefor, and decern  all evidents, if he any has made to him thereupon, of none avail, force, nor  effect, and the said John Mackenzie to have free ingress and entry to the said Castle, because he required the said Hector for deliverance thereof and to thole him to enter thereunto, howbeit the said Hector refused and  would not give him entry to the said Castle, but if his servants would have  delivered their happinnis from them to his men or their entries, like as one  actentit instrument taken thereupon shown and produced before the said  Lords purported and bore, and therefore ordains our sovereign Lords'  letters (to) be directed to devode and rid the said Castle and to keep the  said John in possession thereof as effeirs and continues to remanent points  contained in the said summons in form, as they are now, unto the 20th day of July next to come, with continuation of days, and ordains that letters be  written in form of commission to the Sheriff of Inverness and his deputies  to summon witnesses and take probations thereupon and to summon the  party to heir them sworn and thereafter send their depositions closed to the  Lords again, the said day, under the said Sheriffs or his Deputy's seal, that thereafter justice may be ministered thereuntill."

Whatever truth there may be in the accounts given by the family historians, Hector Roy was undoubtedly at this period possessed of considerable estates of his own; for, we find a "protocol," by John Vass, "Burges of Dygvayll, and Shireff in this pairt," by which he makes known  that, by the command of his sovereign lord, letters and process was  directed to him as Sheriff granting him to give Hector Mackenzie heritable  state and possession "of all and syndri the landis off Gerloch with thar  pertinens, after the forme and tenor off our souerane lordis chartyr maide  to the forsaide Hector," lying between the waters called Inverew and  Torridon. The letter is dated "At Alydyll (?Talladale)  the xth of the  moneth off December the zher off Gode ane thousande four hundreth  nynte an four zheris." It is clear that Hector did not long continue under a cloud; for in  1508 the King directed a mandate to the Chamberlain of Ross requesting  him to enter Hector Roy Mackenzie in the "males and proffitis of our  landis of Braane and Moy, with ariage,  cariage and vther pertinence  thareof . for his gude and thankfull service done and to be done to us .  and this on na wise ye leif vndone, as ye will incur our indignatioun and displesour.  This our letrez . efter the forme of our said vther letres past  obefor, given vnder our signet at Edinburgh the fift day of Marche and of Regne the twenty yere.--(Signed) James R."  In 1513 he received a charter under the great seal of the lands of Gairloch formerly granted him, with  Glasletter and Coruguellen, with their pertinents. [The original charter; the  "protocol" from John Vass; the mandate to the Chamberlain of Ross, for  copies of which we are indebted to Sir Kenneth S. Mackenzie, Baronet,  are in the Gaitloch Charter Chest, and the latter two will be found in  extenso in the account of the Gairloch family later on.]  Hector Roy's  conduct towards John has been unfavourably criticised, but if it is kept in  mind that no regular marriage ever took place between Kenneth a Bhlair and John's mother, Agnes of Lovat that their union was not recognised by  the Church until 1491, if then, the same year in which Kenneth died it can  easily be understood why Hector should conscientiously do what he  probably held to be his duty-oppose John of Killin in the interest of those  whom he considered the legitimate successors of Kenneth a Bhlair and his  unfortunate son, Kenneth Og, to whom only, so far as we can discover,  Hector Roy was appointed Tutor; for when his brother, Kenneth a Bhlair,  died, there was every appearance that Hector's ward, Kenneth Og, would  succeed when he came of age.  The succession of John of Killin was at  most only a remote possibility when his father died, and therefore no  Tutor to him would have been appointed.

In terms of an Act passed in 1496, anent the education of young gentlemen of note, John, when young, was sent by Hector Roy to Edinburgh to complete his education at Court.  He thus, in early life,  acquired a knowledge of legal principles and practice of great service and  value to him in after life, not only in the management of his own affairs,  but in aiding his friends and countrymen in their peculiar difficulties by  his counsel and guidance, and thus he secured such universal esteem and  confidence as seldom fell to the lot of a Highland chief in that rude and unruly age.  The standard of education necessary at Court in those days  must have been very different from that required in ours, for we find that, with all his opportunities, John of Killin could not write his own name.

To a bond in favour of the Earl of Huntly he subscribes, "Jhone M'Kenzie  of Kyntaill, with my hand on the pen led by Master William Gordone,  Notar." Referring to the power of the House of Kintail at this period, and  to the rapid advance made by the family under Alexander and his  successors, we quote the following from a modern MS. history of the  family by the late Captain John Matheson of Bennetsfield:--"We must  observe here the rapid advance which the family of Kintail made on every  side.  The turbulent Macdonalds, crushed by the affair of Park, Munro,  sustained by his own clan, and the neighbouring vassals of Ross humbled  at their own door, when a century had not yet passed since the name of  Mackenzie had become familiar to their ears; and it is gratifying to trace  all this to the wise policy of the first James and his successors.  The judicious education of Alastair Ionraic, and consequent cultivation of  those  habits which, by identifying the people with the monarch through  the laws, render a nation securely' great, is equally discernible in John of  Killin and his posterity.  The successors of the Earls of Ross were  turbulent and tenacious of their rights, but they were irreclaimable.

The  youthful Lord of the Isles, at the instigation of his haughty mother,  deserted the Court of James I., while young Kintail remained, sedulously  improving himself at school in Perth, till he was called to display his  gratitude to his Royal master in counteracting the evil arising from the  opposite conduct  of Macdonald.   Thus, by one happy circumstance, the  attention of the King was called to a chieftain who gave such early  promise of steady attachment, and his future favour was secured.  The  family of Kintail was repeatedly recognised in the calendar of the Scottish  Court, while that of the once proud Macdonalds frowned in  disappointment  and barbarous independence amidst their native wilds,  while their territories, extending beyond the bounds of good government  and  protection, presented  gradually  such defenceless gaps as became  inviting and easily penetrable by the intelligence of Mackenzie, and  Alastair Ionraic acquired a great portion of his estates by this legitimate advantage, afterwards secured by the intractable arrogance of Macdonald  of Lochalsh and the valour and military capacity of Coinneach a Bhlair." In 1513 John of Killin is found among those Highland chiefs  summoned to rendezvous with the Royal army at Barrow Moor  preparatory to the fatal advance of James IV. into England, when the  Mackenzies, forming with  the Macleans, joined that miserably-arranged  and ill-fated expedition which terminated so fatally to Scotland on the  disastrous field of Flodden, where the killed included the King, with the flower of his nobility, gentry, and even clergy.  There was scarcely a  Scottish family of distinction that did not lose at least one, and some of  them lost all the male members who were capable of bearing arms.  The  body of the King was found, much disfigured with wounds, in the thickest  of the slain.  Abercromby, on the authority of Crawford, includes, in a list  of those killed at Flodden, "Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, ancestor to the  noble family of Seaforth."  This is an undoubted error for it will be seen  that John, not Kenneth was chief at the time of Flodden.  It was he who  joined the Royal army, accompanied by his brave and gallant uncle,  Hector Roy of Gairloch  and it is established beyond dispute that though  almost all their followers fell, both John and Hector survived and returned  home.  They, however, narrowly escaped the charge of Sir Edward Stanley  in rear of the Highlanders during the disorderly pursuit of Sir Edward Howard, who had given way to the furious and gallant onset of the mountaineers.

John was made prisoner, but afterwards escaped in a very  remarkable manner.  When his captors were carrying him and others of his followers to the south, they were overtaken by a violent storm which  obliged them to seek shelter in a retired house occupied by the widow of a  shipmaster.  After taking up their quarters, and, as they thought, providing  for the safe custody of the prisoners, the woman noticed that the captives  were Highlanders; and, in reference to the boisterous weather raging  outside, she, as if unconsciously, exclaimed, "The Lord help those who are  to-night travelling on Leathad Leacachan."  The prisoners were naturally astonished to hear an allusion, in such a place, to a mountain so familiar to  them in the North Highlands, and they soon obtained an opportunity,  which their hostess appeared most anxious to afford them, of questioning  her regarding her acquaintance with so distant a place; when she told them  that during a sea voyage she took with her husband, she had been taken so ill aboard ship that it was found necessary to send her ashore on the north  west coast of Scotland, where, travelling with only a maid and a single  guide, they were caught in a severe storm, and she was suddenly taken in  labour.  In this distressing and trying position a Highlander passing by  took compassion upon her, and  seeing her case so desperate, with no  resources at hand, he, with remarkable presence of mind, killed one of his  horses, ripped open his stomach, and taking out the bowels, placed  her  and the newly-born infant in their place, as the only effectual shelter from  the storm.  By this means he secured sufficient time to procure female  assistance, and ultimately saved the woman and her child.  But the most remarkable part of the story remains to be told.  The  same person to whom she owed her preservation was at that moment one  of the captives under her roof.   He was one of Kintail's followers on the  fatal field of Flodden.  She, informed of his presence and of the plight he  was in, managed to procure a private interview with him, when he amply  proved to her, by more detailed reference to the incidents of their meeting  on Leathad Leacachan, that he was the man--"Uisdean Mor Mac `Ille  Phadruig"--and in gratitude, she, at the serious risk of her own personal  safety, successfully planned the escape of Hugh's master and his whole  party.  The story is given on uninterrupted tradition in the country of the  Mackenzies; and a full and independent version in the vernacular of the  hero's humane conduct on Leathad Leacachan will be found in the Celtic  Magazine, vol. ii., pp. 468-9, to which the Gaelic reader is referred.

Gregory, p. 112, says:--"Tradition has preserved a curious  anecdote connected with the Mackenzies, whose young chief, John of  Kintail, was taken prisoner at Flodden.  It will be recollected that Kenneth Og Mackenzie of Kintail, while on his way to the Highlands, after making  his escape from Edinburgh Castle, was killed in the Torwood by the Laird  of Buchanan.  The foster-brother of Kenneth Og was a man of the district  of Kenlochewe, named Donald Dubh MacGillecrist vic Gillereoch, who  with the rest of the clan was at Flodden with his chief.  In the retreat of the  Scottish army this Donald Dubh heard some one near him exclaiming,  `Alas, Laird! thou hast fallen.' On enquiry, he was told it was the Laird of  Buchanan, who had sunk from his wounds or exhaustion.  The faithful  Highlander, eager to revenge the death of his chief and foster-brother,  drew his sword, and, saying, `If he has not fallen he shall fall,' made  straight to Buchanan, whom he killed on the spot."

As to the safe return of John of Kintail and Hector Roy to their Highland home, after this calamitous event, there is now no question whatever; for we find John among others, afterwards appointed, by Act of  Council, a Lieutenant or Guardian of Wester Ross, [Gregory, p. 115. Acts  of Lords of Council, xxvi., fo. 25.] to protect it from Sir Donald Gallda Macdonald of Lochalsh, when he proclaimed himself Lord of the Isles.  In  1515, Mackenzie, without legal warrant, seized the Royal Castle of  Dingwall, but professed his readiness to give it up to any one appointed by  the Regent, John, Duke of Albany. [Acts of Lords of Council, xxvii., fo.  60.]  In 1532 he is included in a commission by James V. for suppressing  a disorderly tribe of Mackintoshes.  He secured  the esteem of this monarch so much that he appointed him a member of his Privy Council.

To put the question of John's return beyond question, and to show how the family rose rapidly in influence and power during his rule, we  shall quote the Origines Parochiales Scotia, from which it will also be  seen that Kenneth, John's heir, received considerable grants for himself  during his father's lifetime:--"In 1509 King James IV. granted to John  Makkenzie of Keantalle (the brother of Kenneth Og) the 40 marklands of  Keantalle--namely, the davach of Cumissaig, the davach of Letterfearn,  the davach of Gleanselle, the davach of Glenlik, the davach of Letterchall,  the two davachs of Cro, and three davachs between the water of Keppach  and the water of Lwying, with the castle and fortalice of Eleandonnan, in the earldom of Ross and sheriffdom of Innernis, with other lands in Ross, which John had resigned, and which the King then erected into the barony  of Eleandonnan. [Reg. Mag. Sig., lib. xv., No.89. Gregory, p.83.]   In  1530 King James V. granted to James Grant of Freuchy and Johne  Mckinze of Kintale liberty to go to any part of the realm on their lawful business. [Reg. Sec. Sig., vol. viii., fol. 149.]  In 1532, 1538, and 1540, the  same John  M'Kenich of Kintaill appears on record. [Reg. Sec. Sig., vol.  ix, fol. 3; vol. xii., fol. 21 ; vol. xiv., fol. 32.]  In 1542, King James V. granted to John Mckenzie of Kintaill the waste lands of Monar, lying  between the water of Gleneak on the north, the top or summit of Landovir  on the south, the torrent of Towmuk and Inchclochill on the east, and the water of Bernis running into the water of Long on the west; and also the  waste lands of lie Ned lying between Loch Boyne on the  north, Loch  Tresk on the south, lie Ballach on the west, and Dawelach on the east, in the earldom of Ross and sheriffdom of Innernes--lands which were never  in the King's rental, and never yielded any revenue-for the yearly payment  of ? to the King as Earl of Ross. [Reg. Mag. Sig., lib. xxviii., No.  417.]

In 1543 Queen Mary granted to Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, and Isabel  Stewart, his wife, the lands of Auchnaceyric, Lakachane, Strome-ne-mowklach, Kilkinterne, the two Rateganis, Torlousicht, Auchnashellicht,  Auchnagart, Auchewrane, lic Knokfreith, Aucharskelane, and Malegane,  in the lordship of Kintaill and other lands in Ross, extending in all to 36  marks, which he had  resigned. [Reg. Mag. Sig., lib. xxviii., No. 524.  Reg.  Sec. Sig.,vol. xvii., fol. 56.] In 1551 the same Queen granted to John  M'Kenze of Kintaill, and Kenzeoch M'Kenze, his son and apparent heir, a  remission for the violent taking of John Hectour M'Kenzesone of  Garlouch, Doull Hectoursone, and John Towach Hectoursone, and for  keeping them in prison `vsurpand thairthrou our Souerane Ladyis  autorite.' [Reg. Sec. Sig., vol. xxiv., fol. 75.]  In 1554 there appear on  record John Mackenzie of Kintaile and his son and heir-apparant, Kenneth Mackenzie of Brahan--apparently the same persons that appear in 1551.  [Reg, Mag. Sig., lib. xxxii., No. 211.]

Donald Gorm Mor Macdonald of Sleat laid waste the country of  Macleod of Dunvegan, an ally of Mackenzie, after which he passed over  in 1539 to the mainland and pillaged the lands of Kenlochewe, where he  killed Miles or Maolmuire, son of Finlay Dubh MacGillechriost MacRath,  at the time governor of Ellandonnan Castle.  Finlay was a very "pretty  man," and the writer of the Genealogy of the Macras informs us that "the  remains of a monument erected for him, in the place where he was killed,  is still (1704) to be seen."  Kintail was naturally much exasperated at this  unprovoked raid upon his territory, as also for Macdonald's attack upon  his friend and ally, Macleod of Dunvegan; and to punish Donald Gorm, he  dispatched his son, Kenneth, with a force to Skye, who made ample  reprisals in Macdonald's country, killing many of his followers, and at the same time exhibiting great intrepidity and sagacity.  Donald Gorm almost  immediately afterwards made an incursion into Mackenzie's territories of  Kintail, where he killed Sir (Rev.) Dougald Mackenzie, "one of the Pope's knights"; whereupon Kenneth, younger of Kintail, paid a second visit to  the Island, wasted the country; and on his return, Macdonald learning that  Ellandonnan was garrisoned by a very weak force, under the new  governor, John Dubh Matheson of Fernaig--who had married Sir Dugald  Mackenzie's widow--he made another raid upon it, with fifty birlinns or  large boats full of his followers, with the intention of surprising the small  garrison, and taking the castle by storm.  Its gallant defenders consisted at the time of the governor, his watchman, and Duncan MacGillechriost Mac  Fhionnladh Mhic Rath, a nephew of Maolmuire killed in the last incursion  of the Island chief.  The advance of the boats was, however, noticed in  time by the sentinel or watchman, who at once gave the alarm to the  country people, but they arrived too late to prevent the enemy from  landing.  Duncan MacGillechriost was on the mainland at the time; but  flying back with all speed he arrived at the postern of the stronghold in time to kill several of the Islesmen in the act of landing; and, entering the  castle, he found no one there but the governor and watchman; almost immediately after, Donald Gorm Mor furiously attacked the gate, but  without success, the brave trio having strongly secured it by a second  barrier of iron within a few steps of the outer defences. Unable to procure  access  the Islesmen were driven to the expedient of shooting their arrows  through the embrazures, and in this way they succeeded in killing the  governor.

Duncan now found himself sole defender of the castle except the watchman; and worse still his ammunition was reduced to a single barbed  arrow, which he determined to husband until an opportunity occurred by  which he could make good use of it Macdonald at this stage ordered his  boats round to the point of the Airds, and was personally  reconnoitring  with the view of discovering the weakest part of the wall for effecting a breach. Duncan considered this a favourable opportunity, and aiming his  arrow at Donald Gorm, it struck him and penetrated his foot through the  master vein. Macdonald, not having perceived that the arrow was a  barbed one, wrenched it out, and in so doing separated the main artery.

Notwithstanding that all available means were used, it was found impossible to stop the bleeding, and his men conveyed him out of the  range of the fort to a spot--a sand bank--on which he died, called to this  day, "Larach Tigh Mhic Dhomhnuill," or the site of Macdonald's house,  where the haughty Lord of Sleat ended his career. [Genealogy of the  Macras and the Ardintoul MS.  "This Donald Gorme was son to Donald  Gruamach, son to Donald Gallach, son to Hugh, natural son to Alexander,  Earl of Ross, for which the elegy made on his death calls him grandchild  and great grandchild to Rhi-Fingal (King Fingal)--

"A Dhonnchaldh Mhic Gillechriost Mhic Fhionnla, `S mor um beud a thuit le d'aon laimh, Ogha `s iar-ogha Mhic Righ Fhinghaill, `Thuiteam le bramag an aon mhic."

--Letterform MS.]  The Islesmen burnt all they could find ashore in Kintail.

"In 1539 Donald Gorm of Sleat and his allies, after laying waste Trouterness in Sky and Kenlochew in Ross, attempted to take the Castle  of Eileandonan, but Donald being killed by an arrow shot from the wall,  the attempt failed." [Gregory, pp. 145.146.  Border Minstrelsy.  Anderson,  p. 283.  Reg. Sec. Sig., vol. xv., fol. 46.]  In 1541 King James V.  granted a  remission to Donald's accomplices--namely, Archibald  Ilis, alias  Archibald the Clerk, Alexander McConnell Gallich, John Dow  Donaldsoun, and twenty-six others whose names are recorded in Origines  Parchiales, p. 394, vol. ii., for their treasonable fire-raising and burning of  the "Castle of Allanedonnand" and of the boats there, for the "Herschip" of Kenlochew and Trouterness, etc.

Duncan MacGillechriost now naturally felt that he had some claim to the governorship of the castle, but being considered "a man more bold  and rash than prudent and politick," Mackenzie decided to pass him over.

Duncan then put in a claim for his brother Farquhar, but it was thought  best, to avoid local quarrels and bitterness between the respective  claimants, to supersede them both and appoint another, John  MacMhurchaidh Dhuibh, priest of Kintail, to the Constableship. Duncan  was so much offended at such treatment in return for his valiant services that he left Kintail in disgust, and went to the country of Lord Lovat, who  received him kindly, and gave him the lands of Crochel and others in  Strathglass, where he lived for several years, until Lovat's death.

Mackenzie, however, often visited him and finally prevailed upon him to  return to Kintail, and Duncan, who always retained a lingering affection  for his native country, ultimately became reconciled to the chief, who  gave him the quarterland of Little Inverinate and Dorisduan, where he  lived  the remainder of his days, and which his descendants continued to  possess for generations after his death.

For this service against the Macdonalds, James V. gave Mackenzie Kinchullidrum, Achilty, and Comery in feu, with Meikle Scatwell, under  the Great Seal, in 1528.  The lands of Laggan  Achidrom, being four  merks, the three merks of Killianan, and the four merk lands of Invergarry,  being in the King's hands, were disposed by him to John Mackenzie, after  the King's minority and revocation, in 1540, with a precept, under the  Great Seal, and sasine thereupon by Sir John Robertson in January 1541.

But before this, in 1521, he acquired the lands of Fodderty and mill  thereof from Mr John Cadell, which James V. confirmed to him at  Linlithgow in September, 1522.  In 1541 he feued Brahan from the King  to himself and his heirs male, which failing, to his eldest daughter.  In 1542 he obtained the waste lands and forest of Neid and Monar from  James V. for which sasine is granted in the same year by Sir John  Robertson.  In January 1547 he acquired a wadset of the half of Culteleod (Castle Leod) and Drynie from Denoon of Davidston.  In September of the  same year, old as he was, he went in defence of his Sovereign, young  Mary of Scots, to the Battle of Pinkie, where he was taken prisoner; and  the Laird of Kilravock meeting him advised him that they should own  themselves among the commons, Mackenzie passing off as a bowman.

While Kilravock would pass himself off as a miller, which plan succeeded  so well as to secure Kilravock his release; but the Earl of Huntly, who was  also a prisoner, having been conveyed by the Duke of Somerset to view  the prisoners, espying his old friend Mackenzie among the common  prisoners, and ignorant of the plot, called him by his name, desiring that  he might shake hands with him, which civility two English officers  noticed to Mackenzie's disadvantage; for thenceforward he was placed  and guarded along with the other prisoners of quality, but afterwards  released for a considerable sum, to which all  his  people contributed  without burdening his own estate with  it, ["He was ransomed by cows  that was raised through all his lands."--Letterform MS.] so  returning home to set himself to arrange his private affairs, and in the year 1556 he  acquired the heritage of Culteleod and Drynie from Denoon, which was  confirmed to him by Queen Mary under the Great Seal, at Inverness 13th  July the same year.  He had previously, in 1544, acquired the other half of  Culteleod and Drynie from Magnus Mowat, and Patrick Mowat of  Bugholly.  In 1543 John Mackenzie acquired Kildins, part of Lochbroom,  to himself and Elizabeth Grant, his wife, holding blench for a penny, and confirmed in the same year by Queen Mary. [MS. History by the Earl of  Cromartie.]

In 1540 Mackenzie with his followers joined King James at Loch  Duich, while on his way with a large fleet to secure the good government of the West Highlands and Isles, upon which occasion many of the suspected and refractory leaders were carried south and placed in  confinement.  His Majesty died soon after, in 1542.  Queen Mary  succeeded, and, being a minor, the country generally, but particularly the  northern parts, was thrown into a state of anarchy and confusion.  In 1544 the Earl of Huntly, holding a commission as Lieutenant of  the North from the Queen Regent, Mary of Guise, commanded Kenneth  Mackenzie, younger of Kintail (his father, from his advanced age, being  unable to take the field), to raise his vassals and lead an expedition against  the Clan Ranald of Moidart, who, at that time, held lands from Mackenzie  on the West Coast; but Kenneth, in these circumstances, thought it would  be much against his personal interest to attack Donald Glas of Moidart, and refused to comply with Huntly's orders.  To punish him, the Earl  ordered his whole army, consisting of three thousand men, to proceed  against both Moidart and Mackenzie with fire and sword, but he had not  sufficiently calculated on the constitution of his force, which was chiefly  composed of Grants, Rosses, Mackintoshes, and Chisholms; and  Kenneth's mother being a daughter of John, then laird of Grant, and three of his daughters having married, respectively, Ross of Balnagown,  Lachlan Mackintosh of Mackintosh, and Alexander Chisholm of Comar,  Huntly found his followers as little disposed to molest Mackenzie as he  had been to attack Donald Glas of Moidart.  In addition to the friendly  feelings of the other chiefs towards young Kintail, fostered by these family alliances, Huntly was not at all popular with his own followers, or with the  Highlanders generally.  He had incurred such odium for having some time  before executed the Laird of Mackintosh, contrary to his solemn pledge,  that it required little excuse on the part of the exasperated kindred tribes to  counteract his plans, and on the slightest pretext to refuse to follow him.

He was therefore obliged to retire from the West without effecting any  substantial service; was ultimately disgraced committed to Edinburgh  Castle; compelled to renounce the Earldom of Moray and all his other  possessions in the north; and sentenced to banishment in France for five  years.

On the 13th of December 1545, at Dingwall, the Earl of Sutherland entered into a bond of manrent with John Mackenzie of Kintail for mutual  defence against all enemies, reserving only their allegiance to their  youthful Queen, Mary Stuart. [Sir Robert Gordon, p. 112.] Two years  later the Earl of Arran sent the fiery cross over the nation calling upon all  between the ages of sixteen and sixty to meet him at Musselburgh for the  protection of the infant Queen. Mackenzie of Kintail, then between sixty and seventy years of age, when he might fairly consider himself exempt  from further military service, duly appeared with all the followers he  could muster, prudently leaving Kenneth, his only son, at home  and when remonstrated with for taking part in such a perilous journey at his time of  life, especially as he was far past the stipulated age for active service, the  old chief patriotically remarked that one of his age could not possibly die  more decorously than in the defence of his country.  In the same year  (1547) he fought bravely, at the head of his clan, with all the enthusiasm  and gallantry of his younger days, at the battle of Pinkie, where he was  wounded in the head and taken prisoner, but was soon afterwards released, through the influence of the Earl of Huntly, who had meanwhile again got  into favour received a full pardon, and was appointed Chancellor for  Scotland.

The Earl of Huntly some time after this paid a visit to Ross, intending, if he were kindly received by the great chiefs, to feu a part of  the earldom of Ross, still in the King's hands, and to live in  the district  for some period of the year.  Mackenzie, although friendly disposed  towards the Earl, had no desire to have him residing in his immediate  neighbourhood, and he arranged a plan which had the effect of deciding  Huntly to give up. any idea of remaining or feuing any lands in Ross.

The  Earl, having obtained a commission from the Regent to hold courts in the  county, came to the castle of Dingwall, where he invited the principal  chiefs to meet him.  John of Killin, though very advanced in years, was the  first to arrive, and he was very kindly received by Huntly.  Mackenzie in return made a pretence of heartily welcoming and congratulating his  lordship on his coming to Ross, and trusted that he would  be the means of  protecting him and his friends from the violence of his son, Kenneth, who, taking advantage of his frailty and advanced years, was behaving most  unjustly towards him.  John, indeed, expressed the hope that the Earl  would punish Kenneth for his illegal and unnatural rebellion against him, his aged father.  While they were thus speaking, a message came in that a large number of armed men, three or four hundred strong, with banners  flying and pipes playing, were just in sight on the hill above Dingwall.

The Earl became alarmed, not knowing whom they might be or what their  object was, whereupon Mackenzie said that it could be no other than  Kenneth and his rebellious followers coming to punish him for paying his  lordship this visit without his consent and he advised the Earl to leave at  once, as he was not strong enough to resist the enemy, and to take him  (the old chief) along with him in order to protect him from his son's  violence, which would now, in consequence of this visit he directed  against him more than ever.  The Earl and his retinue at once withdrew to Easter Ross. Kenneth ordered his men to pursue them.  He overtook them  as they were crossing the bridge of Dingwall and killed several of them; but having attained his object of frightening Huntly out of Ross, he ordered his men to desist.  This skirmish is known as the "affair of  Dingwall Bridge." [Ardintoul MS.]

In 1556 Y Mackay of Farr, progenitor of the Lords of Reay,  refused to appear before the Queen Regent at Inverness, to answer charges made against him for depredations committed in Sutherlandshire; and she  issued a commission to John, fifth Earl of Sutherland, to lay Mackay's  country waste.  Mackay, satisfied that he could not successfully oppose  the Earl's forces in the field, pillaged and plundered another district of  Sutherland.  The Earl conveyed intelligence of how matters stood to John  of Kintail, who, in terms of the bond of manrent entered into between  them in 1545, despatched his son Kenneth with an able body of the clan to arrest Mackay's progress, which duty he performed most effectually.

Meeting at Brora, a severe contest ensued, which terminated in the defeat of Mackay, with the loss of Angus MacIain Mhoir, one of his chief  commanders, and many of his clan.  Kenneth was thereupon, conjointly  with his father, appointed by the Earl of Sutherland-then the Queen's  Lieutenant north of the Spey, and Chamberlain of the Earldom of Ross  [Sir Robert Gordon, p. 134.]--his deputies in the management of this vast  property, at the same time placing them in possession of Ardmeanoch, or  Redcastle, which remained ever since, until within a recent period, in the  possession of the family, becoming the property of Kenneth's third son,  Ruairidh Mor, first of the house of Redcastle, and progenitor of the family of Kincraig and other well-known branches.

After this, Kintail seems to have lived in peace during the remainder of his long life.  He died at his home at Inverchonan, in 1561, about eighty years of age.  He was buried in the family aisle at Beauly.  That he was a man of proved valour is fully established by the distinguished part he took in the battles of Flodden and Pinkie.  The Earl of  Cromarty informs us that, "in his time he purchased much of the Brae-lands of Ross, and secured both what he acquired and what his  predecessors had, by well ordered and legal security, so that it is doubtful  whether his predecessors' courage or his prudence contributed most to the rising of the family."

In illustration of the latter quality, we quote the following story:--  John Mackenzie of Kintail "was a very great courtier and counsellor of  Queen Manes.  Much of the lands of Brae Ross were acquired by him,  which minds me how he entertained the Queen's Chamberlain who she  sent north to learn the state and condition of the gentry of Ross, minding  to feu her interest of that Earldome. Sir John, hearing of their coming to  his house of Killin, he caused his servants put on a great fyre of ffresh arn   wood newly cutt, which when they came in (sitting on great jests of wood  which he caused sett there a purpose) made such a reek that they were  almost blinded, and were it not the night was so ill they would rather goe  than byde it.  They had not long sitten when his servants came in with a  great bull, which presently they brained on the floor, and or they well  could look about, this fellow with his dirk, and that fellow with his, were  cutting collops of him.  Then conies in another sturdie lusty fellow with a  great calderon in his hand, and ane axe in the other, and with its shaft  stroak each of these that were cutting the collops, and then made Taylzies  of it and put all in the kettle, sett it on the same tire before them all and  helped the tire with more green wood.  When all was ready as he had  ordered, a long, large table was covered and the beef sett on in great  scaills of dishes instead of pleats.  They had scarcely sitten to supper when  they let loose six or sevin great hounds to supp the broth, but before they  made ane end of it, they made such a tulzie as made them all start at the table.  The supper being ended, and longing for their bedds (but much  more for day), there comes in 5 or 6 lustie women with windlings of strae (and white plaids) which they spread on each side of the house, whereon the gentlemen were forced to lye in their cloaths, thinking they had come to purgatory before hand; but they had no sooner seen day light than  without stayeing dinner they made to the gett, down to Ross where they  were most noblie entertained be Ffowlis, Belnagowin, Miltoun, and  severall other gentlemen.  But when they were come south the Queen  asked who were the ablest men they saw there.  They answered all they  did see lived like princes, except Her Majesty's great courtier and  counsellor Mackenzie.  So tells her all their usage in his house, and that he  slept with his doggs and sat with his hounds, wherat the Queen leugh  mirrily (whatever her thoughts was of M'Kenzie) and said `It were a pity  of his poverty, ffor he is the best and honestest among them all.'  The  Queen thereafter having called all the gentry of Ross to hold their lands of  the Crown in feu, Mackenzie got (by her favour and his pretended poverty) the easiest feu, and for his 1000 merks more than any of the rest  had for three." [Ancient MS.]

John had a natural son named Dugall, who lived in Applecross,  and married a niece of Macleod of Harris, by whom he had a son and one  daughter.  The son, also named Dugall, was a schoolmaster in Chanonry,  and died without issue.  The daughter was married to Duncan Mackenzie,  Reraig, and after his death to Mackintosh of Strone.  Dugall, the elder,  was killed by the Mathesons at Kishorn.  John had also a natural daughter,  Janet, who married first Mackay of Reay, and secondly, Roderick  Macleod, X. of Lewis, with issue--Torquil Cononach; and afterwards "Ian  Mor na Tuaighe," brother of John MacGillechallum of Raasay, with  whom she eloped.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of John, tenth Laird of Grant, and by her had an only son and successor,

X.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE,

Commonly known as Coinneach na Cuirc, or Kenneth of the Whittle, so  called from his skill in wood carving and general dexterity with the  Highland "sgian dubh."  He succeeded his father in  1561. In the  following year he was among the chiefs who, at the head of their  followers, met Queen Mary at Inverness, and helped her to obtain  possession of the Castle after Alexander Gordon, the governor, refused her  admission.  In the same year an Act of Privy Council, dated the 21st of  May, bears that he had delivered up Mary Macleod, the heiress of Harris  and Dunvegan, of whom he had previously by accident obtained the  custody, into the hands of Queen Mary, with whom she afterwards  remained for several years as a maid of honour.  The Act is as follows:--

"The same day, in presence of the Queen's Majesty and Lords of Secret Council, compeared Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, who, being commanded by letters and also by writings direct from the Queen's Grace,  to exhibit, produce, and present before her Highness Mary Macleod,  daughter and heir of the umquwhile William Macleod of Harris, conform  to the letters and charges direct thereupon:  And declared that James  Macdonald had an action depending the Lords of Session against him for  deliverance of the said Mary to him, and that therefore he could not gudlie  (well) deliver her.  Notwithstanding the which the Queen's Majesty  ordained the said Kenneth to deliver the said Mary to her Highness and  granted that he should incur `no scaith thairthrou' at the hands of the said  James or any others, notwithstanding any title or action they had against him therefor; and the said Kenneth knowing his dutiful obedience to the  Queen's Majesty, and that the Queen had ordained him to deliver the said Mary to her Highness in manner foresaid which he in no wise could disobey--and therefore delivered the said Mary to the Queen's Majesty  conform to her ordinance foresaid." [Transactions of the Iona Club, pp.  143-4.]

Prior to this Mackenzie refused to give her up to her lawful  guardian, James Macdonald of Dunyveg and the Glens.  In 1563 we find  him on the jury, with James, Earl of Moray, and others, at Inverness, by  whom John Campbell of Cawdor was served heir to the Barony of Strathnairn. [Invernessiana, p.229.]   Kenneth was advanced in years  before he came into possession, and took, as we have seen, an active and  distinguished part in all the affairs of his clan during the life of his long-lived father.  He seems after his return from Inverness, on the occasion of  meeting Queen Mary there, to have retired very much into private life, for,  on Mary's escape from Lochleven Castle he sent his son Colin, then quite  a youth attending his studies at Aberdeen, at the head of his vassals, to join the Earl of Huntly, by whom Colin was sent, according to the Laird of  Applecross, "as one whose prudence he confided, to advise the Queen's  retreat to Stirling, where she  might stay  in  security till  all  her  friends   were convocate, but by an unhappy council she refused this advice and  fought at Langside, where Colin was present, and when by the Regent's  [The Earl of Moray, appointed to the office after Mary's defeat.]  insolence, after that victory, all the loyal subjects were forced to take remissions for their duty, as if it were a crime.  Amongst the rest  Mackenzie takes one, the only one that ever any of his family had  and this  is rather a mark of his fidelity than evidence of failure, and an honour, not  a task of his posterity."  It would have been already seen that another  remission had been received at an earlier date, for the imprisonment and  murder of John Glassich, son and successor to Hector Roy Mackenzie of  Gairloch, in Ellandonnan Castle.  Dr George Mackenzie says that Kenneth  apprehended John Glassich and sent him prisoner to the Castle, where he  was poisoned by the constable's lady, [This lady was Nighean Iamhair,  and was spouse to John MacMhurchaidh Dhuibh. the Priest of Kintail,  who was then chosen constable of Ellandonnan for the following reason:--  A great debate arose between the Maclennans and the Macraes about this  important and honourable post, and the laird finding them irreconcilable, lest they should kill one another, and he being a stranger in the country himself, Mackenzie, on the advice of the Lord of Fairburn, erected the  priest constable of the castle. This did not suit the Maclennans, and, as  soon as Mackenzie left the country, they, one Sabbath morning, as the  priest was coming home from church, `sends a man in ambush in his road  who shot him with an arrow in the buttocks, so that he fell.  The ambusher thinking him killed, and perceiving others coming after the priest that  road, made his escape, and he (the priest) was carried to his boat alive.   Of  this priest are all the Murchisons in thise countries descended."--Ancient  MS.] whereupon "ane certain female, foster-sister of his, composed a  Gaelic rhyme to commemorate him." The Earl of Cromartie gives as the  reason for this imprisonment and murder that, according to rumour John  Glassich intended to prosecute his father's claim to the Kintail estates, and  Kenneth hearing of this sent for him to Brahan, John came suspecting  nothing, accompanied only by his ordinary servants.  Kenneth questioned him regarding the suspicious rumours in circulation, and not being quite  satisfied with the answers, he caused John Glassich to be at once  apprehended.  One of John's servants, named John Gearr, seeing his  master thus inveigled, struck at Kenneth of Kintail a fearful blow with a two-handed sword, but fortunately Kenneth, who was standing close to the  table, nimbly moved aside, and the blow missed him, else he would have  been cloven to pieces.  The sword made a deep cut in the table, "so that  you could hide your hand edgeways in it," and the mark remained in the  table until Colin, first Earl of Seaforth, "caused cut that piece off the table, saying that he loved no such remembrance of the quarrels of his relations."  Kenneth was a man of good endowments "he carried so prudently that he had the good-liking of his prince and peace from his  neighbours."  He had a peculiar genius for mechanics, and was seldom  found without his corc--"sgian dubh"--or some other such tool in his  hand, with which he produced excellent specimens of hand-carving on  wood.

He married early, during his father's lifetime, Lady Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John, second  Earl of Athol, by his wife, Lady Mary  Campbell, daughter of Archibald, second, and sister of Colin, third Earl of  Argyll, and by her had three sons and several daughters--

I.  Murdoch, who, being fostered in the house of Bayne of Tulloch, was presented by that gentleman on his being sent home, with a goodly  stock of milch cows and the grazing of Strathvaich, but he died before he attained majority.

II.  Colin, who succeeded his father.

III.  Roderick, who received the lands of Redcastle and became the progenitor of the family of that name.

IV.  Janet, who as his third wife married, first, Aeneas Macdonald,

VII. of Glengarry, with issue--a daughter Elizabeth, who married John Roy Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch.  She married secondly, Alexander Chisholm, XIV. of Chisholm, with issue.

V.  Catherine, who, as his second wife, married Alexander  Ross,

IX.  of Balnagown, with issue--one son Nicholas Alexander, who died on  the 21st of October, 1592.

VI.  Agnes, who married Lachlan Mor Mackintosh of Mackintosh,  [The following anecdote is related of this match:--Lachlan Mackintosh, being only an infant when his father, William Mackintosh of that ilk, was murdered in 1550, was carried for safety by some of his humble retainers  to the county of Ross.  This came to the knowledge of Colin, younger of  Kintail, who took possession of the young heir of Mackintosh, and carried him to Ellandonnan Castle.  The old chief retained him, and treated him  with great care until the years of pupilarity had expired, and then married  him to his daughter Agnes, by no means an unsuitable match for either,  apart from the time and manner in which it was consummated.] with  issue.

VII.  A daughter who married Walter Urquhart of Cromarty.

VIII.  A daughter who married Robert Munro of Fowlis.

IX.  A daughter who married Innes of Inverbreackie.

By Kenneth's marriage to Lady Elizabeth Stewart, the Royal blood of the Plantaganets was introduced into the Family of Kintail, and it was afterwards strengthened and the strain further continued by the marriage  of Kenneth's son, Colin Cam, to Barbara Grant of Grant, daughter of Lady  Marjory Stewart, daughter of John, third Earl of Athol.

By the inter-marriages of his children Kenneth left his house singularly powerful in family alliances, and as has been already seen he in  1554 derived very substantial benefits from them himself. He died at  Killin on the 6th of June, 1568, and was burried at Beauly.  He was  succeeded by his second and eldest surviving son,

XI.  COLIN  CAM  MACKENZIE,

Or COLIN  THE  ONE-EYED, who very early became a special favourite at Court, particularly with the King himself; so much, the Earl of  Cromartie says, that "there was none in the North for whom he hade a  greater esteem than for this Colin.  He made him one of his Privie  Councillors, and oft tymes invited him to be nobilitate (ennobled); but  Colin always declined it, aiming rather to have his familie remarkable for  power, as it were, above their qualitie than for titles that equalled their  power."  We find that "in 1570 King James VI. granted to Coline  Makcainze, the son and apparent heir of the deceased Canzeoch of  Kintaill, permission to be served heir in his minority to all the lands and  rents in the Sheriffdom of Innerness, in which his father died last vest and  seised.  In 1572 the same King confirmed a grant made by Colin  Makcanze of Kintaill to Barbara Graunt, his affianced spouse, in  fulfilment of a contract between him and John Grant of Freuchie, dated  25th April 1571, of his lands of Climbo, Keppach, and Ballichon, Mekle Innerennet, Derisduan Beg, Little Innerennet, Derisduan Moir, Auchadrein, Kirktoun, Ardtulloch, Rovoch, Quhissil, Tullych, Derewall  and Nuik, Inchchro, Morowoch, Glenlik, Innersell and Nuik, Ackazarge,  Kinlochbeancharan, and  Innerchonray, in  the Earldom of Ross, and  Sheriffdom of Inverness.   In 1574 the same Colin was served heir to his  father Kenneth  M'Keinzie in the davach of Letterfernane, the davach of  Glenshall, and other lands in the barony of Ellendonane of the old extent of five marks." [Origines Parechiales Scotia, p. 393, vol, ii.]

On the 15th of April, 1569, Colin, along with Alexander Ross of  Balnagown, Lachlan  Mackintosh of Mackintosh, Walter Urquhart of  Cromarty, Robert Munro of Fowlis, Hugh Rose of Kilravock, and several  others, signed a bond of allegiance to James VI. and to James Earl of  Murray as Regent.  On the 21st of June, in the same year, before the Lord Regent and the Privy Council, Colin  promised and obliged himself to  cause Torquil Macleod of Lewis to obtain sufficient letters of slams from the master, wife, bairns, and principal kin and friends of the umquhile  John Mac Ian Mhoir, and on the said letters of slams being obtained  Robert Munro of Fowlis promised and obliged himself to deliver to the  said Torquil or Colin the sum of two hundred merks consigned in Robert  Munro's hands by certain merchants in Edinburgh for the assithment of slaughters committed at Lochcarron in connection with the fishings in that  Loch.  On the 1st of August, 1569, Colin signs a decree arbitral between  himself and Donald Gormeson Macdonald, sixth of Sleat, the full text of  which will be found at pp. 185-88 of Mackenzie's History of the  Macdonalds and Lords of the Isles.

In 1570 a quarrel broke out between the Mackenzies and the  Munros. Leslie, the celebrated Bishop of Ross, who had been secretary to Queen Mary, dreading the effect of public feeling against prelacy in  the North, and against himself personally, made over to his cousin Leslie of  Balquhair, his rights and titles to the Chanonry of Ross, together with the  castle lands, in order to divest them of the character of church property,  and so save them to his family but notwithstanding this grant, the Regent Murray gave the custody of the castle to Andrew Munro of Milntown, a  rigid presbyterian, and in high favour with Murray, who promised Leslie  some of the lands of the barony of Fintry in Buchan as an equivalent but  the Regent died before this arrangement was carried out--before Munro obtained titles to the castle and castle lands as he expected.  Yet he  ultimately obtained permission from the Earl of Lennox, during his  regency, and afterwards from the Earl of Mar, his successor in that office,  to get possession of the castle.

The Mackenzies were by no means pleased to see the Munros  occupying the stronghold; and, desirous to obtain possession of it  themselves, they purchased Leslie's right, by virtue of which they  demanded delivery of the castle.  This was at once refused by the Munros. Kintail raised his vassals, and, joined by a detachment of the Mackintoshes, [In the year 1573, Lachlan More, Laird of Mackintosh, favouring Kintail, his brother-in law, required all the people of Strathnairn  to join him against the Munros.  Colin, Lord of Lorn had at the time the  adminstration of that lordship as the jointure lands of his wife, the  Countesa Dowager of Murray, and he wrote to Hugh Rose of Kilravock:--"My Baillie off Strathnarne, for as much as it is reported to me that  Mackintosh has charged all my tenants west of the water of Naim to pass  forward with him to Ross to enter into this troublous action with  Mackenzie against the Laird of Fowlis, and because I will not that any of mine enter presently this matter whose service appertains to me,  wherefore I will desire you to make my will known to my tenants at  Strathnarne within your Bailliary, that none of them take upon hand to rise  at this present with Mackintosh to pass to Ross, or at any time hereafter without my special command and goodwill obtained under such pains," etc.  (Dated) Darnoway, 28th of June, 1573.--Kilravock Writs, p.263.]  garrisoned the steeple of the Cathedral Church, and laid siege to Irvine's  Tower and the Palace.  The Munros held out for three years, but one day  the garrison becoming short of provisions, they attempted a sortie to the Ness of Fortrose, where there was at the time a salmon stell, the contents  of which they attempted to secure.  They were commanded  by John   Munro, grandson of George, fourth laird of Fowlis, who was killed at the  battle of "Bealach-nam-Brog."  They, were immediately discovered, and quickly followed by the Mackenzies, under lain Dubh Mac Ruairidh Mhic  Alastair, who fell upon the starving Munros, and, after a desperate  struggle, killed twenty-six of their number, among whom was their  commander, while the victors only sustained a loss of two men killed and  three or four wounded.  The remaining defenders of the castle  immediately capitulated, and it was taken possession of by the  Mackenzies.  Subsequently it was confirmed to the Baron of Kintail by  King James VI. [Sir Robert Gordon, p. 154, and MS. Histories of the  Family.]  Roderick Mor Mackenzie of Redcastle seems to have been the  leading spirit in this affair.  The following document, dated at Holyrood House, the 12th of September 1573, referring to the matter will prove  interesting--

Anent our Sovereign Lord's letters raised at the instance of Master  George Munro, making mention:--that whereas he is lawfully provided to  the Chancellory of Ross by his Highness's presentation, admission to the  Kirk, and the Lords' decree thereupon, and has obtained letters in all the  four forms thereupon and therewith has caused charge the tenants and  intromitters with the teind sheaves thereof, to make him and his factors  payment; and in the meantime Rory Mackenzie, brother to Colin  Mackenzie of Kintail, having continual residence in the steeple of the  Chanonry of Ross, which he caused to be built not only to oppress the  country with masterful theft, sorning, and daily oppression, but also for suppressing of the word of God which was always preached in the said  Kirk preceding his entry thereto, which is now become a filthy stye and  den of thieves; has masterfully and violently with a great force of oppression, come to the tenants indebted in payment of the said Mr George's benefice aforesaid and has masterfully reft them of all and whole  the fruits thereof; and so he having no other refuge for obtaining of the said benefice, was compelled to denounce the said whole tenants rebels  and put them to the horn, as the said letters and execution thereof more  fully purports; and further is compelled for fear of the said Mr George's life to remain from his vocation whereunto God has called him.  And  anent the charge given to the said Rory Mackenzie to desist and cease  from all intromitting, uptaking, molesting or troubling of the said Mr  George's tenants of his benefice above-written for any fruits or duties  thereof, otherwise than is ordered by law, or else to have compeared  before my Lord Regent's grace and Lords of Secret Council at a certain day bypast, and show a reasonable cause why the same should not be done; under the pain of rebellion and putting him to the horn, with certification to him, and he failing, letters would be directed simpliciter to  put him to the horn, like as is at more length contained in the said letters,  execution and endorsement thereof. Which being called, the said Master  George compeared personally, and the said Rory Mackenzie oftimes  called and not compearing, my Lord Regent's grace, with advise of the  Lords of Secret Council, ordained letters to be directed to officers of arms,  Sheriffs in that part, to denounce the said Rory Mackenzie our Sovereign  Lord's rebel and put him to the horn and to escheat and bring in all his moveable goods to his Highness's use for his contempt. [Records of the  Privy Council.]

In December of the same year Colin has to provide cautioners, for things laid to his charge, to the amount of ten thousand pounds, that he  shall remain within four miles of Edinburgh, and eastward as far as the  town of Dunbar, and that he shall appear before the Council on a notice of  forty-eight hours.  On the 6th of February following other cautioners bind  themselves to enter him in Edinburgh on the 20th of May, 1574,  remaining there until relieved, under a penalty of ten thousand pounds.   He is entered to keep ward in Edinburgh on the 1st March, 1575, and is  bound to appear before the Council when required under a similar penalty.    On the 10th of April following he signs a bond that Alexander Ross shall  appear before the Lords when required to do so.  On the 25th of May,  1575, at Chanonry, Robert Munro of Fowlis and Walter Urquhart, Sheriff of Cromarty, bind  themselves their  heirs, and successors, under a penalty  of five thousand pounds, that they shall on a month's notice enter and  present Roderick Mor Mackenzie of Redcastle before the King and the  Privy Council and that he shall remain while lawful entry be taken of him,  and that he shall keep good rule in his country in the meantime.  On the  same day Colin, his brother, "of his own free motive will" binds himself  and his heirs to relieve and keep these gentlemen scaithless of the amount  of this obligation.  He is one of several Highland chiefs charged by the  Regent and the Privy Council on the 19th of February; 1577-78, to defend  Donald Mac Angus of Glengarry from an expected invasion of his  territories by sea and land. [Register of the Privy Council.]

The disturbed state of the country was such, in 1573, that the Earl  of Sutherland petitioned to be served heir to his estates, at Aberdeen, as he  could not get a jury together to sit at  Inverness, "in consequence of the  barons, such as Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, Hugh Lord Lovat, Lachlan  Mackintosh of Dunachton, and Robert Munro of Fowlis, being at deadly  feud among themselves." [Antiquarian Notes, p. 79]

In 1580 a desperate quarrel broke out between the Mackenzies and Macdonalds of Glengarry.  The Chief of Glengarry inherited part of Lochalsh, Lochcarron, and Lochbroom, from his grandmother, Margaret, one of the sisters and co-heiresses of Sir Donald Macdonald of Lochalsh,  and grand-daughter of Celestine of the Isles. Kenneth, during his father's  life, had acquired the other part by purchase from Dingwall of Kildun, son  of the other co-heiress of Sir Donald, on the 24th November, 1554, and  Queen Mary confirmed the grant by Royal charter.  Many causes leading  to disputes and feuds can easily be imagined with such men in close  proximity.  Glengarry and his followers "sorned" on Mackenzie's tenants,  not only in the immediate vicinity of his own property of Lochcarron, but also during their raids from Glengarry, on the outskirts of Kintail, and thus  Mackenzie's dependants were continually harrassed by Glengarry's  cruelty and ill-usage.  His own tenants in Lochalsh and Lochcarron fared  little better, particularly the Mathesons in the former, and the Clann Ian  Uidhir in the latter, who were the original possessors of Glengarry's lands  in that district.  These tribes, finding themselves in such abject slavery,  though they regularly paid their rents and other dues, and seeing how  kindly Mackenzie used the neighbouring tenantry, envied their more comfortable state and "abhorred Glengarry's rascality, who would lie in  their houses (yea, force their women and daughters) so long as there was  any good to be given, which made them keep better amity and  correspondence with Mackenzie and his tenants than with their own  master and his  followers.  This may partly teach how superiors ought  always to govern and oversee their tenantry and followers, especially in  the Highlands, who were ordinarily made up of several clans, and will not readily underlie such slavery as the Incountry Commons will do."

The  first serious outbreak between the Glengarry Macdonalds and the Mackenzies originated thus:  One Duncan Mac Ian Uidhir Mhic Dhonnachaidh, known as "a very honest gentleman," who, in his early days, lived under Glengarry, and was a very good deerstalker and an  excellent shot, often resorted to the forest of Glasletter, then the property  of Mackenzie of Gairloch, where he killed many of the deer.  Some time  afterwards, Duncan was, in consequence of certain troubles in his own  country, obliged to leave, and he, with all his family and goods, took up his quarters in Glen Affrick, close to the forest.  Soon after, he went,  accompanied by a friend, to the nearest hill, and began his favourite  pursuit of deerstalking. Mackenzie's forester perceiving the stranger, and  knowing him as an old poacher, cautiously walked up, came upon him  unawares, and demanded that he should at once surrender himself and his  arms. Duncan, finding that Gairloch's forester was only accompanied by one gillie, "thought it an irrecoverable affront that he and his man should  so yield, and refused to do so on any terms, whereupon the forester being ill-set, and remembering former abuses in their passages," he and his  companion killed the poachers, and buried them in the hill.  Fionnla Dubh Mac Dhomh'uill Mhoir and Donald Mac Ian Leith, the latter a native of  Gairloch, were suspected of the crime, but it was never proved against  them, though they were both several times put on their trial by the barons  of Kintail and Gairloch.

About two years after the murder was committed, Duncan's bones were discovered by one of his friends, who had continued all the time  diligently to search for him.  The Macdonalds always suspected foul play, and this having now been placed beyond question by the discovery of the  bodies of the victims, a party of them started, determined to revenge the death of their clansman; and, arriving at Inchlochell, Glenstrathfarrar, then  the property of Rory Mor Mackenzie of Redcastle, they found Duncan  Mac Ian Mhic Dhomh'uill Mhoir, a brother of the suspected Finlay Dubh,  without any fear of approaching danger, busily engaged ploughing his  patch of land, and they at once attacked and killed him.  The renowned  Rory Mor, hearing of the murder of his tenant, at once despatched a  messenger to Glengarry demanding redress and the punishment of the  assassins, but Glengarry refused.  Rory was, however, determined to have satisfaction, and he resolved, against the counsel of his friends, to have  retribution for this and previous injuries at once and as best he could.

Having thus decided, he at once sent for his friend, Dugall Mackenzie of  Applecross, to consult him as to the best mode of procedure to ensure  success.

Glengarry lived at the time in the Castle of Strone, Lochcarron, and, after consultation, the two Mackenzies resolved to use every means  in their power to capture him, or some of his nearest relatives.  For this  purpose Dugall suggested a plan by which he thought he would induce the  unsuspecting Glengarry to meet him on a certain day at Kishorn.  Rory  Mor, to avoid any suspicion, was to start at once for Lochbroom, under  cloak of attending to his interests there; and if Macdonald agreed to meet  Dugall at Kishorn, he would immediately send notice of the day to Rory.   No sooner had Dugall arrived at home than, to carry out this plan, he  dispatched a messenger to Glengarry informing him that he had matters of  great importance to communicate to him, and that he wished, for that purpose, to meet him on any day which he might deem suitable.

Day and place were soon appointed, and Dugall at once sent a  messenger, as arranged, with full particulars of the proposed meeting to  Rory Mor, who instantly gathered his friends, the Clann Allan, and  marched them to Lochcarron.  On his arrival, he had a meeting with  Donald Mac Ian Mhic Ian Uidhir, and Angus Mac Eachainn, both of the  Clann Ian Uidhir, and closely allied to Glengarry by blood and marriage,  and living on his lands.  "Yet notwithstanding this alliance, they, fearing  his, and his rascality's further oppression, were content to join Rory in the  plot."  The appointed day having arrived, Glengarry and his lady (a  daughter of the Captain of Clan Ranald, he having. previously sent away  his lawfull wife, a daughter of the laird of Grant) came by sea to Kishorn.

He and Dugall Mackenzie having conferred together for some time discussing matters of importance to each as neighbours, Glengarry took  his leave, but while being convoyed to his boat, Dugall suggested the  impropriety of his going home by sea in such a clumsy boat, when he had  only a distance of two miles to walk, and if he did not suspect his own  inability to make the lady comfortable for the night, he would be glad to provide for her and see her home safely next morning.  Macdonald  declined the proffered hospitality to his lady.  He sent her home by the  boat, accompanied by four of his followers, and told Dugall that he would not endanger the boat by overloading, but that he and the remainder of his  gentlemen and followers would go home on foot.

Rory Mor had meanwhile placed his men in ambush in a place still called Glaic nan Gillean.  Glengarry and his train, on their way to Strone  Castle, came upon them without the slightest suspicion, when they were  suddenly surrounded by Rory's followers, and called upon to surrender.   Seeing this, one of the Macdonalds shot an arrow at Redcastle, which  fixed in the fringe of his plaid, when his followers, thinking their leader  had been mortally wounded furiously attacked the Macdonalds; but Rory  commanded his friends, under pain of death, to save the life of Glengarry,  who, seeing he had no chance of escape, and hearing Redcastle's orders to his men, threw away his sword, and ran into Rory Mor's arms, begging that his life might be spared.  This was at once granted to him, but not a  single one of his men escaped from Redcastle's infuriated followers, who  started the same night, taking Glengarry along with him, for Lochbroom.

Even this did not satisfy the cruel disposition of Donald Mac Ian Mhic Ian Uidhir and Angus Mac Eachainn, who had an old grudge against their chief, Glengarry, his father having some time previously evicted their  father from Attadale, Lochcarron, to which they claimed a right.  They,  under silence of night, gathered all the Clann Ian Uidhir, and proceeded to  Arinaskaig and Dalmartin, where lived at the time three uncles of  Glengarry--Gorrie, Rorie, and Ronald--whom they, with all their  retainers, killed on the spot. "This murder was undoubtedly unknown to  Rory or any of the Mackenzies, though alleged otherwise; for as soon as  his nephew, Colin of Kintail, and his friends heard of this accident, they  were much concerned, and would have him (Rory) set Glengarry at liberty but all their persuasions would not do tell he was secured of him by writ and oath, that he and his would never pursue this accident either legally or  unlegally, and which, as was said, he never intended  to do, till seventeen  years thereafter, when, in 1597, the children of these three uncles of  Glengarry arrived at manhood," determined, as will be seen hereafter, to  revenge their father's death. [Ancient and Ardintoul MSS.]

Gregory, however, says (p. 219) that after his liberation, Glengarry complained to the Privy Council, who, investigating the matter, caused the  Castle of Strone, which Macdonald yielded to Mackenzie as one of the  conditions of his release, to be placed under the temporary custody of the  Earl of Argyll and Mackenzie of Kintail was detained at Edinburgh in  open ward to answer such charges as might be brought against him.  [Records of Privy Council of date 10th August and 2d December 1582;  11th January and 8th March 1582-3.] In 1586 King James VI. granted a  remission to "Colin M'Kainzie of Kintaill and Rodoric M'Kainzie of  Auchterfailie" (Redcastle), "his brother, for being art and part in `the cruel   murder of Rodoric M'Allester in  Stroll; Gorie M'Allester, his brother, in  Stromcraig; Ronnald M'Gorie, the son of the latter; John Roy M'Allane v' Allester, in Pitnean; John Dow M'Allane v' Allester, in Kirktoun of  Lochcarroun; Alexander M'Allanroy, servitor of the deceased Rodoric; Sir  John Monro in Lochbrume; John Monro, his son; John Monro Hucheoun,  and the rest of their accomplices, under silence of night, upon the lands of  Ardmanichtyke, Dalmartene, Kirktoun of Lochcarroun, Blahat, and other  parts within the baronies of Lochcarroun, Lochbrume, Ros, and Kessane,  in the Sheriffdom of Innerness," and for all their other past crimes,  [Origines Parochiales Scotia and Retours.]

During Colin's reign Huntly obtained a commission of fire and sword against Mackintosh of Mackintosh, and reduced him to such a condition that he had to remove with all his family and friends for better  security to the Island of Moy.  Huntly, having determined to crush him,  came to Inverness and prepared a fleet of boats with which to besiege the island.  These preparations having been completed, and the boats ready to be drawn across the hills from Inverness to Moy, Mackenzie, who had  been advised of Huntly's intentions, despatched a messenger--John  Mackenzie of Kinnock--to Inverness, to ask his Lordship to be as  favourable as possible to his sister, Mackintosh of Mackintosh's wife, and  to treat her as a gentlewoman ought to be treated when he came to Moy,  and that he (Colin) would consider it as an act of personal courtesy to himself.  The messenger delivered his message, to which Huntly replied,  that if it were his good fortune, as he doubted not it would be, to  apprehend her husband and her, "she would be the worst used lady in the  North; that she was an ill instrument against his cause, and therefore he would cut her tail above her houghs." "Well, then," answered Kinnock,  "he (Kintail) bade me tell your Lordship if that were your answer, that  perhaps he or his would be there to have a better care of her."  "I do not  value his being there more than herself" Huntly replied, "and tell him so much from me."  The messenger departed, when some of Huntly's  principal officers who heard the conversation remonstrated with his  Lordship for sending the Mackenzie chief so uncivil an answer, as he  might have cause to regret it if that gentleman took it amiss.  Kinnock on  his arrival at Brahan, told his master what had occurred, and delivered  Huntly's rude message.  Colin, who was at the time in delicate health, sent  for his brother, Rory Mor of Redcastle, and sent him next day across the  ferry of Ardersier with a force of four hundred warriors.  These he  marched straight through the hills; and just as Huntly, on his way from  Inverness, was coming in sight, on the west of Moy, Rory and his  followers were marching along the face of the hill on the east side of the  Island, when his Lordship, perceiving such a large force, asked his officers who they could be.  One of them, present during the interview with Mackenzie's messenger on the previous day, answered, "Yonder is the effect of your answer to Mackenzie."  " I wonder," replied Huntly, "how  he could have so many men ready almost in an instant."  The officer  replied, "Their leader is so active and fortunate that his men will flock to  him from all parts on a moment's notice when he has any ado.  And before  you gain Mackintosh or his lady you will lose more than he is worth, since  now, as it seems, her friends take part in the quarrel;" whereupon the Earl  retired with his forces to Inverness, "so that it seemed fitter to Huntly to  agree their differs friendly than prosecute the laws further against Mackintosh."

There is a complaint to the Privy Council by Christian  Scrymgeour, relict of the late Alexander, Bishop of Ross, dated 24th  January, 1578-9, in which it is stated that Colin not only stopped and debarred her late spouse from having fuel and "elding" to his dwelling  house in the Chanonry of Ross, where he made his residence last summer,  but stopped him also from victuals to his house, using such unhuman and  cruel dealings against him that he fell sick and never recovered "till he departed this life."  During the illness of the bishop in December preceding, Colin and others "of his special sending" enclosed the house of the  Chanonry and debarred the complainer and her husband of meat and drink  and all other relief of company or comfort of neighbours and friends, and how soon he had intelligence of the bishop's approaching his death he laid  ambushes of armed men within the town of Chanonry and in the neighbourhood and apprehended several of the bishop's and dean's servants, whom he carried "immediately to the said Colin's house of the  Redcastle," and there detained them for twenty-four hours. Further, on the  22nd of September preceding, the bishop being at the extreme point of  death, Colin with an armed following in great numbers, came to the castle and house of the Chanonry and by force and violence entered therein and  put the said Christian Scrymgeour, the bishop's wife, and his servants,  children, and household out of the same, intromitted with their goods and gear and constrained them to leave the country by sea, not suffering them to get meat, drink. or lodging, in the town, nor letting them take away with them of their own gear as much as a plaid or blanket to protect the  children from cold in the boat, "committing thair throw such cruel and  barbarous oppression upon them as the like has not been heard of in any  realm or country subject to justice or the authority of a Sovereign  Prince."

Colin did not appear to answer this complaint, and he and his chief abettors were denounced rebels, put to the horn and escheated. On the same day, there is a complaint by Henry Lord Methven, in which it is stated that although his Lordship "has by gift of His Highness  to him, his heirs and assignees, the gift of all and whole the temporality of  the Bishopric of Ross, and of the castle, house, and place of the Chanonry  of Ross, now vacant in our Sovereign Lord's hands by the decease of the  late Alexander, last Bishop of Ross, of all years and terms to come, aye  and till the lawful provision of a lawful bishop and pastor to the said  bishopric," and although it is "specially provided by Act of Parliament  that whatsoever person or persons takes any bishop's places, castles, or strengths, or enters by their own authority to hold them without his  Highness' command, letters or charges, shall incur the crimes of treason  and lesemajesty," yet, "Colin  Mackenzie of Kintail, in proud and high  contempt of his Majesty's said loveable law and Act of Parliament, and of his Highness now having the administration of the Government of the  realm in his own person, lately, upon the 22nd day of September last  bypast, in the very hour of the death of the said late Alexander, Bishop of  Ross, or shortly thereafter beset and enclosed the said castle, house, and  place of the Chanonry of Ross, took the same by force and as yet detains  and holds the same as a house of war and will not render and deliver the  same to the said Lord Methven.'  Mackenzie was duly charged to give up possession of the castle and place or take the consequences.  Lord Methven appeared personally, but Colin did not, where-upon their Lordships ordained letters to be directed to him charging him to give them  up. "with the whole munition and ordnance therein" to Henry Lord  Methven or to any other having power to receive them, within twenty-four  hours of the charge under the pain of treason.

The following complaint by Donald Mac Angus of Glengarry laid  before the Privy Council at Dalkeith on 10th of August, 1582, is that gentleman's version of his apprehension by Roderick Mor Mackenzie of  Redcastle and Dugall Mackenzie of Kishorn, as described from family  MSS. at pp. 156-59.  Glengarry's complaint proceeds--

After the great slaughters, herschips, and skaiths, committed upon him, his kin, friends, and servants upon the last day of February the year of  God 1581 years, estimate worth six score thousand pounds money of this  realm or thereby, and on the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth days  of March last bypast thereafter by Rory Mackenzie, brother-german to  Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, Dugald Mackenzie, his brother and the  remainder of their colleagues and company, to the number of two hundred  persons, armed with two-handed swords, bows, darlochis, hagbutts,  pistols, prohibited to be worn or used, and other offensive weapons who  also upon the sixteenth day of April last bypast or thereby, came upon the said complainant he being within his own "rowmes" and country of Lochcarron having mind of no evil or injury to have been done to him nor  none of his, but thinking to have lived under God's peace and our  Sovereign Lord, and then not only took himself captive, kept and detained him prisoner in coves, craigs, woods, and other desert places at their  pleasure wherethrough none of his kin nor friends had access to him for  the space of fourteen days or thereby, but also in the meantime took and  apprehended the late Rory MacAlister, father's brother to the said  complainant, and three of their sons and other of his friends and servants  to the number of 33 persons or thereby, bound their hands with their own shirts, and cruelly and unmercifully, under promise of safety of their lives,  caused murder and slay them with dirks, appointing that they should not  be buried as Christian men, but cast forth and eaten by dogs and swine."

Further, "at the end of the said complainant's captivity and detention in the manner aforesaid, being delivered by the foresaid person, his takers  and detainers, to Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, both he and they, being  armed in warlike manner as said is, upon the 24th day of the said month of  April, came to the said complainant's town and lands of Strome, where  they also carried him  captive with  them and theirs, by hostility and way  of deed, spoiled and reft the whole goods, gear, and plenishing therein and besieged his house and Castle of Strome, threatening his friends and  servants therein that if they rendered not the same to them they would  hang the said complainant in their sight compelling him and his said  friends therefor and for safety of his life to yield to the said persons' tyrranous desires and appetites, and render to them the said castle, which  they not only wrongfully detained and withheld from him, but also  through occasion thereof still insists in their cruelty and inhumanity  against the said complainant, his kin and friends.  Like as lately, about the  end of July last, the said Colin Mackenzie Rory Mackenzie, and others aforesaid, having violently taken Donald MacMoroch Roy, one of the said  complainant's chief kinsmen, and were not content to put him to a simple  death, but to bait them in his blood, and by a strange example to satisfy their cruel and unnatural hearts, first cut off his hands, next his feet, and  last his head, and having cast the same in a "peitpott," exposed and laid out his carcase to be a prey for dogs and ravenous beasts:  Tending by  such kind of dealing to undo as many of the said complainant's friends  and servants as they can apprehend, and to lay waste their lands,  "rowmes," and possessions to the said complainant's heavy hurt and  skaith, and dangerous example of wicked persons to attempt the like, if  remedy be not provided."  In consequence of this complaint charges had gone forth to Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, (1), to have rendered the said  Castle of Strome with the munition and goods therein to the complainer or his representatives, within twenty-four hours after being charged, under  pain of rebellion. or else to have appeared and shown cause to the  contrary; (2) to have appeared and found sufficient surety in the Books of  the Council for the safety of the complainer and his dependants in persons  and goods, or else shown cause to the contrary, under the same pain.  And now, "the said Angus Mac Angus compeared personally and the said  Colin Mackenzie of Kintail being oftimes called and not compearing, the Lords (1) repeat their charge for delivery of the castle within twenty-four  hours, and, failing obedience, order Mackenzie of Kintail to be denounced rebel and put to the horn and to escheat; (2) repeat their charge to the said   Mackenzie to find sufficient caution for the safety of the complainer and his dependants in person and goods, with order that if he fail to do so  within fifteen days after being charged, he shall, for that default also, be  denounced rebel and put to the horn."

On the 2nd of December, 1582, Colin finds caution in the sum of  two thousand merks that he shall deliver up Strome Castle, Lochcarron, to Donald Mac Angus of Glengarry,  in  the event of the Privy Council  finding that he should do so.

Shortly after this the aspect of affairs is changed.  On the 11th of  January, 1582-83, the decree against Mackenzie for the surrender of  Strome Castle to Donald Macdonald of Glengarry is reversed. He  petitions the Privy Council and gives an entirely different complexion to the facts of the case against him to those submitted by Glengarry to the  Council.  He complains of Donald Mac Angus for having "upon a certain   sinister and malicious narration" obtained a decree against him charging  him upon pain of rebellion to deliver up the Castle of Strome, and to  appear before the Privy Council, on the 4th of August preceding, to find  caution that Glengarry and his friends should be kept harmless of him in  their persons and goods, and then makes the following statement:--

The officer, alleged executor of the said letters (against him), neither charged thc said Colin personally nor at his dwelling house, neither yet came any such charge to his knowledge.  Yet he hearing tell  somewhat thereof by the "bruit" of the country, he, for obedience of the  same, directed Alexander Mackenzie, his servant and procurator, to our  Burgh of Perth, where his Majesty was resident for the time, who from the same fourth of August, being the peremptory day of compearance, as well  there as at Ruthven, attended continually upon the calling of the said  letters till the Council dissolved, and that his Majesty passed to Dunkeld  to the hunting.  Like as immediately thereafter the said Alexander repaired  to the Burgh of Edinburgh, where he likewise awaited a certain space  thereafter when Council should have been, and the said letters should have  been called but perceiving no number of Council neither there nor actually  with his Majesty, he looked for no calling of the said letters nor  proceeding thereuntil, but that the same should have (been), deserted,  because the day was peremptory, at the least till he should have been of  new warned and heard in presence of his Highness and his Council to have  shown a reasonable cause why no such letters should be granted  simpliciter upon the said Colin to the effect above-written.  Not-withstanding for by his expectation, he being resident for the time in  Edinburgh, where he looked that the said matter should have been called, the said other letters were upon the tenth day of the said month of August  last, by moyen of the said Donald Mac Angus, called at the Castle of  Dalkeith, and there, for the said Colin's alleged non-compearance, as he is  surely informed, decree was pronounced in the said matter and letters  ordained to be directed simpliciter against him."  Had his said servant,  then still in Edinburgh, been made aware of this meeting of Council at  Dalkeith, "he would not have failed to have compeared, and had many  good and sufficient reasons and defences to have staid all giving of the  said letters simpliciter;" such as that "the said Colin received the said castle and fortalice of Strome by virtue of a contract passed betwixt him and the said Donald, wherein he was content and consented that the said  castle should remain in the said Colin's hands and keeping unto the time  he had fulfilled certain other articles and clauses mentioned and contained  in the same contract;" also "that the said Colin was charged, by virtue of  letters passed by deliverance of the Lords of Session, to render and deliver  the said castle and fortalice of Strome to John Grant of Freuchie, as  pertaining to him in heritage, within a certain space after the charge, under the said pain of horning, so that, he being doubly charged, he is uncertain  to whom to render the said castle."  Moreover, for the satisfaction of the  King and the Lords of Council, "the said Colin has found caution to render  and deliver the said castle and fortalice to the said Donald, if it shall be  found by his Highness and the said Lords that he ought to do the same."   For these reasons it is argued that the said decree and letters issued against  him ought to be suspended.

Charge having been made to the said Donald Mac Angus to appear to this complaint and demand, "both the said parties compeared personally," and the Lords after hearing them, "suspended the foresaid  letters pur chased by the said Donald Mac Angus, effect thereof, and  process of horning contained therein, and all that has followed thereupon,  upon the said Colin simpliciter in time coming," the ground for this  decision being that "the said Colin has found security acted in the books of Secret Council that the said castle and fortalice of Strome, committed to him in keeping by the King's Majesty and Lords of Secret Council,  shall be rendered and delivered again to such person or persons as shall be  appointed by the King's Majesty to receive the same, as the keepers  thereof shall be required thereto upon six days' warning, under the pain of  ten thousand merks" and meanwhile, under the same pains, that none of  the King's subjects shall be "invaded, troubled, molested, nor persecuted,"  by those who keep the castle for him, or by others resorting thither.

There  is, however, this proviso--

That, in case the said Colin shall at any time hereafter sue of the  King's Majesty to be disburdened of the keeping of the said castle, and  that some person may be appointed to receive the same out of his hands  and keeping within the space of twenty days next after his said Suit, which  notwithstanding shall happen to be refused and not done by his Highness  within the said space, that in that case he nor his cautioner be anywise  answerable thereafter for the said house and keeping thereof, but to be  free of the same, and these presents to annul and to have no further force,  effect, nor execution, against them at any time thereafter except that the  same house shall happen to be kept by the said Colin or his servants in his  name thereafter, for the which in that respect the said Colin shall always  be answerable in manner aforesaid and no otherwise.

A bond of caution by Mackenzie, and Lord Lindsay of the Byres as security for him, for ten thousand merks, subscribed on the 20th of  January, 1582-83, and registered in the Chanonry of Ross, binds Colin to  surrender the Castle of Strome to any person appointed by the King for the  purpose, on six days' warning and to fulfil the other duties imposed upon him by the Act of the Privy Council dated the 11th of the same month,  already given, but with the proviso in his favour contained in that Act,  which is repeated at length in the bond of caution of this date.

In terms of this bond the King and Council at a meeting held at  Holyrood on the 8th of March following "for certain causes and  considerations moving them," order letters to issue charging Mackenzie  and other keepers of the Castle of Strome to deliver the same to Colin,  Earl of Argyll, Chancellor, or to his servants in his name within six days  after charge under the pains of rebellion, which being done the King  "discharges thereafter the sureties found by the said Colin Mackenzie of  before, either acted in the books of Secret Council, or by contract, bond,  or promise between him and Donald Mac Angus Mac Alastair of  Glengarry," the Acts referring to the same to be deleted from the books of  the Privy Council.

Colin's name appears again on the 1st of August as surety for a  bond of three thousand merks by David Dunbar of Kilstarry and Patrick  Dunbar of Blairy.

On the 5th of May, 1585, he is denounced a rebel on a complaint  by Hugh Fraser of Guisachan under the following circumstances.  Fraser says that a certain "John Dow Mac Allan was lawfully denounced his Highness' rebel and put to the horn at the said Hucheon's instance for not  removing from the half davoch of land of Kilboky pertaining to him,  conform to a decree obtained by the said Hucheon against the said John  Dow Mac Allan."  Upon this decree Hugh Fraser "raised letters of caption  by deliverance of the Lords of Session to charge the Sheriff of Inverness and other judges in the country where the said John resorts, to take,  apprehend him, and keep him conform to the order observed in such  cases."  In all this process to obtain the decree, with "letters in the four  forms, executions and denunciations thereof," and then raising of the said  letters of caption thereupon, the complainer has been put to great travel and expenses, having his habitation by' the space of eight score miles or thereby distant from the Burgh of Edinburgh."  Nevertheless, Colin  Mackenzie, "to whom the said John Dow Mac Allan is tenant, servant,  and special depender," maintains and assists him in his violent occupation  or the complainer's lands, "keeps him in his company, receives him in his house, and otherwise debates him that he cannot be apprehended," so that  all the proceedings of the complainer Fraser are frustrated.  Colin was  thereupon charged to present Mac Allan before the Privy Council, under  pain of rebellion, and failing to appear, or present John Dow, and the  complainer having appeared personally, an order was pronounced  denouncing Mackenzie a rebel.

On the 11th of December next, John Gordon of Pitlurg becomes cautioner in one thousand merks that Colin will not injure Andrew, Lord  Dingwall, his tenants, or servants.  On the 11th of April, 1586, William  Cumming of Inverallochy and others become surety in ?000 that  Mackenzie shall "remove his coble, fishers, and nets, from the fishing of the water of Canon, and desist and cease therefrom in time coming,  conform to the letters raised at the instance of Andrew, Lord Dingwall, to  the same effect, in case it shall be found and declared that the said Colin  ought to do the same."  On the 4th of May following, Mackenzie binds  himself to keep his sureties scaithless in the matter of this caution.

On the  16th of the same month, the King and Council "for certain necessary and  weighty considerations moving his Highness, tending to the furthering and establishing of his Highness' obedience and the greatness and safety of his  peaceable and good subjects from burnings, riefs, and oppression," ordain Colin to enter in ward in Blackness Castle within twenty-four hours after being charged under pain of treason.  Two days later, being then in ward  in this stronghold, he finds caution in ten thousand merks that on being relieved from ward he will repair to Edinburgh and keep ward there until  set free.  This is deleted by a warrant subscribed by the King and the  Secretary at Falkland on the 6th of the following August.  His name  appears as one of a long list of Highland chiefs complained against to the  Privy Council on the 30th of November, 1586, by the united burghs of the  realm for obstructing the fisheries in the northern parts and making  extortionate exactions from the fishermen, and again on the 16th of  September, 1587, when an order is made to denounce him for his failure  to appear before the Council to enter John Mackenzie of Gairloch and his  accomplices, for whom Colin is held liable "as master and landlord," to  answer a complaint made against them by James Sinclair, Master of  Caithness, on the 10th of August preceding.  On the 5th of March, 1587-88, John Davidson, burgess of Edinburgh, becomes cautioner in 500 merks  that Colin will, if required, enter such of his men before the Privy  Council as "assegeit" James, Master of Caithness, within the house of  William Robson, in the Chanonry of Ross.  On the 27th of July, 1588, he  is appointed by a Convention of the Estates member of a Commission,  charged with powers for executing the laws against Jesuits, Papists, and  other delinquents, and with other extensive powers.  On the 24th of May,  1589, he is named as the Commissioner for the shire of Inverness who is  to convene the freeholders of the county for choosing the Commissioners  to a Parliament to be held at Edinburgh on the 2nd of October in that year,  and to report his diligence in this matter to the Council before the 15th of  August, under pains of rebellion.  On the 4th of June following, he appears  in a curious position in connection with a prosecution for witchcraft  against several women, and an abridgement of the document, as recorded  in the Records of the Privy Council, is of sufficient interest to justify a  place here. It is the complaint of Katherine Ross, relict of Robert Munro  of Fowlis Margaret Sutherland, spouse of Hector Munro, portioner of Kiltearn Bessie Innes, spouse of Neil Munro, in Swordale  Margaret Ross,  spouse of John Neil Mac Donald Roy, in Caull; and Margaret Mowat, as  follows:--

Mr Hector Munro, now of Fowlis, son-in-law of the said Katherine Ross,  "seeking all ways and means to possess himself in certain her tierce and  conjunct fee lands of the Barony of Fowlis, and to dispossess her  therefrom" had first "persued certain of her tenants and servants by way of  deed for their bodily harm and slaughter," and then, "finding that he could  not prevail that way, neither by sundry other indirect means sought by  him," had at last, "upon sinister and wrong information and importunate  suit, purchased a commission of the same to his Majesty, and to Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, Rory Mackenzie, his brother, John Mackenzie of Gairloch, Alexander Bain of Tulloch, Angus Mackintosh of Termitt, James Glas of Gask, William Cuthbert, in Inverness, and some others specially mentioned therein, for apprehending of the said Margaret Sutherland, Bessy Innes, Margaret Ross, and Margaret Mowat, and sundry  others, and putting them to the knowledge of an assize for witchcraft, and  other forged and feinted crimes alleged to be committed by them."

Further, "the said persons, by virtue of the same commission, intended to proceed against them most partially and wilfully, and thereby to drive the  said complainers to that strait that either they shall satisfy his  unreasonable desire, or then to lose their lives, with the sober portion of  goods made by them for the sustenance of themselves and their poor  bairns: howbeit it be of verity that they are honest women of repute and  holding these many years bygone, spotted at no time with any such  ungodly practices, neither any ways having committed any offence, but by  all their actions behaved themselves so discreetly and honestly as none justly could or can have occasion of complaint--they being ever ready,  like they are yet, to underlie the law for all crimes that can be laid to their  charge," and having to that effect, "presently found caution for their  compearance before the justice and his deputes, or any judge unsuspected, upon fifteen days' warning." Their prayer, accordingly, is that the said commission be discharged. Hector Munro appearing for himself and his  colleagues, and the complainers by Alexander Morrison, their procurator,  the Lords ordain Mr Hector and the other commissioners to desist a from proceeding against the women, and "remit their trial to be taken before the  Justice-General or his deputes a in the next justice court appointed to be held after his Majesty's repairing to the north parts of this realm in the  month of July next, at which time, if his Majesty shall not repair thither, or  being repaired shall not before his returning cause the same trial to be  taken, "in that case commission shall be given to Thomas Fraser of  Knocky, tutor of Lovat, John Urquhart of Cadboll, tutor of Cromarty, and  Alexander Bayne of Tulloch, or any two of them to administer justice  conform to the laws of the realm."

On the 6th of March, 1589-90, Colin is again mentioned as one of the Commissioners for Inverness and Cromarty for executing the Acts against the Jesuits and the seminary of priests, with reconstitution of the  Commission of the preceding year for putting the Acts in force and the  appointment of a new Commission of select clergy in the shires to cooperate in the work and promote submission to the Confession of Faith  and Covenant over the whole Kingdom.  On the 8th of June, 1590, officers  of arms are ordered to arrest in the hands of David Clapen in Leith, or any  other person, any money consigned in their hands, or due by them to Sir  William Keith for Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, "or remanent gentlemen  and tenants of the Earldom of Ross for their feus thereof" or that rests yet  in the hands of Colin or such tenants, unpaid or not consigned by them,  and to discharge them from paying the same to Sir William or any other in his name until the King shall further declare his will, under the penalty of  paying his Majesty the same sums over again.  On the 5th of July in the  same year, Colin gives caution of ?000 that William Ross of Priesthill,  when released out of the tolbooth of Edinburgh, shall keep ward in that  city till he find surety for the entrance of himself and his bastard son, John  Ross and others, to appear before the justice to answer for certain crimes  specified in letters raised against him by David Munro of Nigg when  required upon fifteen days' warning, and satisfy the Treasurer-depute for his escheat fallen to the King through having been put to the horn at the instance of the said David Munro.  He repeats the same caution for the  same person on the 15th of August following.  He is again on record in  March, 1591-92, and in June, 1592.  He is, along with Simon Lord Lovat,  John Grant of Grant, Lachlan  Mackintosh of Mackintosh, Ross of  Balnagown, Hector Munro of Fowlis, and others, chosen an assistant  Commissioner of justiciary for the counties of Elgin, Nairn, and Inverness,  in March 1592-93.  He was appointed a member of the Privy Council in June, 1592, but he appears not to have accepted the office on that occasion, for on the 16th of February following there is an entry of the  admission of Sir William Keith of Delny "in the place appointed by his  Majesty, with the advise of his Estates in his last Parliament, for Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, by reason he, being required, has not compeared nor accepted the said place." He, however, accepted the position soon after, for it is recorded under date of 5th July, 1593, that "Colin Mackenzie of Kintail being admitted of the Privy Council gave his oath," in common  form.

The great troubles in the Lewis, which ultimately ended in that extensive principality coming into the possession of the House of Kintail,  commenced about this time, and although the most important events connected with  and leading up to that great result will principally fall to be  treated of later on, the quarrel having originated in Colin Cam's time, it  may be more convenient to explain its origin under the present.

Roderick Macleod, X. of the Lewis,  married, first, Janet, a natural  daughter of John Mackenzie of Killin, by whom he had a son, Torquil  Cononach, so called from his having been brought up with his mother's  relations in Strathconon.  Roderick, by all accounts, was not so  immaculate in his domestic relations as one might wish, for we find him  having no fewer than five bastard sons, named respectively, Tormod  Uigeach, Murdoch,  Neil, Donald, and Rory Og, all of whom arrived at  maturity.  In these circumstances it can hardly be supposed that his lady's  domestic happiness was of the most felicitous and unmixed description.

It  was alleged by this paragon of virtue that she had proved unfaithful to  him, and that she had criminal intimacy with the Brieve (Breitheamh), or  consistorial judge of the Island.  On the other hand, it was maintained that  the Brieve in his capacity of judge,  had been somewhat severe on the  Island chief for his reckless and immoral habits, and for his bad treatment  of his lady and that the unprincipled villain, as throughout his whole  career he proved himself to be, boldly, and in revenge, turned upon and accused the judge of committing adultery with his wife.  Be that as it may,  the unfortunate woman, attempting to escape from his cruel treatment,  while passing in a large birlinn, from the Lewis to Coigeach, on the  opposite side of the coast, was pursued and run down by some of her  husband's followers, when she, with all on board, perished.  Roderick  thereupon disinherited her son, Torquil Cononach, grandson of John of  Killin, maintaining that Torquil was not his legitimate son and heir, but the fruit of his wife's unfaithfulness. [Most of the MS. Histories of the family which we have perused state that Rory Macleod's wife was a  daughter of Kenneth a Bhlair, but it is impossible that the daughter of a chief who died in 1491 could have been the wife of one who lived in the early years of the seventeenth Century. She must have been Kenneth's granddaughter, as above described, a daughter of John of Kuhn. This  view is corroborated by a decree arbitral in 1554, in which Torquil  Cononach is called the oy (ogha, or grandson) of John Mackenzie:--Acts  and Decreets of Session, X., folio 201.  The Roderick Macleod who  married, probably as his second wife, Agnes, daughter of Kenneth a  Bhlair, was Roderick Macleod, seventh of Lewis, who died some time  after his father early in the sixteenth century.]  Roderick Macleod married  secondly, in 1541, Barbara Stewart, daughter of Andrew, Lord Avandale,  with issue--Torquil Oighre or the Heir, who died unmarried before his  father, having been drnwned along with a large number of others while on  a voyage in his birlinn, between Lewis and Skye.  Macleod married thirdly a daughter or Hector Og, XIII., and sister of Sir Lachlan Maclean, XIV., of  Duart, by whom he had two sons--Torquil Dubh, whom he named as his  heir and successor, and Tormod, known as Tormod Og. Torquil  Cononach, now designated "of Coigeach," married Margaret, daughter of  Angus Macdonald, VII. of Glengarry, and widow of Cuthbert of Castlehill,  Inverness, who bore him two sons--John and Neil--and five daughters  and, raising as many men as would accompany him, he, with the  assistance of two of his natural brothers-Tormod and Murdoch-started for  the Lewis to vindicate his rights as legitimate heir to the island.  He  defeated his father, and confined him in the Castle of Stornoway for four years, when he was finally obliged to acknowledge Torquil Cononach as  his lawful son and successor.  The bastards now quarrelled among  themselves. Donald killed Tormod Uigeach.  Murdoch, in resentment,  seized Donald and carried him to Coigeach; but he afterwards escaped and complained to old Rory, who was highly offended at Murdoch for seizing  and with Torquil Cononach for detaining Donald.  Roderick ordered  Murdoch to be apprehended and confined to his own old quarters in the  Castle of Stornoway.  Torquil Cononach again returned to the Lewis,  reduced the castle, liberated  Murdoch, again confined his father, and  killed many of his followers, at the same time carrying off all the writs and charters, and depositing them for safety with his uncle, Mackenzie of Kintail.  He had meanwhile left his son John (who had been in the service of Huntly, and whom he now called home) in charge of the castle, and in  possession of the Lewis.  He imprudently banished his natural uncles,  Donald and Rory Og, out of the island.  Rory Og soon after returned with a considerable number of followers; attacked his nephew, Torquil Cononach's son John, in Stornoway, killed him, and released his own  father, old Roderick, who was allowed after this to possess the island in peace during the remainder of his life.  "Thus was the Siol Torquil  weakened, by private dissensions, and exposed to fall a prey, as it did soon  afterwards, to the growing power of the Mackenzies."

In 1594 Alexander Bayne, younger of Tulloch, granted a charter of the lands of Rhindoun in favour of Colin Mackenzie of Kintail and his  heirs male, proceeding on a contract of sale between them, dated 10th of  March, 1574.  On the 10th of July in the same year there is "a contract of  alienation" of these lands by the same Colin Mackenzie of Kintail in  favour of Roderick Mackenzie of Ardafillie (Redcastle), his brother-german, and his heirs male.  A charter implementing this contract is dated  the 20th of October following, by which the lands are to be holden blench and for relieving Kintail of the feu-duty and services payable to his  superiors." These lands are, in 1625, resigned by Murdoch Mackenzie of  Redcastle into the hands of Colin, second Earl of Seaforth, the immediate lawful superior thereof, for new infeftments to be granted to Roderick  Mackenzie, his second lawful son. (Writs and Evidents of Lands of  Rhindoun. Antiquarian Notes, pp. 172-73.)

Colin, in addition to his acquisitions in Lochalsh and. Lochcarron, "feued the Lordship of Ardmeanach, and the Barony of Delnys, Brae Ross,  with the exception of Western Achnacherich, Wester Drynie, and  Tarradale, which Bayne of Tulloch had feued before, but found it his  interest to hold of him as immediate superior, which, with the former  possessions of the lands of Chanonry, greatly enhanced his influence.

Albeit his predecessors were active both in war and peace, and precedent  in acquiring their estate; yet this man acquired more than all that went  before him, and made such a solid progress in it, that what he had  acquired was with the goodwill of his sovereign, and clear unquestionable purchase."  He protected his nephew, Torquil Macleod of the Lewis, when  he was oppressed by his unnatural relations and natural brothers, and from   his he acquired a right to the lands of Assynt. [Earl of Cromartie and other  MS. Histories of the Family.]

Colin, in April, 1572, married Barbara, daughter of John Grant of Grant, ancestor of the Earls of Seafield, by Lady Marjory Stewart, daughter of John, third Earl of Athol (Tocher 2000 merks and the half  lands of Loch broom, then the property of her father [Chiefs of Grant]),  with issue--

I.  Kenneth, who succeeded his father, and was afterwards elevated to the Peerage by the title of Lord Mackenzie of Kintail.

II.  Roderick, the renowned Sir Roderick Mor Mackenzie of  Coigeach, "Tutor of Kin tail "and progenitor of the Earls of Cromarty, of the families of Scatwell, Tarvie, Ballone, and other minor Mackenzie septs, of whom in their proper place.

III.  Alexander, first of Kilcoy, now represented by Colonel Burton Mackenzie.

IV.  Colin of Kinnock and Pitlundie.

V.  Murdoch of Kernsary, whose only lawful son, John, was killed at the Battle of Auldearn, in 1645, without issue.

VI.  Catherine, who married Simon, eighth Lord Lovat, with issue--Hugh, his heir and successor, and Elizabeth, who married Dunbar of Westfield, Sheriff of Moray.

VII.  Janet, who married Hector Maclean, "Eachainn Og," XV. of Duart, with  issue--Hector Mor, who succeeded his father Lachlan, and  Florence, who married John Garbh Maclean, VII. of Coll.

VIII.  Mary, who, as his second wife, married Sir Donald Gorm  Mor Macdonald, VII., of Sleat, without issue.

He had also a natural son,

IX.  Alexander, by Margaret, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, second of Davochmaluag, who became the founder of the families of Applecross and Coul, of whom in their order.

Colin "lived beloved by princes and people, and died, regretted by  all, on the 14th of June, 1594, at Redcastle and was buried at Bewlie."

He  was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE,

FIRST  LORD  MACKENZIE  OF  KINTAIL, who began his rule amidst  those domestic quarrels and dissensions in the Lewis, to which we have already introduced the reader, and which may,  not inappropriately, be  designated the Strife of the Bastards.  He is on record as "of Kintail" on  the 31st of July, 1594, within seven weeks of his father's death, and again  on the 1st of October in the same year. On the 9th of November he made  oath in presence of the King and the Privy Council that he  should   "faithfully, loyally, and  truly concur, fortify, and assist his Majesty's  Lieutenant of the North with his advice and force at all times and  occasions as he may be required by proclamations, missive letters, or  otherwise."  The country generally was in such a lawless condition in this  year that an Act of Parliament was passed by which it was ordained "that  in order that there may be a perfect distinction, by names and surnames, betwixt those that are and desire to be esteemed honest and true men, and those that are and not ashamed to be esteemed thieves, sorners, and  resetters of them in their wicked and odious crimes and deeds; that  therefore a roll and catalogue be  made of all persons, and the surnames therein mentioned, suspected of slaughter, etc."  It was also enacted "that  such evil disposed persons as take upon themselves to sell the goods of  thieves, and disobedient persons and clans that dare not come to public  markets in the Lowlands themselves, whereby the execution of the Arts  made against somers, clans, and thieves, is greatly impeded," should be punished in  the manner therein contained.  Another Act provided "that  the inbringer of every robber and  thief, after he is outlawed, and  denounced fugitive, shall have two hundred pounds Scots for every robber  and thief so inbrought." [Antiquarian Notes.]

On the 5th of February,  1595-96, it is complained against him by Alexander Bayne of Tulloch that although upon the 7th of March, 1594,  John  MacGillechallum, Raasay, had been put to the horn for non-appearance to a complaint by the said Alexander and his son Alexander,  Fiar of Tulloch, against the Rev. John Mackenzie, minister of Urray,  touching certain oppressions and depredations committed on him and his  tenants, he remained not only unrelaxed from the horn, but continues in  "his wicked and accustomed trade of rief theft, sorning, and oppression," seeking "all indirect and shameful means to wreck and destroy him and  his bairns."  A short time before this, MacGillechallum sent to the  complainer desiring him to give over to him his (Bayne's) old heritage  called Torridon, "with assurance if he do not the same to burn his whole  corn and goods."  In these insolencies "he is encouraged and set forward by the consort, reset, and supply which he receives of Kenneth Mackenzie  of Kintail and his friends, he being near kinsman to the said Kenneth, viz.:  --his father's sister's son; who, in that respect, shows him all good offices  of friendship and courtesy, indirectly assisting him with his men and  moyen in all his enterprises against the said complainer and his bairns,  without whose oversight and allowance and protection it were not able to him to have a reset in any part of the country."  The complainer, Alexander Bayne, describes himself as "a decrepit aged man past eighty  years of age and being blind these years he must submit himself to his  Majesty for remedy."  Kintail appeared personally, and Tulloch by his two sons, Alexander and Ranald, whereupon the King and Council remitted  the complaint to be decided before the ordinary judges.

The following account from family MSS. and Sir Robert Gordon's Earldom of Sutherland, refers no doubt to the same incidents--John MacCallum, a brother of the Laird of Raasay, annoyed the people of Torridon, which place at that time belonged to the Baynes of Tulloch.  He  alleged that Tulloch, in whose house he was fostered, had promised him  these lands as a gift of fosterage; but Tulloch, whether he had made a  previous promise to MacGillechallum or not, left the lands of Torridon to his own second son, Alexander Mor MacDhonnchaidh Mhic Alastair,  alias Bayne.  He afterwards obtained a decree against  MacGillechallum  for interfering with his lands and molesting the people, and, on a  Candlemas market, with a large following of armed men, made up of most  of the Baynes, and a considerable number of Munros, he came to the  market stance, at that time held at Logie.  John MacGillechallum, ignorant  of Tulloch "getting the laws against him" and in no fear of his life or  liberty, came to the market as usual, and, while standing buying some  article at a chapman's stall, Alastair Mor and his followers came up  behind him unperceived, and, without any warning, struck him on the  head with a two-edged sword--instantly killing him.  A gentleman of the  Clann Mhurchaidh Riabhaich Mackenzies, Ian Mac Mhurchaidh Mhic  Uilleam, a very active and powerful man, was at the time standing beside  him, and he asked who dared to have spilt Mackenzie blood in that  dastardly manner.  He had no sooner said the words than he was run  through the body by ore of the swords of the enemy; and thus, without an  opportunity of drawing their weapons, fell two of the best swordsmen in  the North of Scotland. The alarm and the news of their death immediately spread through the market.  "Tulloch Ard," the war cry of the Mackenzies, was instantly raised; whereupon the Baynes and the Munros took to their heels--the Munros eastward to the Ferry of Fowlis, and the Baynes northward to the hills, both followed by a band of the infuriated Mackenzies, who slaughtered every one they overtook.  Iain Dubh Mac Choinnich Mhic Mhurchaidh, of the clan Mhurchaidh Riabhaich, and Iain  Gallda Mac Fhionnla Dhuibh, two gentlemen of the Mackenzies, the latter  of whom was a Kintail man, were on their way from Chanonry to the  market, when they met in with a batch of the Munros flying in confusion  and, learning the cause to be the murder of their friends at Logie market,  they instantly pursued the fugitives, killing no less than thirteen of them  between Logie and the wood of Millechaich.  All the townships in the  neighbourhood of the market joined the Mackenzies in the pursuit, and  Alastair Mor Bayne of Tulloch only saved himself, after all his men were  killed, by taking shelter and hiding for a time in a kiln-logie.  Two of his followers, who managed to escape from the market people, met with some  Lewismen on their way to the fair, who, noticing the Baynes flying half  naked, immediately stopped them, and insisted upon their giving a proper  account of themselves.  This proving unsatisfactory they came to high  words, and from words to blows. when the Lewismen attacked and killed  them at Ach-an-eilich, near Contin.

The Baynes and the Munros had good cause to regret the cowardly conduct of their leaders on this occasion at Logie market, for they lost no  less than fifty able-bodied men in return for the two gentlemen of the Clan  Mackenzie whom they had so basely murdered at the fair.  One lady of the  Clan Munro lost her three brothers, on whom she composed a lament, of  which the following is all we could obtain:--

`S olc a' fhuair mi tus an Earraich, `S na feill Bride `chaidh thairis, Chaill mi mo thriuir bhraithrean geala, Taobh ri taobh u' sileadh fala. `Se `n dithis a rinn mo sharach', Fear beag dubh a chlaidheamh Iaidir, `S mac Fhionnla Dhuibh a Cinntaile Deadh mhearlach nan adh `s nan aigeach.

When night came on, Alastair Mor Bayne escaped from the kiln, and went  to his uncle Lovat, who at once despatched James Fraser of Phopachy  south, with all speed to prevent information from the other side reaching the King before be had an opportunity of relating his version of the  quarrel.  His Majesty was at the time at Falkland, and a messenger from  Mackenzie reached him before Alastair Mor, pursuing for the slaughter of  Mackenzie's kinsmen.  He got the ear of his Majesty and would have been  successful had not John Dubh Mac Choinnich Mhic Mhurchaidh  meanwhile taken the law into his own hands by burning, in revenge, all  Tulloch's cornyards and barns at Lemlair, thus giving Bayne an  opportunity of presenting another and counter claim but the matter was  ultimately arranged by the King and Council obliging Kintail and Tulloch  mutually to subscribe a contract of agreement and peaceful behaviour  towards each other.

Under date of 18th February, 1395-96, there is an entry in the Privy Council Records that Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail "being elected and  chosen to be one of the ordinary members" of the Council, and being  personally preset, makes faith and gives oath in the usual manner.  In a  complaint against him, on the 5th of August, 1596, by Habbakuk Bisset,  he is assoilzied in all time coming by a decree of their Lordships in his favour.

Upon the death of Old Roderick of the Lewis, Torquil Dubh  succeeded him, excluding Torquil Cononach from the succession on the  plea of his being a bastard.  The latter, however, held Coigeach and his other possessions on the mainland, with a full recognition by the Government of his rights to the lands of his forefathers in the Lewis.

His  two sons having been killed, and his eldest daughter, Margaret, having  married Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach, progenitor of the Cromarty  family, better known as the Tutor of Kintail, Torquil Cononach threw  himself into the hands of Kintail for aid against the bastards.  By Roderick  Mackenzie's marriage with Torquil Cononach's eldest daughter, he  became heir of line to the ancient family of Macleod, an honour which  still remains to his descendants, the Cromarty family.  Torquil Dubh  secured considerable support by marriage with a daughter of Tormod, XI.,  and sister of William Macleod, XII. of Harris and Dunvegan, and, thus  strengthened, made a descent on Coigeach and Lochbroom, desolating the  whole district, aiming at permanent occupation.  Kintail, following the example of his predecessors--always prudent, and careful to keep within  the laws of the realm--in 1596 laid the following complaint before King  James VI.:--

Please your Majesty,--Torquil Dow of the Lews, not contenting himself with the avowit misknowledging of your Hieness authority wherebe he has violat the promises and compromit made before your Majesty, now lately the 25th day of December last, has ta'n upon him  being accompanied w 7 or 800 men, not only of his own by ylands neist  adjacent, to prosecute with fire and sword by all kind of gud order, the  hail bounds of the Strath Coigach pertaining to M'Leod his eldest brother,  likewise my Strath of Lochbroom, quhilks Straths, to your Majesty's great dishonour, but any fear of God ourselves, hurt and skaith that he hath  wasted w fire and sword, in such barbarous and cruel manner, that neither man, wife, bairn, horse, cattle, corns, nor bigging has been spared, but all barbarously slain, burnt, and destroyit, quhilk barbarity and cruelty, seeing  he was not able to perform it but by the assistance and furderance of his neighbouring Ylesmen, therefore beseeches your Majesty by advice of  Council to find some sure remeid wherebe sick cruel tyrannie may be  resisted in the beginning.  Otherway nothing to be expectit for but dailly  increasing of his malicious forces to our utter ruin, quha possesses your Majesty's obedience, the consideration quharof and inconveniences quhilk  may thereon ensue.  I remit to your Highness guid consideration of whom  taking my leif with maist humble commendations of service, I commit  your Majesty to the holy protection of God eternal.  At the Canonry of Ross, the 3d day, Jany. 1596-97.  Your Majesty's most humble and obt.  subject.  			

KENNETH  MACKENZIE of Kintail.

The complaint came before the Privy Council, at Holyrood, on the 11th of  February, following, and Torquil Dubh, failing to appear, was denounced  a rebel.  Kenneth thereupon obtained a commission of fire and sword  against him, as also the forfeiture of the Lewis, upon which Torquil  Cononach made over his rights to Mackenzie, on the plea that he was the  next male heir, but reserving the lands of Coigeach to his own son-in-law.

The Mackenzies did all they could to obtain the estste for Torquil Cononach, the legitimate heir, but mainly through his own want of activity  and indolent disposition, they failed with their united efforts to secure undisturbed possession for him.  They succeeded, however, in destroying  the family of Macleod of the Lewis, and most of the Siol-Torquil, and  ultimately became complete masters of the island.  The Brieve by  stratagem captured Torquil Dubh, with some of his friends, and delivering them up to Torquil Cononach, they were, by his orders, beheaded in July,  1597.  "It fell out that the Breve (that is to say, the judge) in the Lewis,  who was chief of the Clan Illevorie (Morrison),, being sailing from the Isle of Lewis to Ronay in a great galley, met with a Dutch ship loaded  with wine, which he took; and advising with his friends, who were all with  him there, what he would do with the ship lest Torqull Du should take her from him, they resolved to return to Stornoway and call for Torqull Du to receive the wine, and if he came to the ship, to sail away with him where Torqull Cononach was, and then they might be sure of the ship and the  wine to be their own, and besides, he would grant them tacks in the best  parts in the Lewis; which accordingly they did, and called for Torqull to come and receive the wine.  Torqull Du noways mistrusting them that  were formerly so obedient, entered the ship with seven others in company, where he was welcomed, and he commended them as good fellows that  brought him such a prize.  They invited him to the quay to take his  pleasure of the feast of their wine.  He goes, but instead of wine they  brought cords to tie him, telling him he had better render himself and his  wrongously possessed estate to his eldest brother; that they resolved to put  him in his mercy, which he was forced to yield to.  So they presently sail  for Coigeach, and delivered him to his brother, who he had no sooner got  but he made him short by the head in the month of July, 1597. Immediately he was beheaded there arose a great earthquake, which astonished the actors and all the inhabitants about them as a sign of God's  judgment." [Ancient MS.]

In 1598 some gentlemen in Fife, afterwards known as the "Fife Adventurers," obtained a grant of the Lewis with the professed object of  civilising the inhabitants.  It is not intended here to detail their  proceedings or to describe at much length the squabbles and constant  disorders, murders, and robberies which took place while they held  possession of the Island.  The speculation proved ruinous to the  Adventurers, who in the end lost their estates, and were obliged to leave the islanders to their fate. A brief summary of it will suffice, and those  who desire more information on the subject will find a full account of it in  the History of the Macleods. [By the same author.  A. & W. Mackenzie, Inverness, 1889.]

On the 15th of June, 1599, Sir William Stewart of Houston, Sir  James Spence of Wormistoun, and Thomas Cunningham appeared  personally before the Privy Council "to take a day for the pursuit of  Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail upon such crimes as criminally they had to  lay to his charge for themselves and in the name of the gentlemen-ventuaries of their society," and the 26th of September was fixed for the purpose.

On the 14th of September Kenneth enters into a bond for a  thousand merks that John Dunbar, Fiar of Avoch, and James Dunbar of  Little Suddie, four sons of John of Avoch, and several others, in five hundred merks each, that they will not harm Roderick Dingwall of Kildin,  Duncan Bayne, apparent heir of Tulloch, Alexander Bayne of Loggie, and  other sons and grandsons of Bayne of Tulloch.

Sir James Stewart of Newton enters into a bond, on the 6th of October, for six hundred merks that Kenneth will not harm James Crambie, a burgess of Perth, signed at Dunkeld in presence of Murdo Mackenzie, apparent heir of Redcastle, John Mackenzie, minister of Dingwall, and Alexander Mackenzie, writer.

On the 16th of April, 1600, Tormod Macleod complains that  Kenneth had apprehended him and detained him as a prisoner without just cause, and failing to appear the King and Council, understanding that  Tormod "is a chief and special man of that clan (Macleod), and that  therefore it is necessary that order be taken for his dutiful obedience and  good behaviour," order Kenneth to present him before the Council on a  day to be afterwards fixed.

Kenneth, on the 11th of December, brings under the notice of the Council a case which places the unlawful practices of the times in a strong  light.  He says that upon the 16th of October preceding, while Duncan  MacGillechallum in Kintail, his man, was bringing twenty-four cows to  the fair of Glammis, three men, whose names he gives, violently robbed  him of the cattle.  Upon the 1st of November, 1599, the same persons had  reft Duncan MacGillechriosd in Kintail, his tenant, at the fair of Elycht, of  twenty-six cows and four hundred merks of silver, and robbed Murdo Mac  Ian Mhic Mhurchaidh, also his tenant in Kintail, of twenty-six cows at the same market.  On the 30th of October, 1600, he sent his servants, John  and Dougall MacVanish, in Lochalsh, to the fair of Elycht with a hundred  and fifty-four cows and oxen to be sold, "for outred and certane the said complenaris adois in thir pairtis," and his servants being at the foot of Drummuir with his said cattle, two of the three who robbed his men at  Glammis, with Patrick Boll in Glenshee, and Alexander Galld Macgregor,  took from them the whole of the cattle and "hes sparpellit and disponit"  upon the same at their pleasure.  This violence and rief at free markets and  fairs, he says, is not only hurtful to him, but it "discourages all peaceable  and good subjects to direct or send any goods to the market and fairs of  the incountry."  Kenneth Mackenzie of Kilchrist appeared for Kintail, and the defenders, in absence, were denounced rebels.

He is ordered on the 31st of January, 1602, as one of the leading Highland chiefs, to hold a general muster and wapinschaw of his followers each year within his bounds, on the 10th of March, as the other chiefs are  in their respective districts.  On the same day he is requested to provide a  hundred men to aid the Queen of England "against the rebels in Ireland;"  is authorised to raise this number compulsorily, if need be, and appoint the  necessary officers to command them.  On the 28th of July following,  Alexander Dunbar of Cumnock, Sheriff-Principal of Elgin and Forres, and David Brodie of Brodie, become cautioners to the amount of three thousand merks that Kenneth will appear before the King and Council, when charged with some unnamed offence, upon twenty days warning.

On the 9th of September Mackenzie complains to the Council that about  St Andrews Day, 1601, when he sent eighty cattle to the St. Andrew  market for sale, Campbell of Glenlyon, with a large number of his men,  "all thieves and broken Highland men," had set upon his servants and  spuilzied them of the whole; and that eighty cattle he had sent to the  Michaelmas market had been reft from him in the same way by the said  Campbell, for which Duncan Campbell, younger of Glenlyon, having  failed to produce his father, who "was in his custody and keeping," was  denounced a rebel.

There being some variance and controversy "between Mackenzie  and Donald Mac Angus of Glengarry, they were both ordered at the same meeting of Council to subscribe, within three hours after being charged,  such forms of mutual assurance as should be presented to them, to endure  till the 1st of May, 1603, under pain of rebellion.

By warrant of the King, Kenneth is admitted a member of the Privy Council and is sworn in, in common form, on the 9th of December, 1602.   On the following day he gives caution for James Dunbar of Little Suddie,  and John Dunbar, Fiar of Avoch, in two hundred merks, for their  relaxation by the 1st of February next from several hornings used against them.

At a meeting of the Privy Council, held at Edinburgh on the 30th of September, 1605, Kenneth receives a commission to act for the King  against Neil MacNeill of Barra, the Captain of Clanranald, and several  other Highland and Island chiefs, who had "of late amassed together a  force and company of the barbarous and rebellious thieves and limmers of  the Isles," and with them entered the Lewis, "assailed the camp of his  Majesty's good subjects," and "committed barbarous and detestable  murders and slaughters upon them." Mackenzie is in consequence  commissioned to convocate the lieges in arms and to pursue these  offenders with fire and sword by sea or land, "take and slay them," or  present them to their Lordships for justice, with power also to the said  Kenneth to pass to the Lewis for thc relief of the subjects "distressed and  grieved" by the said rebellious "lymmairis," or of prisoners in  their hands, and to procure their liberty by "force or policy, as he may best have it."

He is also ordered to charge the lieges within the shires of Inverness and  Nairn, burgh and landward, to rise and assist him in the execution of his office, whenever he requires them, "by his precepts and proclamations."

This was the beginning of Kenneth's second conquest of the Lewis.

Mackenzie is, on the 2nd of June, 1607, appointed by the Privy  Council, along with the Bishop of Ross, a commissioner to the  Presbyteries of Tam and Ardmeanach, and on the 14th of July following,  he is summoned before their Lordships to report his diligence in that matter, under pain of rebellion.  Kenneth does not appear, and he is  denounced a rebel.  On the 30th of July he takes the oath of allegiance,  along with the Earl of Wyntoun and James Bishop of Orkney, in terms of  a Royal letter issued on the 2nd of June preceding imposing a special oath  acknowledging the Royal Supremacy in Church and state on all Scotsmen  holding any civic or ecclesiastical office.

He receives another commission on the 1st of September, 1607.

Understanding that "Neil Macleod and others, the rebellious thieves and  limmers of the Isles, have of late surprised and taken the Castle of  Stornoway in the Lewis, and other houses and biggings, pertaining to the  gentlemen portioners of the Lewis, and have demolished and cast down  some of the said houses, and keep others of them as houses of war,  victualled and fortified with men and armour, and in the meantime  commit barbarous and detestable insolencies and cruelties upon so many  of the poor inhabitants of that country as gave their obedience to his  Majesty," the Lords give commission to Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail to  convocate the lieges in arms  pass to the Lewis, and pursue the said Neil Macleod with fire and sword, using all kinds of "warlike engines" for  recovering the houses, and having power to keep trysts and intercommune  with the inhabitants of the Isles.  This commission is to continue in force  for six months.

Mackenzie is one of the Highland chiefs to whom missive letters are ordered to be sent on the 23rd of June, 1608, to attend his Majesty's service under Lord Ochiltree, at Troternish, in the Isle of Skye, on the 20th  of August following, on which occasion the soldiers must "furnish  themselves with powder and bullets out of their own pay, and not out of  the King's charges."  It is ordered at a meeting of the Privy Council held  on the 6th of February, 1609, that he, along with Simon Lord Lovat, Grant of Grant, the Earl of Caithness, Ross of Balnagown, John Mackenzie of  Gairloch, and others, be charged to appear personally before their  Lordships on the 25th of March following, to come under such order as  shall be prescribed to them touching the finding of surety and caution for the quietness and obedience of their bounds, and that no fugitive and  disobedient Islesmen shall be reset or supplied within the same, under  pain of rebellion and horning.  He appears, with some of the others, before  the Council on the 28th of March, and gives the necessary bond, but the  amount in his case is not named.  On the 7th of April, however, it appears  that he and Grant become personally bound for each other, in ?000 each,  that those for whom they are answerable shall keep the King's peace and  that they will not reset or favour any fugitives from the Isles.  Kenneth becomes similarly bound in ?000 for John Mackenzie of Gairloch and  Donald Neilsoun Macleod of Assynt.

He was one of the eight Lesser Barons who constituted the Lords of the Articles in the Scottish Parliament which met for the first time on  the 17th of June, 1609.

The Privy Council, on the 22nd of the same month, committed to the Earl of Glencairn and Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail the charge of  conveying Hector Maclean of Duart from the Castle of Dumbarton to  Edinburgh and bringing him before their Lordships, "for order to be taken with  him anent the affairs of the Isles, and they became bound in ?0,000  to produce him on the first Council day after the end of that year's  Parliament.  On the 28th of the same month they enter formally into a  bond to this amount that Maclean will appear on the first Thursday of  November, he, in turn, binding himself and his heirs for their relief.  On  the 22nd of February, 1610, the bond is renewed for Maclean's  appearance on the first Council day after that date. He appears on the 28th  of June following, and Mackenzie and the Earl of Glencairn are released from their cautionary obligations.  On the 30th of June, 1609, Kenneth and Sir George become  cautioners for Donald Gorm Macdonald of Sleat to the amount of ?0,000  that he will appear before the Lords Commissioners on the 2nd of  February next, to come under their orders, and Kenneth is charged to keep Donald Gorm's brother's son, "who is now in his hands," until Macdonald  presents himself before the Lords Commissioners.  On the 22nd of  February, 1610, this caution is repeated for Donald's appearance on the  8th of March.  He appears and Mackenzie is finally relieved of the bond on the 28th of June following.

On the 5th of July, 1609, Mackenzie and Sir John Home of  Coldenknowes, undertake, under a penalty of ten thousand merks, that  George Earl of Caithness, shall make a free, peaceable, and sure passage to all his Majesty's lawful subjects through his country of Caithness, in their passage to and from Orkney.

At a meeting of the Council held on the 20th of February, 1610, a  commission is granted to Simon Lord Lovat, Kenneth Mackenzie of  Kintail, John Mackenzie of Gairloch, Hugh Mackay of Farr, and Roderick  Mackenzie of Redcastle, to apprehend Allan Mac Donald Duibh Mhic  Rory of Culnacnock, in Troternish, Isle of Skye, and several others,  including  "Murdo Mac Gillechallum, brother of Gillecallum Raasay,  Laird of Raasay, Gillecallum Mac Rory Mhic Leoid, in Lewis, Norman  Mac Ghillechallum Mhoir, there, and Rory Mac Ghillechallum Mhoir, his  brother," all of whom "remain unrelaxed from a horning of 18th January  last, raised  against them by Christian, Nighean Ian Leith, relict of Donald  Mac Alastair Roy, in Dibaig," Murdo, his son, his other kin and friends,  tenant and servants, "for not finding caution to answer before the justice for the stealing of forty cows and oxen, with all the insight and plenishing  of the said late Donald Mac Alastair's house in Dibaig, worth ?000, and  for murdering the said Donald," his tenant, and servants.  The  Commissioners are to convocate the lieges in arms for apprehending the  said rebels, and to enter them, when taken, before the justice to be suitably  punished for their crimes. Another commission is issued in favour of  Simon Lord Lovat, Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, Donald Gorm  Macdonald of Sleat, and Donald Mac Allan Mhic Ian of Eilean Tirrim,  Captain of Clanranald, against John Mac Allan Mac Ranald, who is  described as "having this long time been a murderer, common thief, and  masterful oppressor" of the King's subjects.

Although Kenneth had been raised to the Peerage on the 19th of November, 1609, by the title of Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, he is not so  designated in the Privy Council Records until the 31st of May, 1610, when the patent of his creation is read and received by their Lordships, and he is  thereupon acknowledged to be a free baron in all time coming.  He is one  of the Highland chiefs charged and made answerable for good rule in the  North on the 28th of June of that year and to find caution within fifteen days, under pain of rebellion, not to reset within their bounds any  notorious thieves, rievers, fugitives, and rebels, for theft and murder,  under a further penalty, in Mackenzie's case, of five thousand merks.

At a meeting of the Privy Council held on the 19th of July, 1610, the following commission was issued in Kenneth's favour as justiciary of  the Lewis, against Neil Macleod:--

Forasmuch as a number of the chieftains and principal men of the  Isles and continent next adjacent are come in and presented themselves  before the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, and have given  satisfaction unto the said Lords anent their obedience and conformity in  time coming, so as that now there is no part of the Isles rebellious and  disobedient  but the Lewis, which being possessed and inhabited by a  number of thieves, murderers, and an infamous byke of lawless and  insolent limmers under the charge and command of the traitor Neil  Macleod, who has usurped upon him the authority and possession of the  Lewis, and they, concurring altogether in a rebellious society, do commit many murders, slaughters, riefs, and villianies, not only among themselves  but upon his Majesty's peaceable and good subjects who resorted among them in their trade of fishing, and by their barbarous and savage behaviour  against his Majesty's good subjects they have made the trade of fishing in  the Lewis, which was most profitable for the whole country, to become  always unprofitable, to the great hurt of the commonweal.  And the Lords  of Secret Council finding it a discredit to the country that such a parcel of  ground, possessed by a number of miserable caitiffs, shall be suffered to continue rebellious, whereas the whole remanent Isles are become  peaceable and obedient, and the said Lords understand the good affection  of Kenneth, Lord Kintail and his willing disposition to undergo all pains and trouble in his Majesty's service.  Therefore the said Lords has made  and constituted, and by the tenour hereof makes and constitutes, the said Kenneth Lord Kintail, his Majesty's justice and commissioner over the  whole boundaries of the Lewis, to the effect under-written, with full  power, commission, and authority to him to convocate his Majesty's  lieges in arms, to levy and take up men of war, to appoint captains and  commanders over them, and with them to pass to the Lewis, and there,  with tire and sword, and all kind of hostility, to search, seek, hunt, follow,  and pursue the said Neil, his accomplices, assistants, and partakers, by sea and land, wherever they may be apprehended, and to mell, confiscate, and  intromit with their goods and gear, and to dispone thereupon at their  pleasure, and to keep such of their persons as shall be taken in sure  firmance till justice he ministered upon them, conform to the laws of this  realm, courts of justiciary within the said bounds to sit, begin, affix, hold,  and continue suits to be made called "absentis to amerchiat," trespasses to  punish, all and sundry persons inhabitants of the Lewis suspected and  delayed of murder, slaughter, fire-raising, theft, and reset of theft, and other capital crimes, to search, seek, take, apprehend, commit to prison, and to enter them upon panel by dittay to accuse them, and to put them to the knowledge of an assize, and as they shall happen to be found culpable or innocent of the said crimes, or any of them, to cause justice be  administered upon them conform to the laws of this realm  assize needful  to this effect, each person under the pain of forty pounds, to summon,  warn, chase, and cause be sworn, clerks, serjeants, dempsters, and all  other officers and members of court needful, to make, create, substitute  and ordain, for whom he shall be held to answer with power likewise to  our said justice, for the better execution of this commission to take the lymphads, galleys, birlinns, and boats, in the next adjacent Isles, and in the  Lewis, for the furtherance of them in their service, the said justice being  always answerable to the owners of the said lymphads, galleys, birlinns,  and bouts for redelivery of the same at the finishing of his Majesty's  service  with power likewise to the said justice and persons assisting him  in the execution of this commission to bear, wear, and use hagbutis, pistols, and petards.  And if in pursuit of this commission there shall  happen slaughter, mutilation fire-raising, or any other inconvenience, to follow, the said Lords decern and declare that the same shall not be  imputed as crime or offence to the said justice nor persons assisting him in  the execution of this Commission, nor that they, nor none of them, shall  not be called nor accused therefore criminally nor civilly by any manner  of way in time coming; exonerating them of all pain, crime, and danger,  that they may incur therethrough for ever.  And generally all and sundry other things to do, exercise, and use, which for execution of this commission are requisite and necessary, firm, and stable, holding and for to hold all and whatsoever things shall be lawfully done herein.  And that  letters of publication be directed hereupon charging all his Majesty's  lieges within the whole boundaries of the North Isles of this Kingdom and within the bounds of the said Lord's own lands, heritages, possessions,  offices, and baillies, excepting always the persons of the name of Fraser,  Ross, and Munro, their tenants and servants, to reverance. acknowledge,  and obey, rise, concur, pass forward, fortify, and assist the said Kenneth,  Lord Kintail, in all things tending to the execution of his commission, and  to convene in arms with him at such times, days, and places, as he shall  please appoint, as they and each one of them will answer upon their  obedience at their highest peril. This commission for the space of two  years after the date hereof, without revocation, to endure.

Soon after this, Neil apprehended a crew of English pirates who had been carrying on their nefarious traffic among the fishermen from the South and other places who frequented the prolific fishing banks, by  which, then as now, the island was surrounded.  This meritorious public  service secured some consideration for him at Court, as appears from the  following letter addressed to Lord Kintail under date of 29th August, 1610 --

After our very hearty commendations to your good Lordship:--  Whereas Neil Macleod in the Lewis has of late done some good service to  his Majesty and the country by the taking and apprehension of certain English pirates upon the coast of the Lewis, common enemies to all lawful traffic, whereby he has merited his Majesty's grace and pardon in some  measure to be shown unto him, and he having made promise and  condition for delivery of the pirates and their ships to such persons as shall  be directed by us to receive them we have thereupon given an assurance to him to come here to us and to remain at his pleasure until Whitsunday  next, that some good course may be taken for settling him in quietness;  and in this meantime we have promised that all hostility and persuit of  him and his followers shall rest and cease until the said term, and also that  we shall deal and trouble with your Lordship for some reasonable ease and condition to be given to him and his followers, all tenants to your Lordship  of the lands and possessions claimed by them.  And, we being careful that our word and promise made and given hereupon shall be effectual and  valid we have therefore thought meet to acquaint your Lordship therewith, requesting your Lordship to forbear all persuit, trouble, and invasion of the  said Neil and his followers until the said term, and that your Lordship will  take some such course with them as upon reasonable conditions they may  be received and acknowledged by your Lordship as tenants of those lands  claimed by them.  Wherein looking to find your Lordship conformable, we  commit you to God.

Neil does not then appear to have gone to Edinburgh, but he gave up the pirate, the captain, and ten of her crew to Patrick Grieve, a burgess  of Burntisland, who, on the 10th of September, received a commission "to  sail with a hired ship" to the Lewis for that purpose.  On the 10th of  October, Macleod writes to the Council acknowledging receipt, "from this  bearer, Patrick Grieve," of their Lordships' order upon him to deliver up the pirate and all her belongings.

On the 19th of July, the same day on which the Commission  against Neil Macleod was granted to Lord Kintail, the Council "being careful that the present peace and quietness in the Isles shall be fostered,  kept, and entertained, and all such occasions removed and taken away  whereby any new disorder, trouble, or misrule may be reinstated within  the same, has therefore thought meet that Rory Macleod, son to the late  Torquil Dubh Macleod, who has been this long time in the keeping of  Donald Gorm of Sleat, and (Torquil) Macleod, another of the said late  Torquil's sons, who has been this long time in keeping of Rory Macleod  of Harris, shall be delivered to Kenneth Lord Kintail, to be kept by him  until the said  Lord take order with them for their obedience."  Charges are  thereupon made upon the chiefs of Sleat and Harris "to bring, present, and  deliver" Torquil Dubh's two sons, "in their keeping," to the Mackenzie  chief, to be kept by him until such order is taken for their good behaviour.

They are to be delivered within thirty days, under the usual pains of  rebellion and horning.

He is one of the Commissioners of the Peace appointed by the  King on the 6th of November, in 1610, in terms of a newly-passed Act of Parliament, for Inverness-shire (including Ross) and Cromarty, his colleagues from among the clan for these counties being Roderick Mackenzie of Redcastle, Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach, and John Mackenzie of Gairloch.  He was at the same time appointed in a similar  capacity for Elgin, Forres, and Nairn.

Mackenzie had for some time kept Tormod Macleod, the lawful  brother of Torquil Dubh, a prisoner, but he now released him, correctly premising that on his appearance in the Lewis all the islanders would rise  in his favour.  In the meantime, early in 1600, Murdoch Dubh was taken  by the Fife Adventurers to St Andrews, and there put to death; but at his execution he revealed, in his confession, the designs of Mackenzie, who  was in  consequence apprehended and committed to Edinburgh Castle,  from which, however, he contrived to escape without trial, through his  influence with the Lord Chancellor.

There is an entry in the Records of the Privy Council under date of  15th August, 1599, which shows that Kintail must at an earlier date have  been confined in Edinburgh Castle, for some previous offence, for "it  having pleased the King to suffer Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail to repair  furth of the Castle of Edinburgh for four or five miles, when he shall think  expedient, for repose, health, and recreation" on caution being given by  himself as principal, and Robert Lord Seton as surety, that he shall re-enter the Castle every night, under pain of ten thousand merks.  The bond is signed on the same date, and is deleted by warrant signed by the King, and the Treasurer, on the 25th of September following.

After various battles had been fought between the brothers, the Adventurers returned in strong force to the island, armed with a commission of fire and sword, and all the Government power at their back, against Tormod.  The fight between the combatants continued with  varied success and failure on either side; the Adventurers again  relinquished their settlement, and returned to Fife to bewail their losses,  having solemnly promised never again to return to the Island or molest  Mackenzie and his friends.

Kintail now, in virtue of Torquil Cononach's resignation in his favour, obtained a gift, under the Great Seal, of the Lewis for himself  through the influence of the Lord Chancellor.  This he had, however,  ultimately to resign into the hands of the King, and his Majesty, in 1608,  vested these rights in the persons of Lord Balmerino, Sir George Hay, and Sir James Spence, of Wormistoun, who undertook the colonisation of the  island.  For this purpose they made great preparations, and, assisted by the  neighbouring tribes, invaded the Lewis for the double purpose of planting a colony in it and of subduing and apprehending Neil Macleod, who now  alone defended it.  Mackenzie dispatched his brother Roderick, and Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, with a party of followers numbering 400,  ostensibly to aid the colonists now acting under the King's commission to whom he promised active friendship.  At the same time he despatched a  vessel from Ross loaded with provisions, but privately sent word to Neil  Macleod to intercept her on the way, so that the settlers, being  disappointed of their supply of the provisions to which they trusted  for maintenance,  should  be obliged  to abandon the island for want of the  necessaries of life. Matters turned out exactly as Kintail anticipated.

Sir  George Hay and Sir James Spence (Lord Balmerino having meanwhile been convicted of high treason, and forfeited) abandoned the Lewis, leaving a party behind them to hold the garrison, and intending to send a fresh supply of men and provisions back to the island on their arrival in Fife.  But Neil Macleod and his followers took and burnt the fort,  apprehended its defenders, and sent them safely to their homes "on giving their oath that they would never come on that pretence again, which they  never did."  Finding this, the Adventurers gave up all hope of establishing  themselves in the island, and sold their acquired rights therein, as also their share of the forfeited districts of Troternish and Waternish in Skye, to Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail, who at the same time obtained a grant  from the King of Balmerino's forfeited share of the Lewis, thus finally  acquiring what he had so long and so anxiously desired.  In addition to a fixed sum of money, Mackenzie granted the Adventurers "a lease of the  woods of Letterewe, where there was an iron mine, which they wrought by  English miners, casting guns and other implements till their fuel was  exhausted and their lease expired."  The King confirmed this agreement,  and "to encourage Kintail and his brother Roderick in their work of  civilizing the people of the Lewis," he elevated the former to the peerage  as Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, on the 19th of November, 1609, at the same  time conferring the honour of knighthood on his brother, Roderick Mor  Mackenzie of Coigeach.

Referring to this period Mr Fraser-Tytler, in his History of  Scotland, says--"So dreadful indeed was now the state of those portions of his (the King's) dominions, that, to prevent an utter dissevering from  the  Scottish crown, something must be done, and many were the projects  suggested.  At one time the King resolved to proceed to the disturbed  districts in person, and fix his headquarters in Kentire; at another, a deputy  was to be sent, armed with regal powers; and twice the Duke of Lennox  was nominated to this arduous office.  The old plan, too, might have been repeated, of granting a Royal Commission to one or other of the northern  Reguli, who were ever prepared, under the plea of loyalty, to strengthen  their own hands, and exterminate their brethren; but this, as had been often felt before, was to abandon the country to utter devastation; and a more pacific and singular policy was now adopted.  One association of  Lowland barons, chiefly from Fife, took a lease from the Crown of the Isle  of Lewis, for which they agreed, after seven years' possession, to give the  King an annual rent of one hundred and forty chalders of victual; and  came under an obligation to conquer their farm at their own charges.

Another company of noble-men and gentlemen in Lothian offered, under a  similar agreement, to subdue Skye.  And this kind of feudal joint-stock  company actually commenced their operations with a force of six hundred  soldiers, and a motley multitude of farmers, ploughmen, artificers, and  pedlars.  But the Celtic population and their haughty chiefs could not  consent to be handed over, in this wholesale fashion, to the tender mercies  and agricultural lectures of a set of Saxon adventurers.  The Lowland  barons arrived, only to be attacked with the utmost fury, and to have the leases of their farms, in the old Douglas phrase, written on their own skins  with steel pens and bloody ink.  For a time, however, they continued the  struggle and having entered into alliance with some of the native chiefs, fought the Celts with their own weapons, and more than their own  ferocity.  Instead of agricultural and pastoral produce, importations of  wool, or samples of grain, from the infant colony, there was sent to the  Scottish Court a ghastly cargo of twelve human heads in sacks; and it was hoped that, after such an example of severity, matters might succeed  better.  But the settlers were deceived.  After a feeble and protracted  struggle for a few years, sickness and famine, perils by land and perils by  water, incessant war, and frequent assassinations, destroyed the colony; and the three great western chiefs, Macdonald of Sleat, Macleod of Harris,  and Mackenzie of Kintail, enjoyed the delight of seeing the principal  gentlemen adventurers made captive by Tormod Macleod; who, after  extorting from them a renunciation of their titles, and an oath never to  return to the Lewis, dismissed them to carry to the Scottish Court the  melancholy reflection that a Celtic population, and the islands on which it  was scattered, were not yet the materials or the field for the further  operations of the economists of Fife and Mid-Lothian."

In 1610 his Lordship returned to the Lewis with 700 men, and finally brought the whole island to submission, with the exception of Neil  Macleod and a few of his followers, who retired to the rock of Berissay,  and took possession of it.  At this period religion must have been at a very  low ebb--almost extinct among the inhabitants; and, to revive Christianity  among them, his Lordship selected and took along with him the Rev.  Farquhar Macrae, a native of Kintail and minister of Gairloch, [He  brought with him Mr Farquhar Macrae, who was then a young man and  minister of Gairloch and appointed by the Bishop of Ross (Lesley) to stay with Sir George Hay and the Englishmen that were with him in Letterewe,  being a peaceful and eloquent preacher.--Ardintoul MS.] who had been recommended to the latter charge by the bishop of Ross.  Mr Macrae found quite enough to do on his arrival in the island, but he appears to  have been very successful among the uncivilised natives; for he reports  having gained many over to Christianity; baptised a large number in the  fortieth year of their age; and, to legitimise their children, marrying many  others to those women with whom they had been for years cohabiting.   Leaving the reverend gentleman in the prosecution of his mission, his  Lordship returned home, having established good order in the island, and  promising to return again the following year, to the great satisfaction of  the people.

Some time before this Alexander MacGorrie and Ranald MacRory, sons of Glengarry's uncles murdered in 1580 in Lochcarron, having arrived at maturity, and being brave and intrepid fellows, determined to  revenge upon Mackenzie the death of their parents.  With this object they went to Appelcross, where lived one of the murderers, John Og, son of  Angus, MacEachainn, surrounded his house, and set lire to it, burning to  death himself and his whole family.  Kintail sought redress from  Glengarry, who, while he did not absolutely refuse, did not grant it or  punish the wrong-doers; and encouraged by Glengarry's eldest son, Angus,  who had now attained his majority, the cousins, taking advantage of the  absence of Mackenzie, who had gone on a visit to France, continued their  depredations and insolence wherever they found opportunity.  Besides,  they made a complaint against him to the Privy Council, whereupon he  was charged at the pier of Leith to appear before the Council on an appointed day under pain of forfeiture.  In this emergency, Mr John  Mackenzie, minister of Dingwall, went privately to France in search of his  chief, whom he found and brought back in the most secret manner to  Edinburgh, fortunately in time to present himself next day after his arrival  before the Council, in terms of the summons at Glengarry's instance; and, after consulting his legal adviser and other friends, he appeared quite  unexpectedly before their Lordships.

Meantime, while the gentlemen were on their way from France, Alexander MacGorrie and Alexander MacRory killed in his bed Donald Mackenneth Mhic Alastair, a gentleman of the family of Davochmaluag, who lived at Kishorn.  The shirt, covered with his blood, had been sent to  Edinburgh to await the arrival of Mackenzie, who the same day presented  it before the Privy Council, as evidence of the foul crime committed by his  accusers.  Glengarry was unable to prove anything material against Kintail  or his followers.  On the contrary, the Rev. John Mackenzie, of Dingwall, charged Glengarry with being instrumental in the murder of John Og and  his family at Applecross, as also in that of Donald Mackenzie of  Davochmaluag, and undertook not only to prove this, but also that he was  a sorner, an oppressor of his own and of his neighbours' tenants, an idolater, who had a man in Lochbroom making images, in testimony of  which he carried south the image of St. Coan, which Glengarry worshipped, called in Edinburgh Glengarry's god, and which was, by  public order, burnt at the Town Cross that Glengarry was a man who lived  in constant adultery with the Captain of Clan Ranald's daughter, after he had put away Grant of Grant's daughter, his lawful wife; whereupon  Glengarry was summoned there and then to appear next day before the  Council, and to lodge defences to this unexpected charge.  He naturally  became alarmed, and fearing the worst, fled from the city during the night,  "took to his heels," and gave up further legal proceedings against  Mackenzie.  Being afterwards repeatedly summoned, and failing to put in  an appearance, most of the charges were found proven against him; and in  1602, [Records of Privy Council, 9th September, 1602; Sir Robert  Gordon's Earldom of Sutherland, p. 248; Letterfearn, Ardintoul, and other MS. Histories of the Mackenzies.] he was declared outlaw and rebel; a  commission of fire and sword was granted to Mackenzie against him and  all his followers, with a decree of ransom for the loss of those who were burnt and plundered by him, and for Kintail's charges and expenses,  making altogether a very large sum.  But while these legal matters were  being arranged, Angus Macdonald, younger of Glengarry, who was of a  restless, daring disposition, went along with some of his followers under silence of night to Kintail, burnt the township of Cro, killed and burnt  several men, women, and children, and carried away a large spoil of  cattle.

Mackenzie, hearing of this sudden raid, became much concerned about the loss of his Kintail tenants, and decided to requite the quarrel by  at once executing his commission against the Macdonalds of Glengarry,  and immediately set out in pursuit, leaving a sufficient number of men at home to secure the safety of his property.  He took along with him a force  of seventeen hundred men, at the same time taking three hundred cows  from his farm of Strathbraan to maintain his followers.  Ross of  Balnagowan sent a party of a hundred and eighty men, under command of  Alexander Ross of Invercharron, to aid his neighbour of Kintail, while  John Gordon of Embo commanded a hundred and twenty men sent to his  aid by the Earl of Sutherland, in virtue of the long standing bond of  manrent which existed between the two families; but Sir John "retired at  Monar, growing faint-hearted before he saw the enemie".  Andrew Munro  of Novar also accompanied Kintail on this, as on several previous  expeditions. The Macdonalds, hearing of Mackenzie's approach, drove  all their cattle to Monar, where they gathered in strong force to guard  them. Kintail, learning this, marched straight where they were; harried and wasted all the country through which he had to pass; defeated and  routed the Macdonalds, and drove into Kintail the largest booty ever heard  of in the Highlands of Scotland, "both of cows, horses, small bestial, duinuasals, and plenishing, which he most generously distributed amongst his  soldiers, and especially amongst such strangers as were with him, so that John Gordon of Embo was at his repentance for his return." Mackenzie  had only two men killed in this expedition, though a few of the Kintail  men, whom he caused to be carried home on litters, were wounded.

Several instances are recorded of the prowess and intrepidity of  Alexander of Coul on this occasion.  He was, excepting John MacMhurchaidh Mhic Gillechriost, the fastest runner in the Mackenzie country.  On his way to Kintail, leading his men and driving the creach  before them, he met three or four hundred Camerons, who sent Mackenzie  a message demanding "a bounty of the booty" for passing through their  territory.  This Kenneth was about to grant, and ordered thirty cows and a  few of the younger animals to be given, saying that it "was fit that hungry  dogs should get a collop;" whereupon Alexander of Coul and his brave  band of one hundred and twenty followers started aside and swore with a  great oath that if the Camerons dared to take away a single head, they  would, before night, pay dearly for them, and have to light for their collop; for he and his men, he said, had already nearly lost their lives driving them  through a wild and narrow pass where eighteen of the enemy fell to their  swords before they were able to get the cattle through; but he would now  let them pass in obedience to his chief's commands.  The messengers,  hearing the ominous threat, notwithstanding Kenneth's personal  persuasion, declined on any account to take the cattle, and marched away  "empty as they came."

Before starting from home on this expedition Kintail drove every one of Glengarry's followers out of their holdings in Lochalsh and  Lochcarron, except a few of the "Mathewsons and the Clann Jan Uidhir,"  and any others who promised to submit to him and engaged to prove their  sincerity by "imbrowing their bands in the enemy's blood."  The Castle of Strome, however, still continued in possession of the Macdonalds.

Mackenzie, after his return home, had not well dissolved his camp when Alexander MacGorrie and Ranald MacRory made an incursion to  the district of Kenlochewe, and there meeting some women and children who had fled from Lochcarron with their cattle, he attacked them unexpectedly, killed several of the defenceless women, all the male  children, slaughtered and took away many of the cattle, and "houghed" all they were not able to carry along with them.

In the following autumn, Alexander MacGorrie made a voyage to  Applecross in a great galley, contrary to the advice of all his friends, who looked upon that place as a sanctuary which all Highlanders had hitherto  respected as the property of the Church.  Notwithstanding that many took  refuge in it in the past, he was the first man who ever pursued a fugitive to  the place, "but," says our authority, "it fared no better with him or he  rested, but be being informed that some Kintail men, whom he thought no  sin to kill anywhere," bad taken refuge there with their cattle, he  determined to kill them, but on his arrival he found only two poor fellows,  tending their cows.  These he murdered, slaughtered all the cows, and took away as many of them as his boat would carry.

A few days after this, Glengarry combined with the Clann Alain of Moydart (whose chief was at the time captain of Clan Ranald's men), the  Clann Ian Uidhir, and several others of the Macdonalds, who gathered  together amongst them thirty-seven birlinns with the intention of sailing to  Lochbroom, and on their return to burn and harry the whole of the  Mackenzie territories on the west coast. Coming to an arm of the sea on  the east side of Kyleakin called Loch na Beist, opposite Lochalsh, they  sent Alexander MacGorrie forward with eighty men in a large galley to  examine the coast in advance of the main body.  They first landed in  Applecross, in the same spot where MacGorrie had previously killed the  two Kintail men.  Kenneth was at the time on a visit to Mackenzie of  Gairloch, at his house on Island Rory in Loch-Maree, and hearing of  Glengarry's approach and the object of his visit, he ordered all his coasts  to be placed in readiness, and sent Alexander Mackenzie of Achilty with sixteen men and eight oarsmen, in an eight oared galley belonging to John Tolmach Macleod, son of Rory, son of Allan Macleod, who still possessed  a small portion of Gairloch, to watch the enemy and examine the coast as  far as Kylerhea.  John Tolmach himself accompanied them, in charge of  the galley.  On their way south they landed by the merest chance at  Applecross, on the north side of the point at which MacGorrie landed,  where they noticed a woman gathering shellfish on the shore, and who no  sooner saw them than she came forward and informed them that a great  galley had landed in the morning on the other side of the promontory.

This they at once suspected to contain an advanced scout of the enemy,  and, ordering their boat round the point, in charge of the oarsmen, they  took the shortest cut across the neck of land, and, when half way along,  they met one of Macdonald's sentries lying sound asleep on the ground.   He was soon sent to his long rest; and the Mackenzies blowing up a set of bagpipes found lying beside him, rushed towards the Macdonalds, who,  suddenly surprised and alarmed by the sound of the Piob mhor, and  thinking a strong force was falling down upon them, fled to their boat,  except MacGorrie, who, when he left it, swore a great oath that he would  never return with his back to the enemy; but finding it impossible single-handed to resist, he retired a little, closely followed by the Mackenzies who furiously attacked him.  He was now forced to draw aside to a rock,  against which he placed his back, and fought right manfully, defending  himself with extraordinary intrepidity, receiving the enemy's arrows in his  targe.  He was ultimately wounded by an arrow which struck him under  the belt, yet no one dared to approach him; but John Dubh Mac Choinnich  Mhic Mhurchaidh noticing his amazing agility, observing that his party  had arrived with the boat, and fearing they would lose Glengarry's galley unless they at once pursued it, went round to the back of the rock against  which the brave Macdonald stood, carrying a great boulder, which he  dropped straight on to MacGorrie's head, instantly killing him.  Thus died the most skilful and best chieftain--had he possessed equal wisdom and  discretion--then alive among the Macdonalds of Glengarry.

The Mackenzies immediately took to their boat, pursuing  Macdonald's galley to Loch na Beist, where, noticing the enemy's whole  fleet coming out against them, John Tolmach Macleod recommended his  men to put out to sea; but finding the fleet gaining upon them, they decided to land in Applecross, where they were nearly overtaken by the  enemy.  They were obliged to leave their boat and run for their lives, hotly  pursued by the Macdonalds; and were it not that one of Mackenzie's men  --John Mac Rory Mhic Mhurchaidh Mathewson--was so well acquainted  with the ground, and led them to a ford on the river between two rocks,  which the Macdonalds missed, and the night coming on, they would have  been unable to escape with their lives.  The Macdonalds retraced their  steps to their boats, and on the way discovered the body of Alexander  MacGorrie, whose death "put their boasting to mourning," and conceiving  his fate ominous of additional misfortunes, they, carrying him along with them, prudently returned home, and disbanded all their followers.  In the flight of the Mackenzies Alexander of Achilty, being so stout that he  fainted on the way, was nearly captured.  John MacChoinnich, who  noticed him falling, threw some water on him, and, drawing his sword,  swore that he would kill him on the spot if he did not get up at once rather  than that the enemy should have the honour of killing or capturing him.   They soon arrived at Gairloch's house in the island on Loch-Maree, and  gave a full account of their expedition, whereupon Kintail at once decided  upon taking active measures against the Macdonalds.  In the meantime he  was assured that they had returned to their own country.  He soon returned home, and found that the people of Kintail and Glengarry, tiring of those incessant slaughters and mutual injuries, agreed, during his absence, in the  month of May, to cease hostilities until the following Lammas.  Of this  agreement Kintail knew nothing; and young Glengarry, who was of an  exceedingly bold and restless disposition, against the earnest solicitations  of his father, who became a party to this agreement between his people  and those of Kintail, started with a strong force to Glenshiel and  Letterfearn, while Allan Macdonald of Lundy with another party went to  Glenelchaig, harried those places, took away a large number of cattle, and  killed some of the aged men, several women, and all the male children.

They found none of the principal and able-bodied men, who had withdrawn some distance that they might with greater advantage gather together in a body and defend themselves, except Duncan MacIan Mhic  Ghillechallum in Killichirtorn, whom the enemy apprehended, and would  have killed, had not one of the Macdonalds, formerly his friend and  acquaintance, prevailed upon young Glengarry to save his life, and send  him to the Castle of Strome, where he still had a garrison, rather than kill  him.

The successful result of this expedition encouraged Angus so much that he began to think fortune had at last turned in his favour, and he set  out and called personally upon all the chief and leaders of the various  branches of the Macdonalds in the west, soliciting their assistance against  the Mackenzies, which they all agreed to give him in the following spring.

This soon came to Mackenzie's knowledge, who was at the time residing in Ellandonnan Castle; and fearing the consequences of such a  powerful combination against him, he went privately to Mull by sea to  consult his brother-in-law, Hector Og Maclean of Duart, to whom he told  that he had a commission of fire and sword against "the rebels of  Glengarry and such as would rise in arms to assist them, and being  informed that the Macdonalds near him (Maclean) had combined to join  them, and to put him to further trouble, that, therefore, he would, not only  as a good subject but as his fast friend, divert these whenever they should  rise in arms against him." [Ardintoul MS.]  Maclean undertook to prevent  the assistance of the Clan Ranald of Isla and the Macdonalds of Glencoe  and Ardnamurchan, by, if necessary, invading their territories, and thus  compelling them to protect their own interests at home.  It appears that old  Glengarry was still anxious to arrange a permanent peace with Mackenzie;  but his son Angus, restless and turbulent as ever, would not hear of any  peaceful settlement, and determined to start at once upon an expedition,  from which his father told him at the time he had little hopes of his ever  returning alive--a prediction which turned out only too true.

Angus, taking advantage of Mackenzie's absence in Mull,  gathered, in the latter end of November, as secretly as be could, all the boats and great galleys within his reach, and, with this large fleet loaded  with his followers passed through the Kyles under silence of night; and,  coming to Lochcarron, he sent his marauders ashore in the twilight.  The  inhabitants perceiving them, escaped to the hills, but the Macdonalds  cruelly slaughtered all the aged men who could not escape, and many of  the women and children seized all the cattle, and drove them to the Island  of Slumbay, where their boats which they filled with the carcases lay.

Before, however, they had fully loaded, the alarm having gone through the districts of Lochalsh and Kintail, some of the natives of those districts were seen marching in the direction of Lochcarron. The Macdonalds  deemed it prudent to remain no longer, and set out to sea pursued by a  shower of arrows by way of farewell, which, however, had little effect  upon them, as they were already out of range.

The Kintail men, by the shortest route, now returned to  Ellandonnan, sending twelve of the swiftest of their number across  country to Inverinate, where lay, newly built, a twelve-oared galley, which had never been to sea, belonging to Gillecriost MacDhonnchaidh, one of  Inverinate's tenants.  These heroes made such rapid progress that they  were back at the castle with the boat before many of their companions  arrived from Lochcarron.  During the night they set to work, superintended  and encouraged by Lady Mackenzie in person, to make arrangements to go  out and meet the enemy.  The best men were quickly picked.  The Lady  supplied them with all the materials and necessaries for the journey within  her reach, handed them the lead and powder with her own hands, and gave  them two small pieces of brass ordnance.  She ordered Duncan  MacGillechriost, a powerful handsome fellow, to take command of the  galley in his father's absence, and in eloquent terms charged them all with  the honour of her house and her own protection in her husband's absence.

This was hardly necessary, for the Kintail men had not yet forgotten the  breach of faith which had been committed by Macdonald regarding the  recent agreement to cease hostilities for a stated time, and other recent sores.  Her ladyship having wished them God-speed, they started on their  way rejoicing and in the best of spirits. She mounted the castle walls, and  stood there encouraging them until, by the darkness of the night, she could  no longer see them.

On their way towards Kylerhea they met a boat from Lochalsh sent out to inform them of the enemy's arrival at Kyleakin.  Learning this, they  cautiously kept their course close to the south side of the loch.  It was a  calm moonlight night, with occasional slight showers of snow.  The tide  had already begun to flow, and, judging that the Macdonalds would await  the next turning of the tide to enable them to get through Kylerhea, the  Kintail men, longing for their prey, resolved to advance and meet them.

They had not proceeded far, rowing very gently, after placing seaweed in  the rowlocks so as not to make a noise, when they noticed a boat, rowing  at the hardest, coming in their direction; but from its small size they  thought it must have been sent by the Macdonalds in advance to test the  passage of Kylerhea.  They therefore allowed it to pass unmolested, and  proceeded northward, looking for Macdonald's own galley.  As they  neared the Cailleach, a low rock midway between both Kyles, it was  observed in the distance covered with snow.  The night also favoured  them, the sea, calm, appearing black and mournful to the enemy.  Here  they met Macdonald's first galley, and drawing up near it, they soon  discovered it to be no other than his own great birlinn, some distance  ahead of the rest of the fleet. Macdonald, as soon as he noticed them,  called out "Who is there?" twice in succession, but receiving no answer,  and finding the Kintail men drawing nearer, he called out the third time, when, in reply, he received a full broadside from Mackenzie's cannon,  which disabled his galley and threw her on the Cailleach Rock.

The men on board Macdonald's galley thought they had been  driven on shore, and flocked to the fore part of the boat, striving to escape,  thus capsizing and filling the birlinn.  Discovering their position, and  seeing a long stretch of sea lying between them and the mainland, they  became quite confused, and were completely at the mercy of their  enemies, who sent some of their men ashore to despatch any of the poor  wretches who might swim ashore, while others remained in their boat  killing and drowning the Macdonalds. Such of them as managed to reach  the land were also killed or drowned by those of the Kintail men who went ashore, not a soul out of the sixty men on board the galley having escaped  except Angus Macdonald himself still breathing, though he had been  wounded twice in the head and once in the body.  He was yet alive when  they took him aboard their galley, but he died before morning.  Hearing  the uproar, several of the Lochalsh people went out with all speed in two small boats, under command of Dugall Mac Mhurchaidh Matthewson, to  take part in the fray; but by the time they arrived at the scene of action few  of Macdonald's followers were alive.  Thus ended the career of Angus,  younger of Glengarry, a chief to whom his followers looked up, and whom  they justly regarded as a bold and intrepid leader, though deficient in  prudence and strategy.

The remainder of Macdonald's fleet, to the number of twenty-one, following behind his own galley, having heard the uproar, returned to  Kyleakin in such terror and confusion that each thought his nearest  neighbour was pursuing him.  Landing in Strathardale, they left their boats  "and their ill-cooked beef to these hungry gentlemen," and before they  slept they arrived in Sleat, from whence they were sent across to the  mainland in the small boats of the laird.

The great concern and anxiety of her ladyship of Ellandonnan can be easily conceived, for all that she had yet learnt was the simple fact that  an engagement of some kind had taken place, and this she only knew from  having heard the sound of cannon during the night. Early in the morning  she noticed her protectors returning with their birlinn, accompanied by  another great galley.  This brightened her hopes, and going down to the  shore to meet them, she heartily saluted them, and asked if all had gone  well with them.  "Yea, Madam," answered their leader, Duncan  MacGillechriost, "we have brought you a new guest, without the loss of a  single man, whom we hope is welcome to your ladyship."  She looked into  the galley, and at once recognising the body of Angus of Glengarry, she  ordered it to be carried ashore and properly attended to.  The men  proposed that he should be buried in the tomb of his predecessors, "Cnoc  nan Aingeal," in Lochalsh; but this she objected to, observing that, if he  could, her husband would never allow a Macdonald, dead or alive, any  further possession in that locality, at the same time ordering young  Glengarry to be buried with her own children, and such other children of  the predecessors of the Mackenzies of Kintail as were buried in Kilduich, saying that she considered it no disparagement for him to be buried with  such cousins; and if it were her own fate to die in Kintail, she would  desire to be interred amongst them.  The proposal was agreed to, and  everything having been got ready suitable for the funeral of a gentleman of his rank-such as the place could afford in the circumstances-he was buried  next day in Kilduich, in the same tomb as Mackenzie's own children.

This is not the most generally received account regarding Angus Macdonald's burial; but we are glad, for the credit of our common humanity, to find the following conclusive testimony in an imperfect but excellently written MS. of the seventeenth century, otherwise remarkably  correct and trustworthy:--"Some person, out of what reason I cannot tell,  will needs affirm he was buried in the church door, as men go out and in, which to my certain knowledge is a malicious lie, for with my very eyes I have seen his head raised out of the same grave and returned again,  wherein there was two small cuts, noways deep." [Ancient MS.]

The author of the Ardintoul MS. informs us that MacLean had  actually invaded Ardnamurchan, and carried fire and sword into that and  the adjoining territory of the Macdonalds, whereupon the Earl of Argyll, who claimed the Macdonalds of those districts as his vassals and dependants, obtained criminal letters against MacLean, who, finding this, sent for his brother-in-law, Mackenzie of Kintail, at whose request he had  invaded the country of the Macdonalds.  Both started for Inveraray.  The  Earl seemed most determined to punish MacLean, but Mackenzie  informed him that "he should rather be blamed for it than MacLean, and  the King and Council than either of them, for he having obtained, upon  good grounds, a commission of fire and sword against Glengarry and such  as would assist him, and against these men's rebellious and wicked  courses, which frequently his lordship seemed to own, that he did charge, as he did several others of the king's loyal subjects, MacLean to assist  him."  So that, if Maclean was to be punished for acting as his friend and as a loyal subject, he hoped to obtain a hearing before the King and  Council under whose orders he acted.  After considerable discussion they  parted good friends, Argyll having agreed not to molest MacLean any  further.  Mackenzie and MacLean returned to Duart, where his lordship  was warmly received and sumptuously entertained by MacLean's  immediate friends and kinsmen for the service which he had just rendered  to their chief.  While thus engaged, a messenger arrived at the castle from  Mackenzie's lady and the Kintail men.

After the funeral of young Angus of Glengarry, she became  concerned about her husband's safe return, and was at the same time most anxious that he should be advised of the state of matters at home. She  therefore despatched Robert Mac Dhomh'uill Uidhir to arrange the safest  plan for bringing her lord safely home, as the Macdonalds were still  prowling among the creeks and bays further south. Robert, after the  interchange of unimportant preliminaries, on his arrival in Mull, informed  his master of all that had taken place during his absence.  MacLean,  surprised to hear of such gallant conduct by the Kintail men in the absence  of their chief, asked Mackenzie if any of his own kinsmen were amongst  them, and being informed they were not, Maclean replied, "It was a great  and audacious deed to be done by fellows."  "Truly, MacLean," returned Mackenzie, "they were not fellows that were there, but prime gentlemen,  and such fellows as would act the enterprise better than myself and  kinsmen."  "You have very great reason to make the more of them," said  Maclean; "he is a happy superior who has such a following."  Both chiefs  then went outside to consult as to the best and safest means for  Mackenzie's homeward journey. MacLean offered him all his chief and  best men to accompany him by land, but this he declined, saying that he  would not put his friend to such inconvenience, and would return home in  his own boat just as he came; but he was ultimately persuaded to take  MacLean's great galley, his own being only a small one.  He sailed in his friend's great birlinn, under the command of the Captain of Cairnburgh,  accompanied by several other gentlemen of the MacLeans.

In the meantime, the Macdonalds, aware that Mackenzie had not  yet returned from Mull, "convened all the boats and galleys they could, to  a certain island which lay in his course, and which he could not avoid  passing.  So, coming within sight of the island, having a good prospect of  a number of boats, after they bad ebbed in a certain harbour, and men also  making ready to set out to sea. This occasioned the captain to use a  stratagem, and steer directly to the harbour, and still as they came forward  be caused lower the sail, which the other party perceiving made them  forbear putting out their boats, persuading themselves that it was a galley  they expected from Ardnamurchan, but they had no sooner come forgainst the harbour but the captain caused hoist sail, set oars and steers aside, immediately bangs up a bagpiper and gives them shots.  The rest, finding  the cheat and their own mistake, made such a hurly-burly setting out their  boats, with their haste they broke some of them, and some of themselves  were bruised and bad broken shins also for their prey, and such as went  out whole, perceiving the galley so far off; thought it was folly to pursue  her any further, they all returned wiser than they came from home.  This  is, notwithstanding other men's reports, the true and real narration of Glengarrie Younger his progress, of the Kintail men their meeting him in  Kyle Rhea, of my lord's coming from Mull, and of the whole success,  which I have heard verbatim not only from one but from several that were  present at their actings." [Ancient MS. The authors of the Letterfearn and  Ardintoul MSS. give substantially the same account, and say that among  those who accompanied Mackenzie to Mull, was "Rory Beg Mackenzie,  son to Rory More of Achiglunichan. Fairburn and Achilty's predecessor,  and who afterwards died parson of Contine, from whom my author had  the full account of Mackenzie's voyage to Mull."]

Mackenzie arrived at Ellandonnan late at night, where he found his lady still entertaining her brave Kintail men after their return from  Glengarry's funeral.  While not a little concerned about the death of his troublesome relative, he heartily congratulated his gallant retainers on the  manner in which they had protected his interests during his absence.

Certain that the Macdonalds would never rest satisfied until they wiped  out and revenged the death of their leader, Mackenzie determined to drive them out of the district altogether.  The castle of Strome still in possession  of Glengarry, was the greatest obstacle in carrying out this resolution, for  it was a good and convenient asylum for the Macdonalds when pursued by  Mackenzie and his followers; but he ultimately succeeded in wresting it  from them.

The following account is given in the Ancient MS. of how it was taken from them:--"In the spring of the following year, Lord Kintail gathered together considerable forces and besieged the castle of Strone in  Lochcarron, which at first held out very manfully, and would not  surrender, though several terms were offered, which he (Mackenzie)  finding not willing to lose his men, resolved to raise the siege for a time;  but the defenders were so unfortunate as to have their powder damaged by  the women they had within.  Having sent them out by silence of night to  draw in water, out of a well that lay just at the entrance of the castle, the  silly women were in such fear, and the room they brought the water into  being so dark for want of light, when they came in they poured the water into a vat, missing the right one, wherein the few barrels of powder they had lay.  And in the morning, when the men came for more powder,  having exhausted the supply of the previous day, they found the barrels of  powder floating in the vat; so they began to rail and abuse the poor  women, which the fore-mentioned Duncan Mac Ian Mhic Gilliechallum,  still a prisoner in the castle, hearing, as he was at liberty through the house, having promised and made solemn oath that he would never come  out of the door until he was ransomed or otherwise relieved."  This he was  obliged to do to save his life.  But having discovered the accident which befel the powder, he accompanied his keepers to the ramparts of the  castle, when he noticed his country men packing up their baggage as if intending to raise the siege.  Duncan instantly threw his plaid over the  head of the man that stood next to him, and jumped over the wall on to a  large dung heap that stood immediately below. He was a little stunned,  but instantly recovering himself, flew with the fleetness of a deer to  Mackenzie's camp, and informed his chief of the state of matters within  the stronghold.  Kintail renewed the siege and brought his scaling ladders  nearer the castle.  The defenders seeing this, and knowing that their  mishap and consequent plight had been disclosed by Duncan to the  enemy, they offered to yield up the castle on condition that their lives would be spared, and that they he allowed to carry away their baggage.

This was readily granted them, and "my lord caused presently blow up the  house with powder, which remains there in heaps to this day.  He lost only  but two Kenlochewe men at the siege.  Andrew Munro of Teannouher   (Novar) was wounded, with two or three others, and so dissolved the  camp." [Ardintoul MS.]  Another writer says--"The rooms are to be seen  yet.  It stood on a high rock, which extended in the midst of a little bay of  the sea westward, which made a harbour or safe port for great boats or  vessels of no great burden, on either side of the castle.  It was a very convenient place for Alexander Mac Gillespick to dwell in when he had  both the countries of Lochalsh and Lochcarron, standing on the very  march between both."

A considerable portion of the walls is still (1893) standing, but no  trace of the apartments.  The sea must have receded many feet since it was  in its glory; for now it barely touches the base of the rock on which the ruin stands.  We have repeatedly examined it, and with mixed feelings  ruminated upon its past history, and what its ruined  walls, could they only  speak, might bear witness to.  In the following year (1603) the chief of Glengarry Donald Gruamach having died, and the heir being still under age, the Macdonalds, under Donald's cousin, Allan Dubh MacRanuil of Lundy, made an  incursion into the country of Mackenzie in Brae Ross, plundered the lands of Cillechriost, and ferociously set fire to the church during divine service,  when full of men, women, and children, while Glengarry's piper marched  round the building cruelly mocking the heartrending wails of the burning  women and children, playing the well-known pibroch, which has been  known ever since by the name of "Cillechriost," as the family tune of the Macdonalds of Glengarry.  "Some of the Macdonalds chiefly concerned in  this inhuman outrage were afterwards killed by the Mackenzies; but it is  somewhat startling to reflect that this terrible instance of private  vengeance should have occurred in the commencement of the seventeenth  century, without, so far as we can trace, any public notice being taken of  such an enormity.  In the end the disputes between the chiefs of Glengarry  and Kintail were amicably settled by an arrangement which gave the Ross-shire lands, so long the subject of dispute, entirely to Mackenzie; and the  hard terms to which Glengarry was obliged to submit in the private quarrel  seem to have formed the only punishment inflicted on this clan for the cold-blooded atrocity displayed in the memorable raid on Kilchrist." [Gregory, pp. 302-3.]

Eventually Mackenzie succeeded in obtaining a crown charter to the disputed districts of Lochalsh, Lochcarron, and others, dated 1607; and  the Macdonalds having now lost the three ablest of their leaders, Donald's  successor, his second son, Alexander, considered it prudent to seek peace with Mackenzie.  This was, after some negotiation, agreed to, and a day  appointed for a final settlement.

In the meantime, Kintail sent for twenty-four of his ablest men in Kintail and  Lochalsh, and took them, along with the best of his own  kinsmen, to Baile Chaisteil (now Grantown), where his uncle Grant of  Grant resided, with the view to purchase from him a heavy and long-standing claim which he held against Glengarry for depredations  committed on Grant's neighbouring territories in Glenmoriston and Glen-Urquhart.  Grant was unwilling to sell, but ultimately, on the persuasion of  mutual friends, he offered to take thirty thousand merks for his claim.

Mackenzie's kinsmen and friends from the West were meanwhile lodged in a great kiln in the neighbourhood, amusing themselves with some of  Grant's men who went to the kiln to keep them company.  Kintail sent a  messenger to the kiln to consult his people as to whether he would give  such a large amount for Grants "comprising" against Glengarry.  The  messenger was patiently listened to until he had finished, when he was  told to go back and tell Grant and Mackenzie, that had they not  entertained great hopes that their chief would "give that paper as a gift to  his nephew after all his trouble," he would not have been allowed to cross  the Ferry of Ardersier; for they would like to know where he could find  such a large sum, unless he intended to harry them and his other friends, who had already suffered quite enough in the wars with Glengarry; and, so saying, they took to their arms, and desired the messenger to tell Mackenzie that they wished him to leave the paper where it was. And if  he desired to have it, they would sooner venture their own persons and  those of the friends they had left at home to secure it by force, than give a  sum which would probably be more difficult to procure than to dispossess  Glengarry altogether by their doughty arms.  They then left the kiln, and sent one of their own number for their chief, who, on arriving, was  strongly abused for entertaining such an extravagant proposal and  requested to leave the place at once.  This he consented to do, and went to  inform Grant that his friends would not hear of his giving such a large  sum, and that he preferred to dispense with the claim against Glengarry  altogether rather than lose the goodwill and friendship of his retainers, who had so often endangered their lives and fortunes in his quarrels.

Meanwhile, one of the Grants who had been in the kiln communicated to  his master the nature of the conversation which had there passed when the price asked by Grant was mentioned to the followers of Mackenzie.  This  made such an impression upon Grant and his advisers, that he prevailed  upon Mackenzie, who was about starting for home, to remain in the castle  for another night.  To this Kintail consented, and before morning he  obtained the "paper" for ten thousand merks--a third of the sum originally  asked for it. "Such familiar relationship of the chief with his people," our authority says, "may now-a-days be thought fabulous; but whoever considers the unity, correspondence, and amity that was so well kept and  entertained betwixt superiors and their followers and vassals in former  ages, besides as it is now-a-days, he need not think it so; and I may truly  say that there was no clan in the Highlands of Scotland that would  compete with the Mackenzies, their vassals and followers, as to that; and it is sure their superiors in former times would not grant their daughters in  marriage without their consent.  Nor durst the meanest of them, on the  other hand, give theirs to any stranger without the superior's consent; and  I heard in Earl Colin's time of a Kintail man that gave his daughter in  marriage to a gentleman in a neighbouring country without the Earl's  consent, who never after had kindness for the giver, and, I may say, is yet  the blackest marriage for that country, and others also, that ever was  among their commons.  But it may be objected that now-a-days their  commons advice or consent in any matter of consequence is not so  requisite, whereas there are many substantial friends to advise with; but its  an old Scots phrase, `A king's advice may fall from a fool's head.'  I  confess that is true where friends are real friends, but we ordinarily find,  and partly know by experience, that, where friends or kinsmen  become  great and rich in interest, they readily become emulous, and will ordinarily advise for themselves if in the least it may hinder them from becoming a  chief or head of a family, and forget their former headship, which was one  of the greatest faults, as also the ruin of Munro of Miltown, whereas a  common man will never eye to become a chief so long as he is in that  state, and therefore will advise his chief or superior the more freely."

What a change in the relationship between the chiefs and clansmen of to-day!  Sir William Fraser, who quotes the foregoing narrative from the  former edition of this work, says that John Grant, fifth of Freuchie, in  whose time this incident is said to have occurred, was not "uncle" but  cousin to Kenneth Mackenzie of Kintail.  But he adds that the "story is so  far corroborated by the fact that about the time the incident is said to have  happened, the young Chief of Kintail granted a receipt to the laird of  Freuchie for the charter of comprising, granted on 4th May, 1548, to  James Grant of Freuchie, which, with relative papers, was now handed  over to Mackenzie, in terms of a disposition by the Laird to him of lands in Kessoryne, Lochalsh, Lochcarron, etc."  The original discharge, dated  1st May, 1606, Sir William says, is at Castle Grant. [Chiefs of Grant, vol.  i. p. 178.]  A bond of manrent is entered into between Grant and  Mackenzie on the same date, at Inverness.

The day appointed for the meeting of Mackenzie and Glengarry to arrange terms soon arrived.   The former had meanwhile brought up several decrees and claims against the latter at the instance of neighbouring proprietors, for "cost, skaith and damage," which altogether amounted to a greater sum than the whole of Macdonald's lands were  worth.  The two, however, settled their disputes by an arrangement which  secured absolutely to Mackenzie all Glengarry's lands in the county of  Ross, and the superiority of all  his other possessions, but Glengarry was  to hold the latter, paying Mackenzie a small feu as superior.  In  consideration of these humiliating concessions by Macdonald, Mackenzie  agreed to pay twenty thousand merks Scots, and thus ended for ever the  ancient quarrels which had existed for centuries between the powerful  families of Glengarry and Kintail.  "Thus ended the most of Glengarrie's troubles tho' there was severall other bloody skirmishes betwixt ym--such  as the taking of the Stank house in Knoidart, where there was severalls  burnt and killed by that stratagem; as also young Glengarrie's burning and  harrying of Croe in Kintail, where there was but few men killed, yet  severall women and children were both burned and killed.  I cannot forget ane pretty fellow that was killed there, who went himself and three or four  women to ane outsett in the Croe, where there was a barn (as being more  remote), where they sleept yt night.  But in the morning the breaking of the dore was their wakening, whereupon the man, (called Patrick McConochy Chyle) started and finding them about the barn, bad them leave of and he would open it.  So, getting his bow and arrow, he opens  the door, killed 4 of them there, (before) they took nottice of him, which  made them all hold off.  In end they fires the barn and surrounds it, which  he finding still, started out, and as he did he still killed one of them, till he  had killed 11.  The barn in end almost consumed and his arrows spent, he  took him to his heels, but was killed by them, and two of the women, the  third having stayed in the reek of the barn, and a rough hide about her." [Ancient MS.]

On the 18th of July, 1610, Lord Kenneth made over to Sir  Roderick Mor Macleod, XIII. of Dunvegan, the five unciate lands of  Waternish, which his lordship had previously purchased from Sir George  Hay and others, who obtained possession of them on the forfeiture of the  Macleods of Lewis, to whom Waternish formerly belonged.  As part  payment, Sir Roderick Mor Macleod disponed to Mackenzie two unciates  of lands in Troternish, Isle of Skye, which belonged to him, along with the  Bailliary of the old extent of eight merks which had been united to the  Barony of Lewis, and in which William Macleod, XII. of Dunvegan, had  been served heir to his father in 1585.  On the 24th of the same month the  Lords of the Privy Council ordain that Lord Kintail should pay Norman  Macleod's expenses in prison in all time coming.

Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, to quote the Earl of  Cromarty, "was truly of an heroic temper, but of a spirit too great for his  estates, perhaps for his country, yet bounded by his station, so as he (his  father) resolved to seek employment for him abroad; but no sooner had he  gone to France, but Glengarry most outrageously, without any cause, and  against all equity and law convocates multitudes of people and invades his  estates, sacking, burning, and destroying all.  Kenneth's friends sent John Mackenzie of Tollie to inform him of these wrongs, whereupon he made a  speedy return to an affair so urgent, and so suitable to his genius, for as he  never offered wrong so he never suffered any.  His heat did not  overwhelm his wit, for he took a legal procedure, obtained a commission  of fire and sword against Glengarry and his complices, which he  prosecuted so bravely as in a short time by himself and his brother he soon  forced them to retreat from his lands, and following them to their own  bills, he soon dissipated and destroyed them, that young Glengarry and  many others of their boldest and most outrageous were killed, and the rest  forced to shelter themselves amongst the other Macdonalds in the islands  and remote Highlands, leaving all their estates to Kenneth's disposal.

This tribe of the Clan Ranald seem to have been too barbarous for even  those lawless times, while by a strange contumacy in latter times, a  representative of that ancient family pertinaciously continued  to proclaim   its  infamy and  downfall  by the adherence to the wild strain of bagpipe music (their family pibroch called Cillechriost), at once indicative of its  shame  and  submission. Kenneth's character and policies were of a  higher order, and in the result he was everywhere the gainer by them."

He  was supported by Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Redcastle; and by his own  brothers--Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach, Alexander of Coul, and  Alexander of Kilcoy, all men of more than ordinary intelligence and  intrepidity.

Lord Kenneth married, first, Ann, daughter of George Ross, IX. of Balnagown, with issue--

I.  Colin Ruadh, his successor, afterwards created first Earl of Seaforth.

II.  John of Lochslinn, who married Isobel, eldest daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, and died without lawful male issue.

III.  Kenneth, who died unmarried.

IV.  Barbara, who married Donald, Lord Reay.

V.  Janet, who married Sir Donald Macdonald, VIII. of Sleat, Baronet, with issue, his heir and successor, and others.

Kenneth married, secondly, Isobel, daughter of Sir Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, by whom he had--

VI.  Alexander, who died without issue.

VII.  George,  who  afterwards  succeeded  Colin  as second Earl of  Seaforth.

VIII.  Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine, whose male line has  been proved extinct.

IX.  Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn.  Simon was twice married  and left a numerous offspring, who will afterwards be more particularly referred to, his descendants having since the death of "the Last of the  Seaforths" in 1815, without surviving male issue, carried on the male  representation of the ancient family of Kintail.

X.  Sibella, who married,, first, John Macleod, XIV. of Harris; secondly, Alexander Fraser, Tutor of Lovat; and thirdly, Patrick Grant,  Tutor of Grant, second son of Sir John Grant of Freuchie.

He died in February, 1611, in the forty-second year of his age; was buried "with great triumph" at Chanonry, ["As is proved by an old MS.  record kept by the Kirk Session of Inverness, wherein is this entry:--`Upon the penult day of February 1611 My Lord Mackenzie died in the Chanonrie of Ross and was buried 28th  April anno foresaid in the Chanonrie Kirk with great triumph.'"--Allangrange Service] and was succeeded by his second and eldest  surviving son,


XIII.  COLIN  FIRST  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,


AND  SECOND  LORD  MACKENZIE  OF  KINTAIL, a minor only  fourteen years old when his father died.  On the 16th of July, 1611, a  Royal precept is issued under the Signet to the Sheriff of Inverness directing him to have all brieves of inquest obtained by Colin, Lord  Mackenzie of Kintail, for serving him nearest and lawful heir to the late Kenneth Mackenzie, Lord of Kintail, his father, in all lands and annual-rents wherein his father died, last vested and seased, proclaimed and put to  the knowledge of an inquest, notwithstanding the minority of the said  Colin, "whereupon we have dispensed and by these present dispense" with  that objection, providing always that the dispensation be not prejudicial to  the donator of the ward of the said late Kenneth's lands in the matter of the mails, fermes, and duties of the same during the time of the ward  thereof.

On the 16th of August, 1611, a proclamation is issued to the  Highland chiefs, following upon one granted to Sir Roderick Mackenzie  of Coigeach, as Tutor of Kintail, and four other leaders of the clan, on the  11th of June preceding, against assisting Neil Macleod and the other  rebels of the Lewis, who had risen in arms against the Tutor, in the  following terms:--

Forasmuch as the barbarous and rebellious thieves and limmers of the Lewis, who have been suppressed and in some measure kept in subjection and obedience these years bygone, taking new breath and courage upon occasion of the decease of Kenneth, Lord Kintail, who was  his Majesty's justice and commissioner in these bounds, they have now of  late risen in arms in a professed and avowed rebellion against the Tutor of  Kintail, whom his Majesty and his Council have authorised and  constituted in that place of justiciary possessed by his deceased brother within the Lewis, and intend, with their whole power and force, not only  to withstand and resist the said Tutor of Kintail in the advancement of his  Majesty's authority and service within the Lewis, but to prosecute himself  and his Majesty's good subjects attending upon him with all hostility--wherein they presume of farther backing and assistance, upon some  foolish apprehension that the clansmen of the Isles who have given their obedience to his Majesty, and now stands under his Majesty's good grace,  shall make shipwreck of their faith, credit, and promised obedience, and  join with them in their detestable rebellion. And although his Majesty, in  the sincerity of his royal heart, cannot apprehend any such disloyalty or treachery in the person of the clansmen of the Isles, who have had so large  a proof of his Majesty's clemency, benignity, and favour, that now, so  unworthily and unnecessarily, they will reject his Majesty's favour, and, to the inevitable hazard and peril of their estates, join with these miserable  miscreants in their rebellion yet to take away all pretext of excuse from them, and to make them the more inexcusable if wilfully, traitorously, and  maliciously they will suffer themselves to be carried in such an imminent danger, the King's Majesty and Lords of Secret Council ordain letters to  be directed to command, charge, and inhibit all and sundry, the inhabitants of the Isles and continent next adjacent, namely Donald Macdonald Gorm  of Sleat, Roderick Macleod of Dunvegan, called Macleod of Harris, Hugh  Mackay of Farr, Mackay his son and apparent heir, and MacNeill of Barra,  that none of them presume or take upon hand, under whatsoever colour or  pretence, to concur, fortify, or assist the said rebellious thieves and  limmers of the Lewis, nor to intercommune or join with them, supply  them with men, victual, powder, bullets, or any other thing consortable  unto them, nor to show them any kind of protection, consort, countenance, reset or supply, under the pain to be reputed, held, and esteemed as art and  partakers with them in their rebellion, and to be pursued and punished for  the same, as traitors to his Majesty and his country, with all vigour.

On the 28th of May, 1612, a commission, apparently first granted to those named in it on the 11th of June, 1611, but of which the original is  not given in the published Records of the Privy Council, "almost expired" at the first-named date, and was renewed to the same persons--the Tutor  of Kintail, Colin Mackenzie of Killin, Murdo Mackenzie of Kernsary,  Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, and Kenneth Mackenzie of Darochmaluag.

It is to the same effect as and in almost identical terms with the commission issued in favour of Kenneth, Lord Kintail, on the 19th of July,  1610 (given at length at pp. 193-94), and it confers full powers on the  Tutor and his colleagues for the pursuit and apprehension of Neil Macleod and his fellow rebels in the Lewis.

A complaint is made on the 4th of March, 1613, by Sir William Oliphant, the King's Advocate, that all the chieftains and principal men of  the Isles and mainland next adjacent having made their submission to his  Majesty, "there only resteth Neil Macleod, called the Traitor, rebellious and disobedient"  His accomplices are given as Malcolm Mac Rory  MacLeod William Mac Rory Macleod, his brother, John Dubh Mac Angus  Mac Gillemhichell, Gillecallum Mac Ian Mhic-ant-Sagairt, Murdo and  Donald Mac Ian Mhic-an-t-Sagairt, Donald and Rory, sons to Neil  Macleod, and Donald Mac Ian Duibh--the Brieve.  They are stated to have  maintained open rebellion in the Lewis for some years past, "but after  their strength and starting hoill," called Berissay, had been attacked by the  Tutor of Kintail and others in the King's name they fled to the bounds and  country of Donald Mac Allan of Ellantirrim, where they were received  and supplied by him and several others, whose names are given, "despite the proclamation of the commission against the resett of rebels made at  Inverness," some time before.  The resetters, to the number of nine, are  denounced rebels and at the born.

At a meeting of the Council held on the 28th of April Roderick Macleod of Harris is charged to deliver up to the Tutor of Kintail within twenty days after the charge five of Neil Macleod's accomplices who had  been apprehended by Roderick's brother Alexander.  These are Malcolm  and William, "sons to the late Neil Macleod, called the Traitor," Murdo  Mac Ian Mhic-an-t-Sagairt, Malcolm Mac Ian Mhic-an-t-Sagairt, and  Donald Mac Angus, "who were the chief actors and ringleaders in all the  treasonable and rebellious attempts committed and perpetrated upon his  Majesty's peaceable and good subjects within the Lewis these divers years bygone.

On the 20th of May a commission is issued in favour of the Tutor, Roderick MacLeod of Dunvegan and Harris, and John Grant of Grant, for  the apprehension of Allan Mac Allaster, in Kilchoan, Knoydart, and  several others of his relatives, for the murder of Ronald Mac Angus Gearr,  and also, at the instance of Donald Mac Angus of Glengarry, for not  finding caution to appear before the Justice for going by night armed with  "daggs and pistolletts" to the lands of Laggan Achadrom in Glengarry, and setting fire to the houses there and destroying them with all their  plenishing.  They are afterwards apprehended, and on the 8th of February, 1614, a commission to try them is issued in favour of the Sheriff of  Inverness and his deputies.  In the meantime they are lodged in the  tolbooth of that town.

The Tutor must have become responsible for Donald Gorm  Macdonald, for on the 3rd of June, 1613, there is an entry declaring that "in respect of the personal compearance of Donald Gorm of Sleat" before the Privy Council their Lordships "exoner and relieve Rory Mackenzie of  Coigeach of the acts" whereby he became acted for the entry of Macdonald before them on the last Council day of May preceding, and he  is declared "free of said acts in all time coming."  On the 24th of the same  month a commission is issued to Roderick, Mr Colin Mackenzie of Killin,  Murdo Mackenzie of Kernsary, Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, and  Kenneth Mackenzie of Davochmaluag, to pass to the Lewis and apprehend  Roderick and Donald Macleod, sons of Neil who had been executed at  Edinburgh in the preceding April; William and Roderick Macleod,  brothers of Malcolm, son of Rory Macleod, sometime of the Lewis;  Donald Mac Ian Duibh--the Brieve, Murdo Mac Angus Mhic-an-t-Sagairt,  Donald, his brother, Gillecallum Caogach Mac-an-t-Sagairt, John Dubh  Mac Angus Mac Gillemhichell, Murdo Mac Torquil Blair, John Roy and  Norman, sons of Torquil Blair, Donald Mac Neill Mhic Finlay,  Gillecallum Mac Allan Mhic Finlay, and Donald Mac Dhomhnuill Mac  Gillechallum, "actors in the first rebellion in the Lewis against the  gentlemen venturers," all of whom bad been denounced as rebels on the  2nd of February the same year.  This commission is renewed for twelve  months on the 21st of June, 1614, and proclamation is ordered at  Inverness and other places, charging all the inhabitants of the North Isles, and within the bounds of the lands, heritages, possessions, offices and  bailliaries pertaining to Colin, Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, except persons  of the name of Fraser, Ross, and Munro, and their tenants and servants, to  assist the commissioners in apprehending those named in the former  commission.

On the 30th of July, 1613, in a long list of 121 persons before the Council from the County of Inverness, which then included Ross, and fined for the reset of the Clan Macgregor, Sir Roderick Mackenzie of  Coigeach, as Tutor of Kintail, has ?000 against his name, by far the  largest sum in the list, the next to him being his own uncle, Roderick Mor  Mackenzie I. of Redcastle, with 4000 merks. There seems to have been  some difficulty as to the settlement of these heavy fines, for on the 27th of  October following, there is a missive before the Council from the King  "anent the continuation granted to the Tutor of Kintail, Mr John and Rory Mackenzies, for payment of their fines," and directions are given  accordingly that no new continuation be granted.

In 1614, while the Tutor was busily engaged in the island of Lewis, discussions broke out between different branches of the Camerons, instigated by the rival claims of the Marquis of Huntly and the Earl of  Argyll.  The latter had won over the aid of Allan MacDhomhnuill Dubh,  chief of the clan, while Huntly secured the support of Erracht, Kinlochiel,  and Glen Nevis, and, by force, placed them in possession of all the lands belonging to the chief's adherents who supported Argyll.  Allan, however, managed to deal out severe retribution to his enemies, who were  commanded by Lord Enzie, and, as is quaintly said, "teaching ane lesson  to the rest of kin that are alqui in what form they shall carry themselves to  their chief hereafter."  The Marquis obtained a commission from the King  to suppress these violent proceedings, in virtue of which he called out all  his Majesty's loyal vassals to join him.  Kintail and the Tutor demurred, and submitted the great difficulties and trials they had experienced in  reducing the Lewis to good and peaceable government as their excuse, and  they were exempted from joining Huntly's forces by a special commission  from the King.  Closely connected as it is with the final possession of the  island by the House of Kintail, it is here given--

"James Rex,--James, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, to all and sundry our lieges, and  subjects whom it effeirs to whose knowledge this our letters shall come  greeting.  For as much as we have taken great pains and travails, and  bestown great charge and expense for reducing the Isles of our kingdom to our obedience:  And the same Isles being now settled in a reasonable way  of quietness, and the chieftains thereof having come in and rendered their  obedience to us  there rests none of the Isles rebellious, but only the  Lewis, which being inhabitated by a number of godless and lawless  people, trained up from their youth in all kinds of ungodliness:  They can hardly be reclaimed from their impurities and barbarities, and induced to embrace a quiet and peaceable form of living  so that we have been  constrained from time to time to employ our cousin, the Lord Kintail, who rests with God, and since his decease the Tutor of Kintail his brother, and  other friends of that House in our service against the rebels of the Lewis,  with ample commission and authority to suppress their insolence and to  reduce that island to our obedience, which service has been prosecuted  and followed these divers years by the power, friendship and proper  services of the House of Kintail, without any kind of trouble and charge or  expense to us, or any support or relief from their neighbours and in the  prosecution of that service, they have had such good and happy success, as  divers of the rebels have been apprehended and executed by justice:  But  seeing our said service is not yet fully accomplished, nor the Isle of the  Lewis settled in a solid and perfect obedience, we have of late renewed  our former commission to our cousin Colin, now Lord of Kintail, and to  his Tutor and some other friends of his house, and they are to employ their  whole power, and service in the execution of the said commission, which being a service importing highly our honour, and being so necessary and  expedient for the peace and quiet of the whole islands, and for the good of  our subjects, haunting the trade of fishing in the isles, the same ought not  to be interrupted upon any other intervening occasion, and our  commissioners and their friends ought not to be distracted therefrom for  giving of their concurrence in our services:  Therefore, we, with advice of  the Lords of our Privy Council, have given and granted our licence to our said cousin Colin. Lord of Kintail, and to his friends, men, tenants and servants, to remain and bide at home from all osts, raids, wars, assemblings, and gatherings to be made by George, Marquis of Huntly, the  Earl of Enzie, his son, or any other our Lieutenants, Justices, or  Commissioners, by sea or land either for the pursuit of Allan Cameron of  Lochiel and his rebellious complices, or for any other cause or occasion  whatsoever, during or within the time of our commission foresaid granted  against the Lewis, without pain or danger to be incurred by our said cousin  the Lord of Kintail and his friends in their persons, lands or goods;  notwithstanding whatsoever our proclamation made or to be made in the  contrary whatever, and all pains contained in it, we dispense by these presents, discharging hereby our Justices, Justice Clerk, and all our Judges  and Ministers of law, of all calling, accusing, or any way proceeding  against them, for the cause aforesaid, and of their officers in that part.

Given under our signet at Edinburgh, the 14th day of September, 1614,  and of our reign the 12th, and 48 years. Read, passed, and allowed in  Council.  Alexander, Chancellor.  Hamilton, Glasgow, Lothian, Binning."

Having procured this commission, the Mackenzies were in a  position to devote their undivided attention to the Lewis and their other affairs at home; and from this date that island principality remained in the  continuous possession of the family of Kintail and Seaforth, until in 1844,  it was sold to the late Sir James Matheson.  The people ever after adhered  most loyally to the illustrious house to whom they owed peace and  prosperity such as was never before experienced in the history of the  island.

The  commission proved otherwise of incalculable benefit to  Kintail; for it not only placed him in a position to pacify and establish good order in the Lewis with greater ease, but at the same time provided  his Lordship with undisturbed security in his extensive possessions on the  mainland at a time when the most violent disorders prevailed over every  other district of the West Highlands and Isles.

On the 2nd of February, 1615, a commission is signetted in favour of Sir Roderick, Mr Colin Mackenzie of Strathgarve, Mr Alexander Mackenzie of Kinnock, and Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, to receive Malcolm Caogach Mac Jan Mhic-an-t-Sagairt, Callum Dubh Mac  Allaster, Donald Mac Angus Mac Gillechallum, Gillecallum Mac Ian  Riabhaich, and James Mac Ian Duibh, from the Magistrates of Edinburgh,  to carry them north, and to keep them in ward until everything is ready for  trying them for murder, mutilation, theft, reset, and other crimes.

At a meeting of the Council held at Edinburgh on the 9th of February, 1615, Neil Macleod's two sons, Norman and Roderick, are set  at liberty on condition that they transport themselves out of the King's  dominions and never return.  They appeared personally "and acted and  obliged them that within the space of forty days after their relief furth of  their ward, where they remain within the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, they  shall depart and pass furth of his Majesty's dominions and never return  again within the same during their lifetimes, under the pain of death; and  in the meantime, till their passing furth of his Majesty's dominions, that  they shall not go benorth the water of Tay, under the said pain, to be executed upon them without favour if they fail in the premises. And they gave their great oath to perform the conditions of this present act; and  further, the said Norman declared that he would renounce, like as by the  tenour of this present act he does renounce, his Majesty's remission and  pardon granted unto him, and all favour and benefit that he could acclaim by the said remission, in case he failed in the premises.  In respect  whereof the said Lords ordained the said Norman and Rory to be put to  liberty and fredom furth of the Tolbooth"; and a warrant was issued to the Provost and  Bailies of Edinburgh to give effect to their Lordships' decision.  The Tutor appeared personally, and in name of Lord Kintail  consented to the liberation of the prisoners.  He at the same time protested  that neither he nor his chief should be held any longer responsible for the  expenses of maintaining Norman, now that lie was at liberty, and he was  accordingly relieved from further charge on that account.

On the 26th of April following the Tutor receives a commission for the pursuit and apprehension of Coll MacGillespic Macdonald, Malcolm Mac Rory Macleod, and other fugitives, described as "the Islay  rebels," who had fled from justice, should they land in the Lewis or in any  other of the territories belonging to Lord Mackenzie of Kintail.  In order  that he may the better attend to this duty, along with several other heads of  clans named in the same commission for their respective districts, and as "it is necessary that the commissioners foresaid remain at home and on nowise come to this burgh (Edinburgh) to pursue or defend in any actions  or causes concerning them," their Lordships continued all actions against them until the 1st of November next, ordaining the said actions "to rest  and sleep" till that date.

On the same day, a second dispensation under the signet is  addressed to the Sheriff of Inverness and his deputes in favour of Lord Colin, requesting that despite his minority he be served heir to his father,  the late Kenneth, Lord Mackenzie of Kintail.  On the 25th of June  following he is ordered to provide twenty-five men as part of an  expedition for the pursuit of Sir James Macdonald and Coll  MacGillespick.  In June, 1616, he is appointed a Commissioner of the  Peace for the Sheriffdom of Elgin and Forres.

On the outbreak of a new rebellion in the Lewis another  commission, dated the 28th of August, 1616, to last for twelve months,  was issued by the Privy Council, in favour of the Tutor and other leading men of the clan, couched in the following terms:--

Forasmuch as the King's Majesty having taken great pains and troubles and bestowed great charges and expenses for reducing of the  Islands of this Kingdom and continent next adjacent to his Majesty's  obedience, and for establishing of religion, peace, justice, order, and  government, within the same, in the which his Majesty by the force and  power of his royal authority has had such a happy and good success as  almost the whole chieftains of clans and headsmen of the Isles are come in  and in all dutiful submission doth acknowledge his Majesty's obedience,  so that now there is no part of the Isles rebellious but the Lewis--the  chieftains whereof, as from time to time they raise up in credit, power, and friendship among the barbarous inhabitants thereof, have been apprehended and by course of justice have suffered their deserved punishment, and at last the traitor Neil, who was last ringleader of that rebellious society, being apprehended and executed to the death, whereby  it was presumed that in him all further trouble, misery, and unquietness in  the Lewis should have ceased and rested; notwithstanding it is of truth that  Malcolm Macleod, son to Rory Macleod, sometime of the Lewis, has  embraced that rebellious and treasonable course wherein his treacherous  predecessors miserably perished, and having associated himself with the  persons following--Rory and Donald Macleod, sons to the said umquhile  Neil, and William and Rory Macleod, brothers to the said Malcolm,  Donald Mac Ian Duibh-the Brieve, Murdo Mac Angus  Mhic-an-t-Sagairt,  Donald Mac Angus Mhic-an-t-Sagairt his brother, Gillecallum Caogach Mac-an-t-Sagairt, John Dubh Mac Angus Mac Gillemichell, Murdo Mac Torquil Blair, Norman Mac Torquil Blair, John Roy Mac Torquil Blair, Donald Mac Neil Mac Finlay, Gillecallum Mac Allan Mac Finlay, and Donald Mac Dhomhuill Mac Gillechallum--who were all actors in the first rebellion moved and raised in the Lewis against the gentlemen venturers who were directed by his Majesty there, and did prosecute that  rebellion against them with fire and sword and all kinds of hostility, for  the which and for other thievish and treasonable crimes committed by  them they and every one of them were upon the second day of February,  1612, orderly denounced rebels and put to the horn--they have now  combined and banded themselves in a most treacherous, disloyal, and  pernicious course and resolution to maintain a public rebellion in the  Lewis, and to oppose themselves with their whole power and strength  against all and whatsoever courses shall be further taken by his Majesy's direction for repressing of their insolence; whereby is not only all  intercourse and trade which by his Majesty's good subjects in the  Lowlands would be entertained amongst them, made frustrate and void,  but the preparative of this rebellion in consequence and example is most  dangerous, and if the same be not substantially repressed, may give further  boldness to others who are not yet well settled in a perfect obedience, to  break loose.  Accordingly, as it is "a discredit to the country that such a  parcel of ground possessed by a number of miserable caitiffs shall be  suffered to continue rebellious, whereas the whole remanent Isles are  become peaceable and obedient; and whereas the said Lords, for  repressing of the insolence of the whole of the rebellious thieves and  limmers of the Lewis and reducing them to his Majesty's obedience,  passed and expede a commission--to Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach,  Tutor of Kintail, Mr Colin Mackenzie of Killin, Murdo Mackenzie, their brother, Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, and Kenneth Mackenzie of Davochmaluag, for reducing of the limmers of the Lewis to obedience," which commission "is now expired, and the said thieves, taking new  courage and breath thereupon, are become more insolent than formerly  they were, and have lately made a very open insurrection and committed  slaughter and bloodshed within the said bounds, in contempt of God and  disregard of his Majesty's laws";  therefore his Majesty and the Lords of Council, understanding of the "good affection" of the said persons, now  reconstitute them commissioners for the reduction of the said rebels, with  full power and authority, etc. (as in previous commissions granted them)  and, "for the better execution of this commission, to take the lymphads,  galleys, birlinns, and boats in the Lewis and in the next adjacent Isles for  the furtherance of his Majesty's service,--the said justices being always  answerable to the owners of the said lymphads, galleys, birlinns, and boats  for delivery of the same at the finishing of his Majesty's said service."   Proclamation was to be made at Inverness and other places charging the  lieges within the bounds of the North Isles and within the lands of Colin,  Lord of Kintail (except those of the name of Fraser, Ross, and Munro,  their tenants and servants), to assist the said commissioners in the  execution of their duty.

By a commission dated the same day, Sir Roderick, along with  Simon Lord Lovat, and Urquhart of Cromarty, is appointed, for the trial in  the Burgh of Inverness of all resetters within thc Sheriffdom of the county  of any traitors in the Isles, the commission to last for one year.

In 1618, along with Grant of Grant, he assisted the Mackintosh against the Marquis of Huntly.  On the 18th of June, 1622, he is one of the  chiefs named in a commission against the Camerons, among the others  being Mackintosh of Mackintosh, Sir Roderick Macleod, XIII. of Harris,  Grant of Grant, Sir John Campbell of Calder, John Grant of Glenmoriston,  Patrick Grant of Ballindalloch, and John Macdonald, Captain of  Clanranald. [See Mackenzie's History of the Camerons, p. 86.]

At the death of Kenneth, Lord Kintail, the estates were very  heavily burdened in consequence of the wars with Glengarry and various family difficulties and debts.  His lordship, in these circumstances, acted  very prudently, as we have seep, in appointing his brother, Sir Roderick  Mackenzie I. of Coigeach--in whose judgment he placed the utmost  confidence--Tutor to his son and successor, Lord Colin. Knowing the  state of affairs--the financial and numberless other difficulties which  stared him in the face, at the same time that the family were still much  involved with the affairs of the Lewis, and other broils on the mainland--Sir Roderick hesitated to accept the great responsibilities of the position,  but, to quote one of the family manuscripts, "all others refusing to take the  charge he set resolutely to the work.  The first thing he did was to assault the rebels in the Lewis, which he did so suddenly, after his brother's  death, and so unexpectedly to them, that what the Fife Adventurers had  spent many years and much treasure in without success, he, in a few  months, accomplished; for having by his youngest brother Alexander,  chased Neil, the chief commander of all the rest, from the Isle, pursued  him to Glasgow, where, apprehending him, he delivered him to the  Council, who executed  him immediately. He returned to the Lewis,  banished those whose deportment he most doubted, and settled the rest as  peaceable tenants to his nephew; which success he had, with the more  facility, because he had the only title of succession to it by his wife, and  they looked on him as their just master.  From thence he invaded  Glengarry, who was again re-collecting his forces; but at his coming they dissipated and fled.  He pursued Glengarry to Blairy in Moray, where he  took him; but willing to have his nephew's estate settled with  conventional right rather than legal, he took Low-countrymen as sureties  for Glengarry's peaceable deportment, and then contracted with him for the reversion of the former wadsets which Colin of Kintail had acquired of  him, and for a ratification and new disposition of all his lands, formerly  sold to Colin, and paid him thirty thousand merks in money for this, and  gave him a title to Lagganachindrom, which, till then, he possessed by  force, so that Glengarry did ever acknowledge it as a favour to be  overcome by such enemies, who over disobligements did deal both justly  and generously.  Rory employed himself therefore in settling his pupil's  estate, which he did to that advantage that ere his minority passed he freed his estate, leaving him master of an opulent fortune and of great superiorities, for be acquired the superiority of Troternish with the heritable  Stewartry of the Isle of Skye, to his pupil, the superiority of Raasay and  some other Isles.  At this time, Macleod, partly by law and partly by force,  had possessed himself of Sleat and Troternish, a great part of Macdonald's  estate.  Rory, now knighted by King James, owned Macdonald's cause as  an injured neighbour, and by the same method that Macleod possessed  himself of Sleat and Troternish he recovered both from him, marrying the heir thereof Sir Donald Macdonald, to his niece, sister to Lord Colin, and  caused him to take the lands of Troternish holden of his pupil.  Shortly  after that he took the management of Maclean's estate, and recovered it  from the Earl of Argyll, who had fixed a number of debts and pretences on it, so by his means all the Isles were composed and accorded in their  debates and settled in their estates, whence a full peace amongst them,  Macneill of Barra excepted, who had been an hereditary outlaw.  Him, by  commission, Sir Rory reduced, took him in his fort of Kisemull, and  carried him prisoner to Edinburgh, where he procured his remission.  The King gifted his estate to Sir Rory, who restored it to Macneill for a sum not exceeding his expenses, and holding it of himself in feu.  This Sir  Rory, as he was beneficial to all his relations, establishing them in free  and secure fortunes, purchased considerable lands to himself in Ross and  Moray, besides the patrimony left him by his father, the lands of Coigeach  and others, which, in lieu of the Lewis, were given him by his brother.

His  death was regretted as a public calamity, which was in September, 1626,  in the 48th year of his age.  To Sir Rory succeeded Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat; and to him Sir George Mackenzie, of whom to write might be  more honour to him than of safety to the writer as matters now stand."  [The Applecross Mackenzie MS.]

We shall now draw to some extent on the family manuscripts. The  narrative in this form will add considerable interest to the information  already given under this head from official sources. Sir Roderick was a  most determined man, and extremely fertile in such schemes as might  enable him to gain any object he had in view.  One of his plans, connected  with Mackenzie's possession of the Lewis, in its barbarous and cruel  details, almost equalled the Raid of Cillechriost.  Neil Macleod,  accompanied by his nephews, Malcolm, William, and Roderick, the three  sons of Roderick Og; the four sons of Torquil Blair; and thirty of their  more determined and desperate followers, retired, when Kintail obtained  possession of the whole of the Lewis, to the impregnable rock of  Berrissay, at the back of the island, to which Neil, as a precautionary  measure, had been for years previously sending food and other necessaries as a provision for future necessity.  Here they held out for three years, where they were a source of great annoyance to the Tutor and his  followers.  On a little rock opposite Berrissay, Neil, by a well-directed shot killed one of the Tutor's followers named Donald MacDhonnchaidh  Mhic Ian Ghlais, and wounded another called Tearlach MacDhomh'uill  Roy Mhic Fhionnlaidh Ghlais.  This exasperated their leader so much that, all other means having failed to oust Neil from his impregnable position, the Tutor conceived the inhuman scheme of gathering together all the  wives and children of the men who were on Berrissay, and all those in the island who were in any way related to them by blood or marriage, and,  having placed them on a rock exposed only during low water, so near  Berrissay that Neil and his companions could see and hear them, Sir  Roderick and his men avowed that they would leave them--innocent,  helpless women and children--on the rock to be overwhelmed and  drowned on the return of the tide, if Neil and his companions did not at  once surrender the rock.  Macleod knew, by stern experience, that even to the carrying out such a fiendish crime, the promise of the Tutor, once  given, was as good as his bond.  It is due to the greater humanity of Neil  that the terrible position of the helpless women and children and their  companions appalled him so much that he decided immediately upon  yielding up the rock on condition that he and his followers should be  allowed to leave the Lewis with their lives.  It cannot be doubted that but  for Macleod's more merciful conduct the ferocious act would have been  committed by Sir Roderick and his followers; and we have to thank the  less barbarous instincts of their opponents for saving the clan Mackenzie from the commission of a crime which would have secured to its perpetrators the execration of posterity.

After Neil had left the rock he proceeded privately, during the night, to his cousin Sir Roderick Mor Macleod, XIII.	of Harris. The  Tutor learning this caused Macleod to be charged, under pain of treason  and forfeiture, to deliver him up to the Council. Realising the danger of  his position, Macleod prevailed upon Neil and his son Donald to  accompany him to Edinburgh, and to seek forgiveness from the King; and  under pretence of this he delivered them both up on arriving in the city, where Neil, in April, 1613, was at once executed and his son afterwards  banished out of the kingdom.  This treacherous conduct on the part of  Macleod of Harris cannot be excused, but it was a fair return for a similar  act of treachery of which Neil had been guilty against another some little time before.

When on Berrissay, he met with the captain of a pirate, with whom he entered into a mutual bond by which they were to help each other, both being outlaws.  The captain agreed to defend the rock from the seaward  side while Neil made his incursions on shore. They promised faithfully to  live and die together, and to make the agreement more secure, it was  arranged that the stranger should marry Neil's aunt, a daughter of Torquil  Blair.  The day fixed for the marriage having arrived, and Neil and his  adherents having discovered that the captain had several articles of value  aboard his vessel, he, when the master of the pirate was naturally off his  guard, treacherously seized the ship, and sent the captain and crew  prisoners to Edinburgh, expecting that in this way he might secure pardon for himself in addition to possession of all the stores on board.  By order  of the Council the sailors were all hanged at Leith.  Much of the silver and  gold taken from the vessel Neil carried to Harris, where probably it helped  to tempt Macleod, as it previously tempted himself to break faith with  Neil. The official account of these incidents has been already given at  pages 194-95.

Sir Robert Gordon writing about this period but referring to 1477, says--"From the ruins of the family of Clandonald, and some of the neighbouring Highlanders, and also by their own virtue, the surname of the Clankenzie, from small beginnings, began to flourish in these bounds; and by the friendship and favour of the house of Sutherland, chiefly of  Earl John, fifth of that name, Earl of Sutherland (whose Chamberlains  they were, in receiving the rents of the Earldom of Ross to his use) their  estate afterwards came to great height, yea above divers of their more  ancient neighbours.  The chief and head of the family at this day is Colin  Mackenzie, Lord of Kintail, now created Earl of Seaforth." [Gordon's  Earldom of Sutherland, p. 77.]  If the family was so powerful in 1477,  what must its position have been under Lord Colin?  The Earl of Cromarty  says that "This Colin was a noble person of virtuous endowments, beloved of all good men, especially his Prince.  He acquired and settled the right of  the superiority of Moidart and Arisaig, the Captain of Clandonald's lands,  which his father, Lord Kenneth, formerly claimed right to but lived not to  accomplish it.  Thus, all the Highlands and Islands from Ardnamurchan to  Strathnaver were either Mackenzie's property, or under his vassalage,  some few excepted, and all about him were tied to his family by very strict  bonds of friendship or vassalage, which, as it did beget respect from many it be got envy in others, especially his equals."

It is difficult to discover any substantial aid which the Mackenzies ever received from the Earls of Sutherland of the kind stated by Sir Robert  Gordon.  We have carefully perused the whole of the work from which the  above quotation is made, and are unable to discover a single instance prior  to 1477, where the Sutherlands were of any service whatever to the family of Kintail; and the assumption is only another instance of that quality of  partiality to his own family," so characteristic of Sir Robert, and for which even the publishers of his work deemed it necessary to apologise in the  Advertisement prefaced to his History of the Earldom of Sutherland.

They "regret the hostile feelings which he expresses concerning others  who were equally entitled to complain of aggression on the part of those  whom he defends," but "strict fidelity to the letter of the manuscript"  would not allow them to omit "the instances in which this disposition  appears."  After Mackenzie's signal victory over the Macdonalds at Blar-na-Pairc, and Hector Roy's prowess at Drumchait, the Earl of Sutherland  began to think that the family of Mackenzie, rapidly growing in power and influence, might be of some service in the prosecution of his own plans  and in extending his power, and he accordingly entered into the bond of  manrent with him already noticed.  It has been seen that, for a long time after, the advantages of this arrangement were entirely on the side of the  Sutherlands, as at the battle of Brora and other places previously  mentioned.  The appointment of Kintail as Deputy-Chamberlain of the  Earldom of Ross was due to and in acknowledgment of these signal and  repeated services, and the obligations and advantages of the office were  found to be reciprocal.  The first and only instance in which the Earl's  connection with Mackenzie is likely to have been of service in the field is  on the occasion when, in 1605, he sent "six score" men to support him  against Glengarry, and these, it has been seen, had fled before they saw the  enemy. So much for the favour and friendship of the House of Sutherland and its results before and after 1477.

Lord Colin became involved in legal questions with the Earl of  Argyll about the superiority of Moidart and Arisaig, and thus spent most of the great fortune accumulated for him by his uncle the Tutor; but he  was ultimately successful against Argyll.  He was frequently at the Court of James VI., with whom he was a great favourite, and in 1623 he was  raised to the peerage by the title of Earl of Seaforth, and Viscount  Fortrose.  From his influence at Court he was of great service to his  followers and friends; while he exerted himself powerfully and steadily  against those who became his enemies from jealousy of his good fortune  and high position.

He imposed high entries and rents upon his Kintail and West Coast tenants, which they considered a most "grievous imposition."  In Lord  Kenneth's time and that of his predecessors, the people had their lands at  very low rates.  After the wars with Glengarry the inhabitants of the West  Coast properties devoted themselves more steadily to the improvement of  their stock and lands, and accumulated considerable means.  The Tutor,  discovering this, took advantage of their prosperity and imposed a heavy  entry or grassum on their tacks payable every five years.  "I shall give you  one instance thereof.  The tack of land called Muchd in Letterfearn, as I was told by Farquhar Mac Ian Oig, who paid the first entry out of it to the  Tutor, paid of yearly duty before but 40 merks Scots, a cow and some  meal, which cow and meal was usually converted to 20 merks  but the  Tutor imposed 1000 merks of entry upon it for a five years' tack.  This  made the rent very little for four years of the tack, but very great and  considerable for the first year. The same method proportionately was  taken with the rest of the lands, and continued so during the Tutor's and Colin's time, but Earl George, being involved in great troubles, contracted  so much debt that he could not pay his annual rents yearly and support his own state, but was forced to delay his annual rents to the year of their  entry, and he divided the entry upon the five years with the people's  consent and approbation, so that the said land of Muchd fell to pay 280  merks yearly and no entry."  From this account, taken from the  contemporary Ardintoul Manuscript, it appears that the system of charging rent on the tenant's own improvements is an injustice of considerable  antiquity.

Colin "lived most of his time at Chanonry in great state and very magnificently.  He annually imported his wines from the Continent, and  kept a store for his wines, beers, and other liquors, from which he  replenished his fleet on his voyages round the West Coast and the Lewis,  when he made a circular voyage every year or at least every two years  round his own estates.  I have heard John Beggrie, who then served Earl  Colin, give an account of his voyages after the bere seed was sown at  Allan (where his father and grandfather had a great mains, which was  called Mackenzie's girnel or granary), took a Journey to the Highlands,  taking with him not only his domestic servants but several young  gentlemen of his kin, and stayed several days at Killin, whither he called  all his people of Strathconan, Strathbran, Strathgarve, and Brae Ross, and  did keep courts upon them and saw all things rectified.  From thence he  went to Inverewe, where all his Lochbroom tenants and others waited  upon him, and got all their complaints heard and rectified. It is scarcely  credible what allowance was made for his table of Scotch and French  wines during these trips amongst his people. From Inverewe he sailed to  the Lewis, with what might be called a small navy, having as many boats,  if not more loaded with liquors, especially wines and English beer, as he had under men. He remained in the Lewis for several days, until he  settled all the controversies arising among the people in his absence, and setting his land.  From thence he went to Sleat in the Isle of Skye, to Sir  Donald Macdonald, who was married to his sister Janet, and from that he  was invited to Harris, to Macleod's house, who was married to his sister  Sybilla.  While he tarried in these places the lairds, the gentlemen of the  Isles, and the inhabitants came to pay their respects to him, including  Maclean, Clanranald, Raasay, Mackinnon, and other great chiefs.  They  then convoyed him to Islandonain.  I have heard my grandfather, Mr  Farquhar MacRa (then Constable of the Castle), say that the Earl never  came to his house with less than 300 and sometimes 500 men.  The  Constable was bound to furnish them victuals for the first two meals, till my Lord's officers were acquainted to bring in his own customs. There  they consumed the remains of the wine and other liquors.  When all these  lairds and gentlemen took their leave of him, he called the principal men of Kintail, Lochalsh, and Lochcarron together, who accompanied him to  his forest of Monar, where they had a great and most solemn hunting day,  and from Monar he would return to Chanonry about the latter end of  July." [Ardintoul MS.]

He built the Castle of Brahan, which he thought of erecting where the old castle of Dingwall stood, or on the hill to the west of Dingwall, either of which would have been very suitable situations; but the Tutor  who had in view to erect a castle where he afterwards erected Castle Leod,  induced the Lord High Chancellor, Seaforth's father-in-law, to prevail  upon him to build his castle upon his own ancient inheritance, which he  subsequently did, and which was then one of the most stately houses in  Scotland.  He also added greatly to the Castle of Chanonry, and "as be was  diligent in secular affairs, so be and his lady were very pious and  religious." They went yearly to take the Sacraments from the Rev.  Thomas Campbell, minister of Carmichael, a good and religious man, and staid eight days with him; nor did their religion consist in form and  outward show.  They proved its reality by their good works. He had  usually more than one chaplain in his house.  He provided the kirks of the  Lewis without being obliged to do so, as also the five kirks of Kintail,  Lochalsh, Lochcarron, Lochbroom, and Gairloch, all of which he was  patron, with valuable books from London, the works of the latest and best authors, "whereof many are yet extant"  He also laid the foundation for a church in Strathconan and Strathbran, of which the walls are "yet to be  seen in Main in Strathconan, the walls being built above the height of a  man above the foundation, and he had a mind to endow it had he lived longer."  He mortified 4000 merks for the Grammar School of Chanonry,  and had several works of piety in his view to perform if his death had not  prevented it.  The last time he went to Court some malicious person,  envying his greatness and favour, laboured to give the King a bad  impression of him, as if he were not thoroughly loyal; but the King  himself was the first who told him what was said about him, which did not a little surprise and trouble the Earl, but it made no impression on the  King, who was conscious and sufficiently convinced of his loyalty and  fidelity.  After his return from Court his only son, Lord Alexander, died of  smallpox at Chanonry, on the 3d of June, 1629, to the great grief of all who knew him, but especially his father and mother.  His demise hastened  her death at Edinburgh, on the 20th February, 1631.  She was buried with  her father at Fife on the 4th of March; after which the Earl contracted a lingering sickness, which, for some time before his death, confined him to  his chamber, during which "he behaved most Christianly, putting his  house in order, giving donations to his servants, etc."  He died at  Chanonry on the 15th of April, 1633, in the 36th year of his age, and was buried there with his father on the 18th of May following, much lamented  and regretted by all who knew him.  The King sent a gentleman all the way to Chanonry to testify his respect and concern for him, and to attend his funeral, which took place, on the date already stated, with great pomp  and solemnity.  "Before his death he called his successor, George of  Kildene, to his bedside, and charged him with the protection of his family;  but above all to be kind to his men and followers, for that he valued  himself while he lived upon their account more than upon his great estate and fortune." [Ardintoul, Letterfearn, and other Family MSS.]  On the  occasion of his last visit to London the King complimented him on being  the best archer in Britain.

Colin married, first, Lady Margaret Seton, daughter of Alexander, Earl of Dunfermline, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, with issue--

I.  Alexander Lord Kintail, who died young.

II.  Anna, who married Alexander, second Lord Lindsay, who was created Earl of Balcarres by Charles II. in 1651.  By him Lady Anna had  two sons, Charles and Colin.  Charles succeeded his father, and died  unmarried.  Colin then became third Earl, and married Jane, daughter of  David, Earl of Northesk, by whom he had issue an only daughter, who  married Alexander Erikine, third Earl of Kellie.  Secondly, the Earl of  Balcarres married Jane, daughter of William, second Earl of Roxburgh, by  whom he had an only daughter, who married John Fleming, sixth Earl of  Wigton.  This Earl of Balcarres married a third time Margaret, daughter of  James Campbell, Earl of Loudon, by whom he had two sons, Alexander  and James.  Alexander succeeded his father, but died without issue, and  was succeeded by James, fifth Earl of Balcarres, from whom the present  line descends uninterruptedly, carrying along with it, in right of the said  Anna Mackenzie, daughter of Colin, first Earl of Seaforth, first Countess of Balcarres, the lineal representation of the ancient House of Kintail.

Anna married, secondly, Archibald, ninth Earl of Argyll, beheaded in  1685, and died in 1706.

III.  Jean, who married John, Master of Berriedale, with issue, George, sixth Earl of Caithness, who died without issue in 1676. She  afterwards married Lord Duffus, with issue, and died in 1648. His lordship died, as already stated, at Chanonry on the 15th of April, 1633, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Fortrose in a spot chosen by himself.  His son, Lord Alexander, having died before his  father, on the 3d of June, 1629, and Colin having had no other issue male,  he was succeeded by his brother,

XIV.  GEORGE,  SECOND  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,

THIRD  LORD  MACKENZIE  OF  KINTAIL, eldest son of Kenneth, the first Lord, by his second marriage.  During the life of his father and  brother he was known as George Mackenzie of Kildun.  In 1633 he was  "served heir male to his brother Colin, Earl of Seaforth, Lord Mackenzie  of Kintail, in the lands and barony of Ellandonnan, including the barony of  Lochalsh, in which was included the barony of the lands and towns of  Lochcarron, namely, the towns and lands of Auchnaschelloch, Coullin,  Edderacharron, Attadill, Ruychichan, Brecklach, Achachoull,   Delmartyne, with fishings in salt water and fresh, Dalcharlarie,  Arrinachteg, Achintie, Slumba, Doune, Stromcarronach, in the Earldom of  Ross, of the old extent of ?3 6s 8d, and also the towns of Kisserin, and lands of Strome, with fishings in salt and fresh water, and the towns and lands of Torridan with the pertinents of the Castle of Strome; Lochalsh, Lochcarron, and Kisserin, including the davach of Achvanie, the davach of Achnatrait, the davach of Stromcastell, Ardnagald, Ardneskan, and Blaad,  and the half davach of Sannachan, Rassoll, Meikle Strome, and Rerag, in  the Earldom of Ross, together of the old extent of ? 13s 4d." [Origines  Parochiales Scotiae, p. 401.]  He was served heir male to his father  Kenneth, Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, in the lands and barony of  Pluscardine, on the 14th of January, 1620; and had charters of Balmungie  and Avoch, on the 18th of July, 1635; of Raasay, on the 18th of February, 1637 and of Lochalsh, on the 4th of July, 1642.

His high position in the North, and his intimate friendship at this  period with the powerful House of Sutherland, is proved by the fact that  he and Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, on the 2d of November, 1633, stood  godfathers to George Gordon, second son of John, Earl of Sutherland; and  there cannot be any doubt that to the influence of the latter must mainly be  attributed Seaforth's vacillating conduct during the earlier years of the great civil wars which became the curse of Scotland for so many years  after. In 1635 the Privy Council, with the view of putting down the irregularities then prevalent in the Highlands, demanded securities from  the chiefs of clans, heads of families, and governors of counties, in  conformity with a general bond, previously agreed to, that they should be responsible  for their clans and surnames, men-tenants, and servants.

The  first called upon to give this security was the Earl of Huntly; then followed  the Earls of Sutherland and Seaforth, and afterwards Lord Lorn and all the  chiefs in the western and northern parts of the Kingdom.

In the following year the slumbering embers of religious  differences broke out into a general blaze all over the country.  Then  began those contentions about ecclesiastical questions, church discipline and liturgies, at all times fraught with the seeds of discontent and danger  to the common weal, and which in this case ultimately led to such sad and momentous consequences as only religious feuds can.  Charles I. was  playing the despot with his subjects, not only in Scotland, but in England.

He was governing without a Parliament, defying and trying to crush the  desires and aspirations of a people born to govern themselves and to be  free.  His infatuated attempt to introduce the Liturgy of the Church of England into the Calvinistic and Presbyterian pulpits of Scotland was as  insane as it was unavailing.  But his English as well as Scottish subjects  were at the same time almost in open rebellion for their liberties.  He tried  to put down the rising in Scotland by the sword, but his means and  military skill were unequal to the task.  He failed to impose the English Liturgy on his Scottish subjects, but his attempt to do so proved the deliverance of his English subjects from high-handed tyranny. It is only natural that in these circumstances Seaforth, though personally attached to  the King, should be found on the side of the Covenant, and that he should have joined the Assembly, the clergy, and the nobles in the Protest, and in  favour of the renewal of the Confession of Faith previously accepted and  confirmed by James VI. in 1580, 1581, and 1590, at the same time that  these several bodies entered into a covenant or bond of mutual defence among themselves against all opposition from whatever source.

The principal among the Northern nobles who entered into this engagement were the Earls of Seaforth and Sutherland, Lord Lovat, the  Rosses, Munroes, Grant of Grant, Mackintosh of Mackintosh, Innes, the  Sheriff of Moray, Kilravock, Cumming of Altyre, and the Tutor of Duffus.

These, with their followers under command of the Earl of Seaforth, who  was appointed General of the Covenanters north of the Spey, marched to  Morayshire, where they met the Royalists on the northern banks of the  river ready to oppose their advance. [On May 14, 1639, 4000 men met at  Elgin under the command of the Earl of Seaforth, and the gentlemen  following, viz.:--The Master of Lovat, the Master of Ray, George, brother  to the Earl of Sutherland, Sir James Sinclare of Murkle, Laird of Grant,  Young Kilravock, Sheriff of Murray, Laird of Innes, Tutor of Duffus,  Hugh Rose of Achnacloich, John Munro of Lemlare, etc.  They encamped  at Speyside, to keep the Gordons and their friends from entering Murray;  and they remained encamped till the pacification, which was signed June  18, was proclaimed, and intimated to them about June 22.--Shaw's MS.  History of Kilravock.]  An arrangement was here come to between  Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine, Seaforth's brother, on behalf of the  Covenanters, and a representative from the Gordons for their opponents,  that the latter should recross to the south side of the Spey, and that the  Highlanders should return home.  About the same time Seaforth received a  despatch from Montrose, then at Aberdeen and fighting for the Covenant,  intimating the pacification entered into on the 20th of June between the  King and his subjects at Berwick, and requesting Seaforth to disband his  army--an order which was at once obeyed.  Shortly after, however,  Montrose dissociated himself from the Covenanters, joined the King's  side and raised the Royal standard.  The Earl of Seaforth soon after this was suspected of lukewarmness for the Covenant.  In 1640 the King  arrived at York on his way north to reduce the Covenanting Scots, after  they had resolved to invade England, and, as a precautionary measure, to imprison or expel all suspected Royalists from the army.  Among the  suspects are found the Earl of Seaforth, Lord Reay, and several others,  who were taken before the Assembly, kept in ward at Edinburgh for two  months; and in 1641, on the King's arrival in Scotland, the Earl of  Traquair, who had been summoned before Parliament as an opponent to  the Lords of the Covenant succeeded in persuading the Earls of Montrose,  Wigton, Athole, Hume, and Seaforth (who had meanwhile escaped), and  several other influential chiefs, to join in a bond against the Covenanters.

Soon after this Montrose leaves Elgin with the main body of his army, and marches towards the Bog of Gight, accompanied by the Earl of  Seaforth, Sir Robert Gordon, Grant of Grant, Mackenzie of Pluscardine,  and several other gentlemen who came to him at Elgin, to support the  King.  After this, however, fearing that depredations might be committed  upon his followers by a garrison of two regiments then stationed at  Inverness, and the other Covenanters of that district, he permitted  Seaforth, Grant of Grant, and other Morayshire gentlemen, to return home  in order to defend their estates, but before permitting them to depart he made them swear allegiance to the King and promise that they should  never again under any circumstances take up arms against his Majesty or any of his loyal subjects, and to rejoin him with all their available forces  as soon as they were able to do so.  Seaforth, however, with unaccountable  want of decision, disregarded his oath, again joined the Covenanters, and excused himself in a letter to the Committee of Estates, saying that he had  joined the Royalists through fear of Montrose, at the same time avowing  that he would abide by "the good cause to his death"--a promise not much to be trusted.

He is soon again in the field, this time against Montrose.  Wishart says that "the Earl of Seaforth, a very powerful man in those parts (and  one of whom he entertained a better opinion) with the garrison of Inver-ness, which were old soldiers, and the whole strength of Moray, Ross,  Sutherland, and Caithness, and the sept of the Frasers, were ready to meet  him with a desperate army of 5000 horse and  foot."  Montrose had only  1500--the Macdonalds of Glengarry and the Highlanders of Athol having   previously gone home, against  the earnest solicitude of Montrose that  they should complete the campaign, according to their usual custom, to  deposit the booty obtained in their repeated victories under their great chief, but on the plea of repairing their houses and other property which had been so much injured by their enemies in their absence. The great  commander, however, although he knew many of the garrison to be old  soldiers, decided to attack the superior numbers against him, correctly  surmising that a great many of his opponents were newly raised recruits  "from among husband-men, cowherds, tavern-boys and kitchen-boys," and  would be raw and unserviceable.  Fortunately for Seaforth and his forces, matters turned out otherwise.  The gallant Marquis, on his way to  Inverness, was informed of Argyll's descent on Lochaber, and, instantly  changing his route, he fell down upon him at Inverlochy so unexpectedly,  that when Argyll, by an ignominious flight in one of his boats, made  himself secure, he had the well-merited reward of personal cowardice and  pusillanimity of witnessing fifteen hundred of his devoted adherents cut  down, among whom were a great  number of the leading gentlemen of the  clan, who deserved to fight under a better and less cowardly commander.

Among  those who fell were Campbell of Auchinbreck, Campbell of  Lochnell, his eldest son, and his brother Colin; Macdougall of Rara, and  his eldest son, Major Menzies, brother to the Chief of Achattens Parbreck,  and the Provost of the Church of Kilmuir. The power of the Campbells  was thus broken, and so probably would that of Seaforth had Montrose  attacked him first.

After this brilliant victory at Inverlochy, on the 2d February, 1645,  Montrose returned to Moray, by Badenoch, where on his march to Elgin,  he was met by Thomas Mackenzie of Piuscardine and others, sent by  Seaforth and the Covenanters as commissioners to treat with him.  They  received an indignant answer.  The Marquis declined any negotiation, but  offered to accept the services of such as would join and obey him as the  King's Lieutenant-General.  The Earl of Seaforth was then sent by the  Committee of Ross and Sutherland, in person, and meeting the Marquis  between Elgin and Forres, he was arrested and for several days detained  prisoner.  He was subsequently released, but all the authorities plead  ignorance of the terms.

When the Royalists marched south, the Laird of Lawers, who was then Governor of the Castle of Inverness, cited all those who had communications with Montrose in Moray, and compelled them to give bonds for their appearance, to answer for their conduct, before Parliament,  if required to do so.  Among them were Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine; and, after the affair at Fettercairn, and the retreat of Montrose  from Dundee, the Earls of Seaforth and Sutherland, with the whole of the  Clan Fraser, and most of the men of Caithness and Moray, are found  assembled at Inverness, where General Hurry, who had retreated before  Montrose, joined them with a force of Gordons--1000 foot and 200 horse  --the whole amounting to about 3500 of the former and 400 of the latter,  which included Sutherlands, Mackenzies, Frasers, Roses, and Brodies,  while the followers of Montrose consisted of Gordons, Macdonalds,  Macphersons, Mackintoshes, and Irish, to the number of about 3000 foot  and 300 horse. [Shaw's MS. History.]  Montrose halted at the village of  Auldearn, and General Hurry finding such a large force waiting for him at Inverness, decided to retrace his steps the next morning, and give battle to the Marquis at that village.

The author of the Ardintoul MS. tells how Seaforth came to take part in the battle of Auldearn, and gives the following interesting account  of his reasons and of the engagement:--"General Hurry sent for Seaforth  to Inverness, and during a long conference informed him that although he  was serving  the States himself he privately favoured the King's cause.

He  advised Seaforth to dismiss his men and make a pretence that he had only  sent for them to give them new leases of their lands, and in case it was  necessary to make an appearance to fight Montrose, he could bring, when  commanded to do so, two or three companies from Chanonry and  Ardmeanach, which the Marquis would accept.  It was, however, late  before they parted, and Lady Seaforth, who was waiting for her lord at  Kessock, prepared a sumptuous supper for her husband and his friends.

The Earl and his guests kept up the festivities so long and so well that he  `forgot or delayed to advertise his men to dismiss till to-morrow,' and  going to bed very late, before he could stir in the morning all the lairds  and gentlemen of Moray came to him, most earnestly entreating him by all  the laws of friendship and good neighbourhood, and for the kindness they  had for him while he lived among them, and which they manifested to his  brother yet living amongst them, that his lordship would not see them  ruined and destroyed by Montrose and the Irish, when he might easily prevent it without the least loss to himself or his men, assuring him that if  he should join General Hurry with what forces he had then under his  command, Montrose would go away with his Irish and decline to fight  them.  Seaforth, believing his visitors, and thinking, as they said, that Montrose with so small a number would not venture to fight, his  opponents being twice the number, and many of them trained soldiers.   Hurry told him that he was to march immediately against Montrose and  being of an easy and compassionate nature, Seaforth yielded to their  request, and sent immediately in all haste for his Highlanders, crossed the  ferry of Kessock, and marched straight with the rest of his forces to  Auldearn, where Montrose had his camp; but the Moray men found  themselves mistaken in thinking the Marquis would make off, for he was  not only resolved but glad of the opportunity to fight them before Baillie,  whom he knew was on his march north with considerable forces, could  join General Hurry, and so drawing up his men with great advantage of  ground he placed Alexander Macdonald, with the Irish, on the right wing  beneath the village of Auldearn, and Lord Gordon with the horse on the  left.  On the south side of Auldearn, he himself (Montrose) biding in town,  and making a show of a main battle with a few men, which Hurry  understanding and making it his business that Montrose should carry the  victory, and that Seaforth would come off without great loss, he set his  men, who were more than double the number of their adversaries, to  Montrose's advantage, for he placed Sutherland, Lovat's men, and some  others, with the horse under Drummond's command, on the right wing,  opposite to my Lord Gordon, and Loudon and Laurie's Regiments, with  some others on the left wing, opposite Alexander Macdonald and the Irish, and placed Seaforth's men for the most in the midst, opposite Montrose, where he knew they could not get hurt till the wings were engaged. Seaforth's men were commanded to retire and make off before they had  occasion or command to fight; but the men hovering, and not understanding the mystery, were commanded again to make off and follow Drummond with the horse, who gave only one charge to the enemy  and then fled, which they did by leaving both the wings and some of their own men to the brunt of the enemy, because they stood at a distance from  them, the right wing being sore put to by my Lord Gordon, and seeing  Drummond with the horse and their neighbours fly, they began to follow.

Sutherland and Lovat suffered great loss, while on the left wing, Loudon's  Regiment and Lawrie with his Regiment were both totally cut off betwixt  the Irish and the Gordons, who came to assist them after Sutherland's and Lovat's men were defeated.  Seaforth's men got no hurt in the pursuit, nor  did they lose many men in the fight, the most considerable being John  Mackenzie of Kernsary, cousin-german to the Earl, and Donald Bain,  brother to Tulloch and Chamberlain to Seaforth in the Lewis, both being  heavy and corpulent men not fit to fly, and being partly deceived by  Seaforth's principal ensign or standard-bearer in the field, who stood to it with some others of the Lochbroom and Lewis men, till they were killed,  and likewise Captain Bernard Mackenzie, with the rest of his company,  which consisted of Chanonry men and some others thereabout, being  somewhat of a distance from the rest of Seaforth's men, were killed on the  spot.  There were only four Kintail men who might make their escape with  the rest if they had looked rightly to themselves, namely, the Bannerman  of Kintail, called Rory Mac Ian Dhomh'uill Bhain, alias Maclennan, who,  out of foolhardiness and indignation, to see that banner, which was wont  to be victorious, fly in his hands, fastens the staff of it in the ground, and stands to it with his two-handed sword drawn, and would not accept of  quarter, though tendered to him by my Lord Gordon in person; nor would  he suffer any to approach him to take him alive, as the gentlemen  beholders wished, so that they were forced to shoot him.  The other three were Donald the bannerman's brother, Malcolm Macrae, and Duncan Mac  Ian Oig.  Seaforth and his men, with Colonel Hurry and the rest, came  back that night to Inverness, all the men laying the blame of the loss of the  day upon Drummond, who commanded the horse, and fled away with  them, for which, by a Council of War, he was sentenced to die; but Hurry  assured him that he would get him absolved, though at the very time of his  execution he made him keep silence, but when Drummond was about to  speak, he caused him to be shot suddenly, fearing, as was thought, that he  would reveal that what was acted was by Hurry's own directions.  This account of the Battle of Auldearn I had from an honourable gentleman and  experienced soldier, as we were riding by Auldearn, who was present from  first to last at this action, and who asked Hurry, Who set the battle with  such advantage to Montrose and to the inevitable loss and overthrow of  his own side? to whom Hurry, being confident of the gentlemen, said, `I  know what I am doing, we shall have by-and-bye excellent sport between  the Irish and the States Regiments, and I shall carry off Seaforth's men  without loss;' and that Hurry was more for Montrose than for the States that day is very probable, because, shortly thereafter when he found  opportunity, he quitted the States service, and is reckoned as first of  Montrose's friends, who, in August next year, embarked with Montrose to  get off the nation, and returned with him again in his second expedition to  Scotland, and was taken prisoner at Craigchonachan, and sent south and  publicly executed with Montrose as guilty of the same fault."

Montrose gained another engagement at Alford on the 2nd of July, after which he was joined by a powerful levy of West Highlanders under  Colla Ciotach Macdonald, Clanranald, and  Glengarry, the Macnabs,  Macgregors, and the Stewarts of Appin.  In addition to these some of the  Farquharsons of Braemar and small parties of lesser septs from Badenoch  rallied round the standard of Montrose. Thus, as a contemporary writer  says, "he went like a current speat (spate) through this kingdom." Seeing all this--the great successes of Montrose and so many Highlanders  joining-Seaforth, who had never been a hearty Covenanter, began to  waver.  The Estates sent a commission to the Earl of Sutherland  appointing him as their Lieutenant north of the Spey, but he refused to  accept it.  It was then offered to Seaforth, who likewise declined it, but  instead "contrived and framed ane band, under the name of an humble remonstrance, which he perswaded manie and threatened others to  subscryve.  This remonstrance gave so great a distast to both the Church  and State, that the Earl of Seaforth was therefore excommunicate by the  General Assemblie; and all such as did not disclaim the raid remonstrance within some days thereafter, were, by the Committee of Estates, declared  inimies to the publick. Hereupon the Earl of Seaforth joined publicly with  Montrose in April, 1646, at the siege of Inverness, though before that time  be had only joined in private councils with him." [Gordon's Earldom of  Sutherland, p. 529.]

At Inverness, through the action of the Marquis of Huntly and the treachery of his son, Lord Lewis Gordon, Montrose was surprised by General Middleton, but he promptly crossed the river Ness in face of a  regiment of cavalry, under Major Bromley, who crossed the river by a ford above the town, while another detachment crossed lower down towards  the sea with a view to cut off his retreat.  These he succeeded in beating  back with a trifling loss on either side, whereupon he marched unmolested to Kinmylies, and the following morning he went round by Beauly and  halted at Fairley, where slight marks of field works are still to be seen; and  now, for the first time, he found himself in the territories of the  Mackenzies, accompanied by Seaforth in person.  Montrose, here finding  himself in a level country, with an army mainly composed of raw levies newly raised by Seaforth among his own people, and taught by their chief's vacillating conduct and example to have little interest or enthusiasm in either cause, did not consider it prudent to engage Middleton, who pursued him with a disciplined force, including a considerable  following of cavalry, ready to fight with every advantage on his side in a  level country.  He therefore moved rapidly up through  the valley of  Strathglass, crossed to Loch-Ness, and passed through Stratherrick in the direction of the river Spey. Meanwhile Middleton advanced to Fortrose  and laid siege to the castle, which was at the time under the charge of  Lady Seaforth. She surrendered after a siege of four days; and having  removed a considerable quantity of stores and ammunition, sent by Queen Henrietta for the use of Montrose on his arrival there, Middleton gave the  Countess, whom he treated with the greatest civility and respect,  possession of the stronghold.

The Committee on Public Affairs, which, throughout the contest, acted in opposition to the Royal authority, and held sederunts at Aberdeen  and Dundee as well as at Edinburgh, gratified their malignity, after  Montrose gave up the fight in 1646, by fining the loyalists in enormous  amounts of money, and decerning them to "lend" to the committee such  sums--in many cases exorbitant--as they thought proper.  Sir Robert  Farquhar, formerly a Bailie of Aberdeen, was treasurer, and in the  sederunt held in that city, the committee threw a comprehensive net over  the clan Mackenzie. Sixteen of the name were decerned to lend the large  sum of ?8,666 13s 4d Scots; but from the other side of the balance sheet it is found that they declined to lend a penny; and Sir Robert credits himself as treasurer thus:--"Item of the loan moneys above set down there  is yet resting unpaid, and wherefore no payment can be gotten, as follows--viz.--Be the  name of Mackenzie, sixteen persons, the sum of ?8,666  13s 4d Scots."  The following are the names and sums decerned against  each of them:--Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine, ?000; Alexander   Mackenzie of  Kilcoy, ?000; Roderick Mackenzie of Redcastle, ?000;  Alexander Mackenzie of Coul, ?000; Kenneth Mackenzie of Gairloch,  ?333 6s 8d; Hector Mackenzie of Scotsburn, ?000; Roderick Mackenzie  of Davochmaluag, ?333 6s 8d; John Mackenzie of Dawach-Cairn, ?333  6s 8d; William Mackenzie of Multavie, ?000; Kenneth Mackenzie of  Scatwell, ?000; Thomas Mackenzie of Inverlael, ?333 6s 8d; Colin  Mackenzie of Mullochie, ?66 13s 4d; Donald Mackenzie of Logie, ?66  13s 4d; Kenneth Mackenzie of Assint, ?000; Colin Mackenzie of  Kincraig, ?000; Alexander Mackenzie of Suddie, ?000.  Among the  other sums decerned is one of ?666 13s 4d against William Robertson in Kindeace, and his son Gilbert Robertson," and in Inverness and Ross the  loan amounted to the respectable sum of ?4,783 6s 8d, of which the  treasurer was allowed to retain ?5,000 in his own hands. The sum, with  large amounts of disbursements by the committee, show that they were  more fortunate with others than with the Clan Mackenzie. [Antiquarian  Notes, pp. 307-308-309.]

The Earl of Seaforth taking advantage of being on opposite sides to the Earl of Sutherland, now asserted some old claims against Donald  Ban Mor Macleod, IX. of Assynt, a follower of the house of Sutherland,  who afterwards became notorious as the captor of the great Montrose  himself.  In May, 1646, Mackenzie laid siege to his castle, on the Isle of  Assynt.

A document written by a friend of the family of Assynt, in 1738, for Norman Macleod, XIX. of Macleod, who, in that year, in virtue of a  disposition of all his estates made by Neil Macleod of Assynt to John  Breac Macleod, XVI. of Macleod, dated the 24th of November, 1681,  commenced a process against Mackenzie, gives a most interesting account  of the proceedings, from the Macleod point of view, by which Seaforth  obtained possession of the lands of Assynt.  This document or  "Information" came into the possession of Simon Lord Lovat, with whose  papers it found its way to the Rev. Donald Fraser, minister of Killearnan,  and is now the property of that gentleman's grandson, the Rev. Hector  Fraser, Halkirk. It was read by Mr William Mackay, solicitor, Inverness,  before the Gaelic Society there on the 19th of March, 1890, and is  published at length in their Transactions for that year, vol. XVI. pp.  197-207. According to the writer of this paper, Neil Macleod was in possession of Assynt from 1650 to 1672, when in the latter year "he was  violently dispossessed by Seaforth," and was from 1672 to 1692, when be  obtained a "Decree of Spulzie" against Seaforth, endeavouring to recover  his right, but without avail.  He says that from the time Seaforth got a  right, "such as it was," to the Island of Lewis for a payment of ten  thousand merks, "and afterwards, in lieu of that, for a mile of the wood of  Letterew," he and his family had it in view to make themselves masters of the estate of Macleod of Assynt, who, he erroneously states, "was lineal  heir to the estates of Lewis."  In order to give effect to this intention Seaforth purchased several old claims, "some of them very unjust," against Assynt, which were made over to Thomas Mackenzie of Plus-cardine, Seaforth's brother.  In 1637 the two Mackenzies, in virtue of  these claims and the titles founded upon them, gave a wadset of the lands of Assynt to Kenneth Mackenzie of Scatwell in security for forty thousand merks.  In 1640 "the Legal of those claims and apprisings being expired,  Seaforth did, with his friends and clan, to the number of 1000 men, invade  Assynt, and did there commit great outrages.  He being for this pursued at  law, was decerned in 40,000 pounds Scots of damages," which paid a  great part of his claim upon the estate, and it is maintained that the remainder was afterwards paid by the means, which are set forth in the  same document, along with somewhat intricate statements, which would  occupy too much space here.  The "Information" proceeds with the  following interesting details, which we give, with very slight alteration, in  his own words.

He says that in 1646 Seaforth having joined Montrose at Inverness, where were likewise 100 men of Assynt under his Superior's (Seaforth) command, and Neil of Assynt himself, then a minor, being a friend, in  Seaforth's house at  Brahan, Seaforth ordered his men in the Highlands to fall upon Assynt's estate, where they made fearful havoc, carried away, as  Neil represents, 3000 cows, 2000 horses, 7000 sheep and goats, and burnt  the habitations of 180 families. When complaint was made of this in the  South, Seaforth was bought off by the interest of General Middleton, and  by virtue of a capitulation which he had with Seaforth when in the North.

In the year 1654 Seaforth led a body of his own men, with a part of  the broken army under the command of Middleton, to Assynt and made  great depredations, destroyed a very great quantity of wine and brandy,  which the Laird of Assynt had bought, besides other commodities, in all to  the value of 50,000 merks, out of a ship then on that coast, carrying off 2400 cows, 1500 horses, about 6000 sheep and goats, besides burning and  destroying many families. Assynt was not liable in law to any such usage from them, having receipts from Seaforth and Lord Reay for his  proportion of the levy appointed at that time for the King's service.

When  Middleton came to that country he declared that he had given no warrant  for what Seaforth had done, and that in presence of Lord Macdonald and  Sir George Munro, etc.  When Assynt pursued Seaforth before the English  judges of the time, Seaforth defeated his process by proving that Neil had  been in arms against the English, and did then allege no cause for the  injuries done by him to Assynt, except a private quarrel.  But when  Macleod afterwards, at the Restoration, pursued Seaforth, he alleged in  defence that he had acted by a warrant from Middleton, who was then  commissioner for the Parliament.  But Neil says, if there was any such  warrant it was certainly given after the injuries had been done to him. However, things stood then in such a way that Neil was not likely to  procure any justice.

There was another claim which seems to have brought matters to a crisis.  Macleod had become a party to a bond of caution granted by Ross  of Little Tarrel in the sum of ?50 sterling, for which, in 1656, an  apprising was laid upon the estate of Assynt, at the instance of Sinclair of  Mey, in Caithness, who subsequently assigned his claim to Sir George  Mackenzie of Tarbat and John Mackenzie, second son of Kenneth Mor,  third Earl of Seaforth, afterwards known as the Hon. John Mackenzie of  Assynt.  The matter was contested for a time, but "in the year 1668 or  1669 or 1670, the legal apprising being expired, decree of mails and duties  was obtained upon the claim against the estate of Assynt and ejection  against himself.  Upon pursuing this ejection in 1671, several illegal steps  were alleged against Assynt, particularly holding out the Castle of Ard-Bhreac against the King, and his otherwise violently opposing the  ejection; whereupon Neil of Assynt, who it seems had been negligent in  defending himself against the foresaid accusations, was denounced rebel,  and a commission of fire and sword was obtained in July, 1672, against  him and his people," granted to Lord Strathnaver, Lord Lovat, Munro of  Fowlis, and others, who at once invaded his territories with a force of  2300 men "and committed the most horrid barbarities," until all the country of Assynt was destroyed.

After this raid Neil, "under the benefit of a protection," went to consult Seaforth, who gave him a certificate of having obeyed the King's  laws, and fifteen days to consider a proposition which his lordship made  to him to dispose of his estates to himself on certain conditions, and so settle the dispute between them for ever.  But Macleod, considering that it  was not safe for him to return to his own country, resolved to proceed to Edinburgh by sea, and to carry his charter chest along with him.

"Seaforth  being apprehensive, it seems, of the  con-sequences of Assynt's going to  Edinburgh, immediately entered into correspondence and concert about  the matter with the Laird of Mey, in Caithness. The consequence was:  Assynt being driven by unfavourable winds to the Orkneys the Laird of  Mey, with a body of men, seized him there, to be sure under the notion of an outlaw, and, by commission from Seaforth, stripped him to his shirt,  robbed him of everything, particularly of his charter chest, and of all the  writs and evidents belonging to his family and estates, carried them to the castle of Mey; where he was kept prisoner in a vault.  From thence he was carried prisoner, under a strong guard, to Tam, and at last to Brahan,  Seaforth's house.  In Brahan (to which place the charter chest was brought,  as was afterwards proved in the Process of Spoilzie) Neil was many  months detained prisoner in a vault, in most miserable circumstances, still  threatened with worse usage if he would not agree to subscribe a blank  paper, probably designed for a disposition of his estates, which was, it  seems, the great thing designed to be procured from him by all this bad  usage.  At last Neil was brought south to Edinburgh, where he arrived  after being in thirteen or fourteen prisons, and in the end he obtained the  remission formerly mentioned," for the offence of defending the Castle of Assynt, and all the other crimes that were alleged against him.

His apologist makes out a strong case for him, if half his  allegations are true.  In any case it is but fair to state them.  Neil was in prison, according to the "Information," when the ejection proceedings were carried out against him.  He was ignorant of the legal steps taken  against him until it was too late, and, in consequence of his great distance  from Edinburgh, he was unable to correspond with his legal advisers there in time for his defence.  His messengers, carrying his correspondence,  were more than once seized, on their way south, and imprisoned at  Chanonry.  When in the south, the contributions of his friends towards his  support and the expenses of his defence were intercepted, and his people  at home were put to great hardships by their new master, the Hon. John  Mackenzie, "for any inclination to succour him in his distress."   "By all these means, the unfortunate gentleman was reduced to great poverty and  misery, and was disabled  from procuring the interest or affording the  expense needful in order to obtain justice against such potent adversaries."

And "it was easy for them (the Mackenzies), being now possessed of his  estate, to get in old unjust patched claims from such as had them, and  being possessed of his charter chest and the retired vouchers of debts  therein contained, by all these means, to make additional titles to the  estate of Assynt, while he, poor gentleman, besides his other misfortunes,  was deprived of his writs and of all his evidences needful to be produced in his defence against the claims of his adversaries."  If a tithe of all this is  true poor Neil deserves to be pitied indeed.  But after giving such a long catalogue of charges, involving the most cruel and deceitful acts against the Mackenzies, the author of them is himself doubtful about their  accuracy, for he says that, although the Mackenzies, after possessing the estates, had all the advantages and means for doing the unjust things  which he alleges against them of inventing new claims and additional  titles, "it is not pretended to be now told what additional titles they made"  --an admission which largely discounts and disposes of the other charges  made by Macleod's apologist.  And, notwithstanding all his disadvantages  and difficulties, Neil made another effort "towards obtaining justice to  himself and his family"; and to that end, in 1679 and 1680, he commenced  a new process against Seaforth and all others "whom he knew to have or  pretended to have" claims against him or his estate.  It was, however,  objected (1) that he had no title in his own person to the lands of Assynt,  and (2) that he was at the horn and had no personam standi in judices.

Neil made "very pertinent" answers to these objections in 1682, but he  was wisely advised to stop the proceedings of reduction, and to commence  a Process of Spulzie against the Earl Sinclair, of Mey, the Laird of  Dunbeath, and others.  Seaforth having died while these proceedings were  pending, there appears in process an Oath by his successor, "who swears  that he not then nor formerly had the charter chest, nor knew what was  become of it; and as he was not charged with having a hand in the Spulzie he was freed thereof and of the consequences of it, by their Lordships.

Neil having given in an inventory of the writs contained in his chest, his  oath in litem was taken thereanent, and he referred his expenses and  damages to the judgment of the Lords," with the result that, in 1692, they  decerned in his favour for the sum of two thousand pounds Scots, in name  of damages and expenses, to be paid to him by the defenders, and at the  same time superseding his further claim until he should give in more  particulars regarding it.  He assigned this decree to his nephew, Captain Donald Macleod of Geanies, and it remained as the basis of the process  which was raised by Norman Macleod, XIX. of Macleod, in 1738, already referred to "for what thereof is unpaid."  But Neil, "being unable by  unparalleled bad usage, trouble, and poverty, and at length by old age, it  does not appear that lie went any further towards obtaining of justice for  himself than what is above narrated in relation to the process of reduction  and Spulzie"; and that his friends failed in their subsequent efforts to  punish Mackenzie or re-possess themselves of the Assynt estates is  sufficiently well-known. [For Neil's connection with the Betrayal of  Montrose see Mackenzie's History of the Macleods, pp. 410-419.]

In 1648 Seaforth again raised a body of 4000 men in the Western Islands and Ross-shire, whom he led south, to aid the King's cause, but  after joining in a few skirmishes under Lanark, they returned home to "cut  their corn which was now ready for their sickles." During the whole of  this period Seaforth's fidelity to the Royal cause was open to considerable  suspicion, and when Charles I. threw himself into the hands of the Scots at  Newark, and ordered Montrose to disband his forces, Earl George, always  trying to be on the winning side, came in to Middleton, and made terms  with the Committee of Estates; but the Church, by whom he had  previously been excommunicated, continued implacable, and would only  agree to be satisfied by a public penance in sackcloth within the High  Church of Edinburgh.  The proud Earl consented, underwent this  ignominious and degrading ceremonial, and his sentence of  excommunication was then removed.  Notwithstanding this public  humiliation, after the death of the ill-fated and despotic Charles I.,  Seaforth, in 1649, went over to Holland, and joined Charles II., by whom  he was made Principal Secretary of State for Scotland, the duties of which, however, he never had the opportunity of performing.

Charles was proclaimed King on the 5th of February, 1649, in Edinburgh, and it was decided by him and his friends in exile that Montrose should make a second attempt to recover Scotland; for, on the  advice of his friends, Charles declined the humiliating terms offered him by the Scottish faction, and, in connection with the plans of Montrose, a rising took place in the North, under Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine,  brother to the Earl of Seaforth, Sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromarty, Colonel John Munro of Lemlair, and Colonel Hugh Fraser.  On the 22d February  they entered Inverness, expelled the troops from the garrison, and  afterwards demolished the walls and  fortifications.  On the 26th of  February a Council of War was held, present--Thomas Mackenzie of  Pluscardine, Preses, Sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromarty, H. Fraser of  Belladrum, Jo. Cuthbert of Castlehill, R. Mackenzie, of Davochmaluak;  Kenneth Mackenzie of Gairloch, R. Mackenzie of Redcastle, John Munro  of Lumlair, Simon Fraser of Craighouse, and Alex. Mackenzie of Suddie.

This Committee made certain enactments, by which they took the customs and excise of the six northern counties entirely into their own  hands.  The Provost of Inverness was made accountable "for all the money  which, under the name of excise, has been taken up in any of the foresaid shires since his intromissions with the office of excise taking."

Another  item is that Duncan Forbes be pleased to advance money "upon the  security which the Committee will grant to him," to be repaid out of the  readiest of the "maintaince and excise."  Cromarty House was ordered to  be put in a position of defence, for which it was "requisite that some faill  be cast and led," and all Sir James Fraser's tenants within the parishes of  Cromarty and Cullicudden, together with those of the laird of Findrassie, within the parish of Rosemarkie, were ordered "to afford from six hours in  the morning to six hours at night, and one horse out of every oxengait  daily for the space of four days, to lead the same faill to the House of Cromarty."  By the tenth enactment the Committee find it expedient for  their safety that the works and forts of Inverness be demolished and  levelled to the ground, and they ordain that each person appointed to this  work shall complete his proportion thereof before the 4th day of March  following "under pain of being quartered upon, aud until the said task be performed."  They further enact that a garrison be placed in Culloden  House, "which the Committee is not desirous of for any intention of harm  towards the disturbance of the owner, but merely because of the security  of the garrison of Calder, which, if not kept in good order, is like to infest  all the well-affected of the country circumjacent." [For these minutes see  Antiquarian Notes, pp. 157-8.]  General Leslie having been sent against  them, they retired to the mountains of Ross, when Leslie advanced to  Fortrose and placed a garrison in the castle.  He made terms with all the other leaders except Pluscardine, who would not listen to any  accommodation, and who, immediately on Leslie's return south,  descended from his mountain fastnesses, attacked and re-took the Castle  of Chanonry.

Pluscardine was then joined by his nephew, Lord Reay, at the head of three hundred men, which increased his force to eight or nine hundred.    General Middleton and Lord Ogilvie, having brought up their forces,  Mackenzie advanced into Badenoch, with the view of raising the people in  that and the neighbouring districts, where he was joined by the Marquis of  Huntly, formerly Lord Lewis Gordon, and they at once attacked and took  the Castle of Ruthven.  After this they were pressed closely by Leslie, and  fell down from Badenoch to Balvenny Castle, whence they sent General  Middleton and Mackenzie to treat with Leslie, but before they reached  their destination, Carr, Halket, and Strachan, who had been in the North, made a rapid march from Fortrose, and on the 8th of May surprised Lord  Reay with his nine hundred followers at Balvenny, with considerable loss  on both sides.  Eighty Royalists fell in the defence of the castle.  Carr at  once dismissed the Highlanders to their homes on giving their oath never  again to take up arms against the Parliament, but he detained Lord Reay  and some of his kinsmen, Mackenzie of Redcastle, and a few leaders of  that name, and sent them  prisoners to Edinburgh. Having there given  security to keep the peace in future, Lord Reay, Ogilvy, Huntly, and  Middleton were forgiven, and allowed to return home, Roderick  Mackenzie of Redcastle, being the only one kept in prison, until he was  some time after released, through the influence of Argyll, on payment of a  fine of seven thousand merks Scots.

Carr now returned to Ross and laid siege to Redcastle, the only stronghold in the North which still held out for the Royal cause. The  officer in charge recklessly exposed himself on the ramparts, and was  pulled down by a well-directed shot from the enemy.  The castle was set  on fire by the exasperated soldiers.  Leslie then placed a garrison in  Brahan and Chanonry Castles, and returned south. The garrisons were  then expelled, some of the men hanged, the walls demolished, and the  fortifications razed to the ground.  Thus ended an insurrection which  probably would have had a very different result had it been delayed until the arrival of Montrose.  The same year General Leslie himself came to  Fortrose with nine troops of horse, and forwarded detachments to  Cromarty and "Seaforth's strongest hold" of Ellandonnan Castle.

The following account of this period by a contemporary writer is  very interesting:--"Immediately after the battle of Auldearn Seaforth met  and communed with Montrose, the result of which was that Seaforth  should join Montrose, for the King against the Parliament and States,  whom they now discovered not to be for the King as they professed; but in the meantime that Seaforth should not appear, till he had called upon and prevailed with his neighbours about him, namely, My Lord Reay, Balna-gown, Lovat, Sir James Macdonald of Sleat, Macleod of Dunvegan, and  others, to join him and follow him as their leader.  Accordingly, Seaforth  having called them together, pointed out to them the condition the King was in, and how it was their interest to rise and join together immediately  for his Majesty's service and relief.  All of them consented and approved of the motion, only some of them desired that the Parliament who  professed to be for the King as well as they, and desired to be rid of  Montrose and his bloody Irish, should first be made acquainted with their resolution.  Seaforth, being unwilling to lose any of them, condescended, and drew up a declaration, which was known as Seaforth's Remonstrance,  as separate from Montrose, whereof a double was sent them; but the  Parliament was so far from being pleased therewith that they threatened to  proclaim Seaforth and all who should join him as rebels.  Now, after the battle of Alford and Kilsyth, wherein Montrose was victorious, and all in the south professing to submit to him as the King's Lieutenant, he was by the treachery of Traquair and others of the Covenanters, surprised and  defeated at Philiphaugh.  In the beginning of the next year, 1646, he came  north to recruit his army. Seaforth raised his men and advertised his  foresaid neighbours to come, but none came except Sir James Macdonald,  who, with Seaforth, joined Montrose at Inverness, which they besieged,  but Middleton, who then served in the Scots armies in England, being sent with nearly 1000 horse and 800 foot, coming suddenly the length of Inverness, stopped Montrose's progress.  Montrose was forced to raise the siege and quit the campaign, and retired with Seaforth and Sir James  Macdonald to the hills of Strathglass, to await the arrival of the rest of  their confederates, Lord Reay, Glengarry, Maclean, and several others,  who, with such as were ready to join him south, were likely to make a  formidable army for the King but, in the meantime, the King having come  to the Scots army, the first thing they extorted from him was to send a  herald to Montrose, commanding him to disband his forces, and to pass  over to France till his Majesty's further pleasure.  The herald came to him  in the last of May, 1646, while he was at Strathglass waiting the rest of the  King's faithful friends who were to join him.  For this Montrose was  vexed, not only for the King's condition, but for those of his faithful  subjects who declared themselves for him and before he would disband he  wrote several times to the King, but received no answer, except some  articles from the Parliament and Covenanters, which after much  reluctance, he was forced to accept, by which he was to depart the  Kingdom against the first of September following, and the Covenanters  were obliged to provide a ship for his transportation, but finding that they  neglected to do so, meeting with a Murray ship in the harbour of  Montrose, he went aboard of her with several of his friends, namely, Sir  John Hurry, who served the States the year before, John Drummond,  Henry Brechin, George Wishart, and several others, leaving Seaforth and the rest of his friends to the mercy of these implacable enemies; for the States and Parliament threatened to forfeit him for acting contrary to their  orders, and the Kirk excommunicated him for joining with the  excommunicated traitor, as they called him, James Graham; for now the  Kirk began to rule with a high hand, becoming more guilty than the  bishops, of that of which they charged him with as great a fault for  meddling with civil and secular affairs; for they not only looked upon  them to form the army and to purge it of such as whom, in their idiom,  they called Malignants, but really such as were loyal to the King; and also  would have no Acts of Parliament to pass without their consent and  approbation. Their proselytes in the laity were also heavy upon and  uneasy to such as they found or conceived to have found with a tincture of Malignancy, whereof many instances might be given."  But to return to  Seaforth.  "After he was excommunicated by the Kirk he was obliged to  go to Edinburgh, where he was made prisoner and detained two years, till  in the end he was, with much ado, released from the sentence of excom-munication, and the process of forfeiture against him discharged; for that  time he returned home in the end of the year, 1648, but King Charles I.  being before that time murdered, and King Charles II. being in France,  finding that he would not be for any time on fair terms with the States and  Kirk, he proposed to remove his family to the Island of Lewis, and dwell there remote from public affairs, and to allocate his rents on the mainland  to pay his most pressing debts, in order to which, having sent his lady in  December to Lochcarron, where boats were attending to transport himself  and children to the Lewis by way of Lochbroom, wherein his affairs called him, he, without acquainting his kinsmen and friends, went aboard a ship  which he had provided for that purpose, and sailed to France, where the  King was, who received him most graciously and made him one of his  secretaries. This did incense the States against him, so that they placed a garrison in his principal house at Brahan, under the command  of Captain  Scott,  who (afterwards) broke his neck from a fall from his horse in the Craigwood of Chanonry, as also another garrison in the Castle of  Ellandonnan, under the command of one William Johnston, which  remained to the great hurt and oppression of the people till, in t

Paragraph 587 has too many words. he year 1650, some of the Kintail men, not bearing the insolence of the garrison  soldiers, discorded with them, and in harvest that year killed John  Campbell, a leading person among them, with others, for having wounded  several at little Inverinate, without one drop of blood drawn out of the  Kintail men, who were only 10 in number, while the soldiers numbered  30.  After this the garrison was very uneasy and greatly afraid of the  Kintail men, who threatened them so, that shortly thereafter they removed to Ross, being commanded then by one James Chambers; but Argyll, to  keep up the face of a garrison there, sent ten men under the command of John Muir, who lived there civilly without molesting the people, the States  were so incensed against the Kintail men for this brush and their usage of  the garrison, that they resolved to send a strong party next spring to  destroy Kintail and the inhabitants thereof.  But King Charles II., after the  defeat of Dunbar, being at Stirling recruiting his army against Cromwell, to which Seaforth's men were called, it proved an act of oblivion and  indemnity to them, so that the Kintail men were never challenged for their  usage of the garrison soldiers.  Though the Earl of Seaforth was out of the kingdom, he gave orders to his brother Pluscardine to raise men for the  King's service whenever he saw the King's affairs required it; and so, in the year 1649, Pluscardine did raise Seaforth's men and my Lord Reay  joining him with his men, marched through Inverness, went through  Moray, and crossed the Spey, being resolved to join the Gordons, Atholes, and several others who were ready to rise, and appeared for the King.   Lesley, who was sent from the Parliament to stop their progress, called  Pluscardine to treat with him, while Seaforth's and my Lord Reay's men  encamped at Balveny, promising a cessation of hostilities.  For some days Colonel Carr and Strachan, with a strong body of horse, surprised them in their camp, when they lay secure, and taking my Lord Reay, Rory  Mackenzie of Redcastle, Rory Mackenzie of Fairburn, John Mackenzie of  Ord, and others, prisoners, threatening to kill them unless the men surrendered and disbanded; and the under officers fearing they would kill them whom they had taken prisoners, did their utmost to hinder the  Highlanders from fighting, cutting their bowstrings, etc., so they were  forced to disband and dissipate.  Pluscardine, in the meantime, being  absent from them, and fearing to fall into their hands, turned back to Spey  with Kenneth of Coul, William Mackenzie of Multavie, and Captain  Alexander Bain, and swam the river, being then high by reason of the  rainy weather, and so escaped from their implacable enemies.  My Lord  Reay, Red-castle, and others were sent to Edinburgh as prisoners, as it  were to make a triumph, where a solemn day of thanksgiving was kept for  that glorious victory.  My Lord Reay and the rest were set at liberty, but  Redcastle was still kept prisoner, because when he came from home he  garrisoned his house of Redcastle, giving strict commands to those he  placed in his house not to render or give it until they had seen an order under his hand, whereupon Colonel Carr and Strachan coming to Ross,  after the defeat of Balvenny, summoned the garrison to come forth, but all  in vain; for they obstinately defended the house against the besiegers until,  on a certain day, a cousin of Carr's advancing in the ruff of his pride, with  his cocked carbine in his hand, to the very gates of the castle, bantering  and threatening those within to give up the castle under all highest pain and danger, he was shot from within and killed outright.  This did so  grieve and incense Colonel Carr, that he began fairly to capitulate with  them within, and made use of Redcastle's own friends to mediate and  persuade them, till in the end, upon promise and assurance of fair terms, and an indemnity of what passed, they came out, and then Carr and his  party kept not touches with them, but, apprehending several of them, and  finding who it was that killed his cousin, caused him to be killed, and thereafter, contrary to the promise and articles of capitulation, rifled the  house, taking away what he found useful, and then burnt the house and all that was within it.  In the meantime Redcastle was kept prisoner at  Edinburgh, none of his friends being in a condition to plead for him, till  Ross of Bridly, his uncle by his mother, went south, and being in great  favour with Argyll, obtained Redcastle's liberation upon payment of 7000  merks fine." [Ardintoul MS.]

While these proceedings were taking place in the Highlands,  Seaforth was in Holland at the exiled Court of Charles II., and when  Montrose arrived there Seaforth earnestly supported him in urging on the  King the bold and desperate policy of throwing himself on the loyalty of  his Scottish subjects, and in strongly protesting against the acceptance by  his Majesty and his friends of the arrogant and humiliating demand made  by the commissioners sent over to treat with him by the Scottish faction.    It is difficult to say whether Seaforth's zeal for his Royal master or the  safety of his own person influenced him most during the remainder of his  life, but whatever the cause, he adhered steadfastly to the exiled monarch to the end of a life which, in whatever light it may be viewed, cannot be commended as a good example to others.  Such vacillating and time-serving conduct ended in the only manner which it deserved. He might  have been admired for taking a consistent part on either side, but with Earl  George self-preservation and interest appear to have been the only  governing principles throughout the whole of this trying period of his  country's history.  The Earl of Cromarty thought differently, and says that  "this George, being a nobleman of excellent qualifications, shared the  fortune of his Prince, King Charles I., for whom he suffered all the  calamities in his estate that envious or malicious enemies could inflict.    He was made secretary to King Charles II. in Holland, but died in that banishment before he saw an end of his King and his country's calamities  or of his own injuries."  We have seen that his conduct was by no means  steadfast in support of Charles, and it may now be safely asserted that his  calamities were due more to his own indecision and accommodating  character than to any other cause. Earl George married early in life, Barbara, daughter of Arthur Lord Forbes (sasine to her in 1637) with issue--

I.  Kenneth Mor, his heir and successor.

II.  Colin, who has a sasine in 1648, but died young and unmarried.

III.  George of Kildun, who married, first, Mary daughter of Skene of Skene, with issue--(1) Kenneth, who went abroad and was no more heard of;  (2) Isobel; and several others who died young.  He married,  secondly, Margaret, daughter of Urquhart of Craighouse, with issue--  Colin of Kildun and several other children of whom no trace can be found.  All his descendants are said to be extinct.

IV.  Colin, who has a sasine of Kinachulladrum in 1721, as "only child now in life, and heir of his brother Roderick."  He married Jean,  daughter of Robert Laurie, Dean of Edinburgh, with issue--(1) Captain  Robert Mackenzie, killed in Flanders, without issue, Colin married,  secondly, Lady Herbertshire, with  issue, (2) Dr George Mackenzie, who,  in 1708, wrote a manuscript History of the Fitzgeralds and Mackenzies,  frequently quoted in this work, and Lives of Eminent Scotsmen.  He, with  his father sold the estate of Kinachulladrum to Roderick Mackenzie, IV.  of Applecross, in 1721, and died without issue. (3) Barbara, who married  Patrick Oliphant.

V.  Roderick, I. of Kinachulladrum, who married, first, Anna, daughter of Ogilvie of Glencairn, in 1668 (sasine 1670), with issue--(1) Alexander, II. of Kinachulladrum, who married Anne, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, III. of Applecross (marriage contract 1707), with  issue--Anne, his only child alive in  1766; (2) Kenneth, who died without  issue; and two daughters.  Roderick married, secondly, Catherine  Scougall, daughter of the Bishop of Aberdeen, with issue, all of whom  died young.

VI.  Jean, who married, first, John Earl of Mar, with issue; and, secondly, Lord Fraser.

VII.  Margaret, who married Sir William Sinclair of Mey, with issue.

VIII.  Barbara, who married Sir John Urquhart of Cromarty.

IX.  John, first of Gruinard, a natural son whose illegitimacy is fully established in the chapter dealing with the Chiefship of the clan.  When his Lordship received the news of the disastrous defeat of  the King's forces at Worcester he fell into a profound melancholy and  died in 1651, at Schiedam in Holland--where he had lived in exile since  the beginning of January, 1649--in the forty-third year of his age.  He was  succeeded by his eldest son,

XV.  KENNETH  MOR,  THIRD  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,

Kenneth was born at Brahan Castle in 1635, and when he was five or six  years old his father placed him under the care of the Rev. Farquhar  Macrae, minister of Kintail, and constable of Ellandonnan Castle, who  had a seminary in his house which was attended by the sons of the  neighbouring gentry, who kept young Kintail company. One of the  manuscript historians of the family, referring to this practical early  training of his Lordship, says--"This might be thought a preposterous and  wrong way to educate a nobleman, but they who would consider where the  most of his interest lay, and how he was among his people, followers, and dependants, on which the family was still valued, perhaps will not think  so, for by this the young lord had several advantages; first, by the  wholesome, though not delicate or too palatable diet he prescribed to him and used him with, he began to have a wholesome complexion, so nimble and strong, that he was able to endure Stress and fatigue, labour and  travel, which proved very useful to him in his after life; secondly, he did  not only learn the language but became thoroughly acquainted with and  learned the genius of his several tribes or clans of his Highlanders, so that  afterwards he was reputed to be the fittest chief or chieftain of all  superiors in the Highlands and Isles of Scotland; and thirdly, the early  impressions of being among them, and acquaint with the bounds, made  him delight and take pleasure to be often among them and to know their circumstances, which indeed was his interest and part of their happiness, so that it was better to give him that first step of education than that which  would make him a stranger at home, both as to his people, estate, and  condition but when he was taken from Mr Farquhar to a public school, he  gave great evidence of his abilities and inclination for learning, and being  sent in the year 1651 to the King's College at Aberdeen, under the  discipline of Mr Patrick Sandylands, before he was well settled or made  any progress in his studies King Charles II., after his army had been defeated at Dunbar the year before, being then at Stirling recruiting and making up his army, with which he was resolved to march into England,  the young laird was called home in his father's absence, who was left in  Holland (as already described), to raise his men for the King's service, and  so went straight to Kintail with the particular persons of his name, viz., the  Lairds of Pluscardine and Lochslinn, his uncles; young Tarbat, Rory of  Davochmaluag, Kenneth of Coul, Hector of Fairburn, and several others,  but the Kintail men, when called upon, made a demur and declined to rise with him, because he was but a child, and that his father, their master, was  in life, without whom they would not move, since the King, if he had use  for him and for his followers, might easily bring him home." [Ardintoul  MS.]

Kenneth, like his father in later years, became identified with the  fate of Charles II., and devoted himself unremittingly to the services of that monarch during his exile.  From his great stature he was known  among the Highlanders as "Coinneach Mor."  On the arrival of the King at  Garmouth, in June, 1650, his reception throughout all Scotland was of a  most cheering character, but the Highlanders, who always favoured the  Stuarts, were specially joyous on the return of their exiled king.  After the  defeat by Oliver Cromwell of the Scottish army at Dunbar--a defeat  brought about by the interference of the Committee of Estates and the  Kirk with the duties of those in charge of the forces, and whose plans, were they allowed to carry them out, would have saved Scotland from the  first great defeat it had ever received at the hands of an enemy--the King  resolved to come north and throw himself upon the patriotism and loyalty  or his Highland subjects.  He was, however, captured and taken back to  Perth, and afterwards to Edinburgh, by the Committee of Estates, on  whom, it is said, his attempted escape to the Highlands "produced a  salutary effect;" and they began to treat him with some respect, going the  length even of admitting him to their deliberations.  A large number of the  Highlanders were already in arms to support him; but the Committee,  having the King in their power, induced him to write to the Highland  chiefs requesting them to lay down their arms. This they refused, and to enforce the King's orders a regiment, under Sir John Drown, was  despatched to the North, but it was surprised and defeated on the night of  the 21st of October by Sir David Ogilvy of Airley.  On receiving this  intelligence, General Leslie hastened north with a force of 3000 cavalry.    General Middleton, who supported the King's friends in the Highlands,  and who was then at Forfar, hearing of Leslie's advance, forwarded him a  letter containing a copy of a bond and oath of engagement which had been  entered into by Huntly, Athole, the Earl of Seaforth, and other leading  Highland chiefs, by which they had pledged themselves on oath to join  firmly and faithfully together, and "neither for fear, threatening,  allurement, nor advantage, to relinquish the cause of religion, of the king,  and of the kingdom, nor to lay down their arms without a general consent; and as the best undertakings did not escape censure and malice, they  promised and swore, for the satisfaction of all reasonable persons, that  they would maintain the true religion, as then established in Scotland, the  National Covenant and the Solemn League and Covenant, and defend the  person of the King, his prerogative, greatness, and authority, and the privileges of parliament, and the freedom of the subject."  Middleton pointed out that the only object of himself and friends was to unite the  Scots in the defence of their common rights, and that, as would be seen  from this bond, the grounds on which they entered into association were  exactly the same as those professed by Leslie himself.  Considering this, and seeing that the independence of Scotland was at stake, he urged that  all Scotsmen should join for the preservation of their common liberties.

Middleton proposed to join Leslie, to place himself under his command,  and expressed a hope that he would not shed the blood of his countrymen  nor force them to shed the blood of their bethren in self-defence.  These communications ended in a treaty between Leslie and the leading  Royalists at Strathbogie, dated 4th November, by which Middleton and his  followers received an indemnity, and laid down their arms. [Balfour, vol, iv., p. 129.  Highland Clans, p. 285]

Immediately after the battle of Worcester, at which Charles was defeated by Cromwell in 1651--where we find among those present Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine as one of the Colonels of foot for  Inverness and Ross, and Alexander Cam Mackenzie, fourth son of  Alexander, fifth of Gairloch--Charles fled to the Continent, and, after  many severe hardships and narrow escapes, he found refuge in Flanders,  where he continued to reside, often in great want and distress, until the Restoration, when in May, 1660, he returned to England "indolent, selfish,  unfeeling, faithless, ungrateful, and insensible to shame or reproach."

The  Earl of Cromarty says that subsequent to the treaty agreed upon between  Middleton and Leslie at Strathbogie, "Seaforth joined the King at Stirling.

After the fatal battle of Worcester he continued a close prisoner until the  Restoration of Charles."  He was excepted from Oliver Cromwell's Act of  Grace and Pardon in 1654, and his estates were forfeited, without any  provision being allowed out of it for his wife and family.  He supported  the King's cause as long as there was an opportunity of fighting for it in  the field, and when forced to submit to the opposing forces of Cromwell  and the Commonwealth, he was committed to prison, where, with "much  firmness of mind and nobility of soul," he endured a tedious captivity for  many. years, until Charles II. was recalled, when he ordered his old and faithful friend Seaforth to be released, after which he became a great  favourite at his licentious and profligate Court.

During the remainder of his life little or nothing of any importance is known of him, except that he lived in the favour and merited smiles of his sovereign, in the undisputed possession and enjoyment of the extensive  estates and honours of his noble ancestors, which, through his faithful  adherence to the House of Stuart, had been nearly lost during the exile of  the second Charles and his own captivity.  Referring to the position of  affairs at this period, the Laird of Applecross says that the "rebels,  possessing the authority, oppressed all the loyal subjects, and him with the first; his estate was over-burthened to its destruction, but nothing could  deter him so as to bring him to forsake his King or his duty. Whenever  any was in the field for him, he was one, seconding that falling cause with  all his power, and when he was not in the field against the enemy, he was in the prison by him until the restoration of the King."  Restored to liberty,  he, on the 23d of April, 1662, received a Commission of the Sheriffship of  Ross, which was afterwards renewed to him and to his eldest son Kenneth,  jointly, on 31st of July, 1675; and when he had set his affairs in order at Brahan, he re-visited Paris, leaving his Countess Isobel, daughter of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, and sister to the first Earl of Cromarty, in  charge of his interests in the North.

Kenneth married early in life Isobel, daughter of Sir John  Mackenzie of Tarbat, father of George, first Earl of Cromarty, with issue--

I.  Kenneth Og, his heir and successor.

II.  John Mackenzie of Assynt, who married Sibella, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, III. of Applecross (marriage contract 1697). He  has a sasine in 1695 and 1696.  They had issue, an only son, Kenneth,  who married his cousin Frances, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of  Assynt and Conansbay, and died in 1723, without issue.

III.  Hugh, who died young and unmarried.  There is a sasine to him as third son in 1667.

IV.  Colonel Alexander, also designated of Assynt and Conansbay. He has a sasine as "third lawful son now in life" of the lands of Kildin, dated October, 1694.  He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Paterson,  Bishop of Ross (marriage contract 1700), with issue--Major William  Mackenzie, who married Mary, daughter and co-heiress of Mathew  Humberston, county Lincoln, whose two sons--Colonel Thomas Francis  Mackenzie, and Francis Humberston Mackenzie, created Lord Seaforth in  1797, and who died without surviving male issue, the last of his line in  1815--succeeded to the family estates.

V.  Margaret, who married James, second Lord Duffus, with issue.

VI.  Anne, who died unmarried.

VII.  Isabel, who married, first,  in  February, 1694, Roderick Macleod, XVI I. of Macleod, without issue; and, secondly, Sir Duncan Campbell of Lochnell, with issue.

VIII.  Mary, who, as his second wife, married Alexander  Macdonald, XI. of Glengarry, with issue--John, who carried on the  succession, and others.  She has a life-rent sasine in 1696.  Kenneth Mor died in December, 1678, when he was succeeded by  his eldest son,

XVI.  KENNETH  OG,  FOURTH  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,

So described by the Highlanders to distinguish him from his father. At an  early age he began to reap the benefits of his predecessor's faithful  adherence to the fortunes of Charles II.  In 1678, before his father died, his  name is found among the chiefs, who, by a proclamation dated 10th of  October in that year, were called upon to give their bond and caution for the security of the peace and quiet of the Highlands, which the leaders  were to give, not only for themselves but for all the members of their  respective Clans. In spite of all the enactments and orders hitherto passed,  the inhabitants and broken men in the Highlands were "inured and accustomed to liberty and licentiousness" during the late troubles, and  "still presumed to sorn, steal, oppress, and commit other violences and  disorders."  The great chiefs were commanded to appear in Edinburgh on  the last Tuesday of February, 1679, and yearly thereafter on the second  Thursday of July, to give security and receive instructions as to the  peace  of the Highlands.  To prevent any excuse for non-attendance, they were  declared free from caption for debt or otherwise while journeying to and  from Edinburgh, and other means were to be taken, which might be  thought necessary or expedient until the Highlands were finally quieted, and "all these wicked, broken, and disorderly men utterly rooted out and  extirpated."  A second proclamation was issued, in which the lesser barons  --heads of the branches of clans--whose names are given, were to go to  Inverlochy by the 20th of November following, as they were "by reason of  their mean condition," not able to come in to Edinburgh and find caution, and there to give in bonds and securities for themselves, their men,  tenants, servants, and indwellers upon their lands, and all of their name descended of their families, to the Earl of Caithness, Sir James Campbell of Lawers, James Menzies of Culdarers, or any two of them.  These lists  are interesting, showing, as they do, those who were considered the greater and lesser barons at the time.  We find four Mackenzies in the  former but not one in the latter. [For the full lists see Antiquarian Notes,  pp. 184 and 187.]

On the 1st of March, 1681, Kenneth was served heir male to his greatg-randfather, Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, in his lands in the Lordship  of Ardmeanach and in the Earldom of Ross; was made a member of the  Privy Council by James II. on his accession to the throne in 1685, and  chosen a Knight Companion of the Thistle, on the revival of that ancient  Order in 1687.  The year after the Revolution Seaforth accompanied his  Royal master to France, but when that Prince returned to Ireland in the  following year to make a final effort for the recovery of his kingdom, he was accompanied thither by the Earl.  There he took part in the siege of  Londonderry and in other engagements, and as an expression of gratitude  James created him Marquis of Seaforth, under which title he repeatedly appears in various legal documents.  This well-meant and deserved honour, however, came too late in the falling fortunes and declining powers of the ex-King, and does little more than mark his Royal confirmation of the steady adherence of the chiefs of Kintail to the cause of  the unfortunate Stuarts.

Viscount Dundee in a letter to the "Laird of Macleod," dated  "Moy, June 23, 1689" [About this time Viscount Tarbat boasted to  General Mackay of his great influence with his countrymen, especially the Clan Mackenzie, and assured him "that though Seaforth should come to his own country and among his friends, he (Tarbat) would overturn in  eight days more than the Earl could advance in six weeks  yet be proved as  backward as Seaforth or any other of the Clan.  And though Redcastle,  Coul, and others of the name of Mackenzie came, they fell not on final  methods, but protested a great deal of affection for the cause."--Mackay's  Memoirs.] in which he details his own and the King's prospects, gives a  list of those who are to join him.  "My Lord Seaforth," he says, "will be in  a few days from Ireland to raise his men for the King's service;" but the fatal shot which closed the career of that brilliant star and champion of the  Stuart dynasty at Killiecrankie, arrested the progress of the family of  Seaforth in the fair course to all the honours which a grateful dynasty  could bestow; nor was the family of Kintail singular in this respect--seeing its flattering prospects withered at, perhaps, a fortunate moment for  the prosperity of the Empire. Jealousies have now passed away on that  subject, and it is not our business to discuss or in any way confound the principles of contending loyalties.

To check the proceedings of the Mackenzies, Mackay placed a  garrison of a hundred Mackays in Brahan Castle, the principal seat of the Earl, and an equal number of Rosses in Castle Leod, the mansion of  Viscount Tarbat, both places of strength, and advantageously situated for watching the movements of the Jacobite Mackenzies. [Life of General  Mackay, by John Mackay of Rockfield, pp. 36-37.]

Seaforth seems to have left Ireland immediately after the battle of  the Boyne, and to have returned to the Highlands.  The greater part of the  North was at the time hostile to the Government, and General Mackay was  obliged to march north, with all haste, before a general rising could take  place under Buchan, who now commanded the Highlanders who stood out  for King James.  Mackay was within four hours march of Inverness before  Buchan, who was then at that place "waiting for the Earl of Seaforth's and  the other Highlanders whom he expected to join him in attacking the  town," knew of his approach.  Hearing of the proximity of the enemy,  Buchan at once retreated, crossed the River Ness, and retired along the  north side of the Beauly Firth, eastward through the Black Isle.  In this emergency, Seaforth, fearing the personal consequences of the part be had acted throughout, sent two of his friends to General Mackay, offering  terms of submission and whatever securities might be required for his  future good behaviour, informing him at the same time that, although he  had been forced to appear on the side of James, he never entertained any  design of molesting the Government forces or of joining Buchan in his  attack on the town of Inverness. Mackay replied that he could accept no  security other than the surrender of his Lordship's person, at the same time  conjuring him to comply, as he valued his own safety and the preservation of his family and people, and assuring him that in the case of surrender he  should be detained in civil custody in Inverness, and treated with the  respect due to his rank, until the will of the Government should become  known.  Next day the Earl's mother, the Countess Dowager of Seaforth,  and Sir Alexander Mackenzie of Coul proceeded to Inverness, to plead  with Mackay for a mitigation of the terms proposed, but finding him  inflexible, they told him that Seaforth would accede to any conditions  agreed to by them in his behalf. It was thereupon stipulated that he should  deliver himself up at once and be kept a prisoner in Inverness until the  Privy Council decided as to his ultimate disposal.  With the view of  concealing his voluntary submission from his own clan and his other  Jacobite friends, it was agreed that the Earl should allow himself to be siezed at one of his seats by a party of horse under Major Mackay, as if he  were taken by surprise.  He, however, disappointed those sent to take him,  in excuse of which, his mother and he, in letters to General Mackay,  pleaded the delicate state of his health, which, it was urged, would suffer  from imprisonment; and indeed few can blame him for any unwillingness  to place himself absolutely at the disposal of such a body as the Privy  Council of Scotland then was--many of whom would not hesitate in the  slightest to sacrifice him, if by so doing they could only see any chance of  obtaining a share, however small, of his extensive estates.  General Mackay became so irritated at the deception thus practised  upon him that he resolved to treat Seaforth's vassals "with all the rigour of military execution," and he sent his Lordship a message that if he did not  surrender forthwith according to his promise, he should at once carry out his instructions from the Privy Council by entering his country with fire and sword, and seizing all the property belonging to himself or to his clan  as lawful prize; and, lest the Earl should have any doubt as to his intention  of executing this terrible treat, he immediately ordered three Dutch  regiments from Aberdeen to Inverness, and decided on leading a  competent body of horse and foot in person from the garrison at the latter  place, to take possession of Brahan Castle.  The General, at the same time wrote instructing the Earl of Sutherland, Lord Reay, and  Ross of Balnagown, to send a thousand of their men, under Major Wishart an experienced officer acquainted with the country, to take up their quarters in  the more remote districts of the Seaforth estates, should that extreme step,  as he much feared, become necessary. Having, however, a friendly  disposition towards the followers of Seaforth, on account of their being  "all Protestants and none of the most dangerous enemies," and being more  anxious to get hold of his Lordship's person than to ruin his friends, he caused information of his intentions to be sent to Seaforth's camp by some of his own party, as if from a feeling of friendship for him the result being  that, contrary to Mackay's expectations, Seaforth surrendered--thus relieving him from a most disagreeable duty, [Though the General "was not  immediately connected with the Seaforth family himself, some of his near  relatives were, both by the ties of kindred and of ancient friendship.  For  these, and other reasons it may be conceived what joy and thankfulness to Providence he felt for the result of ibis affair, which at once relieved him  from a distressing dilemma, and promised to put a speedy period to his  labours in Scotland."--Mackay's Life of General Mackay.]--and he was at once committed a prisoner to the Castle of Inverness.

Writing to the Privy Council about the disaffected chiefs at the time, General Mackay says--"I believe it shall fare so with the Earl of  Seaforth, that is, that he shall haply submit when his country is ruined and  spoyled, which is the character of a true Scotsman, wyse behinde the  hand." [Letters to the Privy Council, dated 1st September, 1690.]  By  warrant, dated 7th October, 1690, the Privy Council directs Mackay "to  transport the person of Kenneth, Earl of Seaforth, with safety from  Inverness to Edinburgh, in such way and manner as he should think fit."

This done, he was on the 6th November following confined within the  Castle of Edinburgh, but, little more than a year afterwards, he was  liberated, on the 7th January, 1692, having found caution to appear when  called upon, and on condition that he should not go ten miles beyond the  walls of Edinburgh.  He appears not to have implemented these conditions  for any length of time, for shortly after he is again in prison  almost immediately makes his escape is apprehended on the 7th of May, the same  year, at Pencaitland and again kept confined in the Castle of Inverness,  from which he is ultimately and finally liberated on giving sufficient  security for his peaceable behaviour, [Records of the Privy Council, and Mackay's Memoirs.] the following being the order for his release:--

"William R., Right trusty and right-well-beloved Councillors, &c., we greet you well.  Whereas we are informed that Kenneth, Earl of Seaforth, did surrender himself prisoner to the commander of our garrison at Inverness, and has thrown himself on our Royal mercy; it is our will and  pleasure, and we hereby authorise and require you to set the said Earl of Seaforth at liberty, upon his finding bail and security to live peaceably under our Government and to compear before you when called.  And that  you order our Advocate not to insist in the process of treason waged  against him until our further pleasure be known therein.  For doing  whereof this shall be your warrant, so we bid you heartily farewell.

Given  at our Court at Kensington, the first day of March, 1696-7, and of our  reign the eighth year.  By his Majesty's command.

(Signed)          "TULLIBARDINE."

During the remaining years of his life, Seaforth appears to have lived mainly in France.  Apart from his necessary absence from his own country during the long-continued period of political irritation, the  exhausted state of his paternal revenues would have rendered his  residence abroad highly expedient.  We accordingly find several discharges for feu-duties granted by others in his absence, such as the  following:--

"I, Maister Alexander Mackenzie, lawful brother to the Marquis of Seaforth, grants me to have received from John Mathesone, all and hail  the somme of seaven hundred and twentie merks Scots money and that in  complete payment of his duties and or the lands of both the Fernacks and  Achnakerich, payable Martimass ninety (1690), dated 22d November,  1694."

There is another by "Isobel, Countess Dowager of Seaforth, in  1696, tested by `Rorie Mackenzie, servitor to the Marquis of Seaforth,'" and an original discharge by "me, Isobell, Countess Dowager of Seaforth, Lady Superior of the grounds, lands, and oyes under-written," to Kenneth  Mackenzie of Dundonnel, dated at Fortrose, 15th November, 1697, signed,  "Isobell Seaforth." [Allangrange Service, on which occasion thc originals were produced.]  It may fairly be presumed that, during the whole of this period, Earl Kenneth was in retirement, and that be took no personal part in the management of his estates for the remainder of his life.

His clansmen, however, seem to have been determined to protect his interest as much as they could.  A certain Sir John Dempster of Pitliver  had advanced Seaforth and his mother, the Countess Dowager, a large  sum of money and obtained a decree of Parliament to have the amount  refunded to him.  The cash was not forthcoming, and Sir John secured  letters of horning and arrestment against them, and employed several  officers to serve them, but they returned the letters unexecuted, not finding  notum accessum in the Earl's country, and they refused altogether to  undertake the duty again without the assistance of the King's forces in the  district.  Sir John petitioned for this aid, and humbly craved the Privy  Council to allow him "a competent assistance of his Majesty's forces at Fort-William, Inverness, or where they are lying adjacent to the places  where the said dilligence is to be put in execution, to support and protect  the messengers" in the due enforcement of the legal dilligence against the  Earl and his mother, "by horning, poinding, arrestment, or otherways,"  and to recommend to the Governor at Fort-William, or the commander of  the forces at Inverness, to grant a suitable force for the purpose.

Their  Lordships having considered the petition, recommended Sir Thomas  Livingstone, commander-in-chief of his Majesty's forces, to order some of the officers already mentioned to furnish the petitioner "with competent  parties of his Majesty's forces" to support and protect the messengers in the due execution of the "legal dilligence upon the said decreet of  Parliament." [For this document see Antiquarian Notes, pp 118-119.]

The Earl married Lady Frances Herbert, second daughter of  William, Marquis of Powis, an English nobleman, by Lady Elizabeth  Somerset, daughter of Edward, Marquis of Worcester, with issue--

I.  William, his heir and successor.

II.  Mary, who married John Careyl, with issue.

He died at Paris, in 1701, and was succeeded by his only son,

XVII.  WILLIAM,  FIFTH  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,

Generally known among the Highlanders as "Uilleam Dubh."  He succeeded at a most critical period in the history of Scotland, just when the country was divided on the great question of Union with England,  which in spite of the fears of most of the Highland chiefs and nobles of  Scotland, ultimately turned out so beneficial to both.  He would, no doubt,  have imbibed strong Jacobite feelings during his residence with his exiled  parents in France.  But little information of William's proceedings during  the first few years of his rule is obtainable.  He seems to have continued  abroad, for on the 23d of May, 1709, an order is found addressed to the forester at Letterewe signed by his mother the Dowager, "Frances Seaforth."  But on the 22d of June, 1713, she addresses a letter to Colin Mackenzie of Kincraig, in which she says--"I find my son William is fully  inclined to do justice to all.  Within fifteen days he will be at Brahan." [Original produced at Allangrange Service in 1829.]

At this period the great majority of the southern nobles were ready to break out into open rebellion, while the Highland chiefs were almost to  a man prepared to rise in favour of the Stuarts.  This soon became known  to the Government.  Bodies of armed Highlanders were seen moving about  in several districts in the North.  A party appeared in the neighbourhood of  Inverness which was, however, soon dispersed by the local garrison.  The  Government became alarmed, and the Lords Justices sent a large number  of half-pay officers, chiefly from the Scottish regiments, to officer the militia, under command of Major General Whitham, commander-in-chief  at the time in Scotland.  These proceedings alarmed the Jacobites, most of whom returned to their homes.  The Duke of Gordon was confined in Edinburgh Castle, and the Marquis of Huntly and Lord Drummond in their  respective residences.  The latter fled to the Highlands and offered bail for  his good behaviour.  Captain Campbell of Glendaruel, who had obtained a  commission from the late Administration to raise an independent  company of Highlanders, was apprehended at Inverlochy and sent prisoner  to Edinburgh.  Sir Donald Macdonald, XI. of Sleat, was also seized and  committed to the same place, and a proclamation was issued offering a  reward of ?00,000 sterling for the apprehension of the Chevalier, should he land or attempt to land in Great Britain.  King George, on his arrival,  threw himself entirely into the arms of the Whigs, who alone shared his favours.  A spirit of the most violent discontent was excited throughout  the whole kingdom, and the populace, led on by the Jacobite leaders,  raised tumults in different parts of the King's dominions.  The Chevalier,  taking advantage of this excitement, issued a manifesto to the chief  nobility, especially to the Dukes of Shrewsbury, Marlborough, and Argyll, who at once handed them to the Secretaries of State.

The King dissolved Parliament in January, 1715, and issued an extraordinary proclamation calling together a new one.  The Whigs were  successful both in England and Scotland, but particularly in the latter,  where a majority of the peers, and forty out of the forty-five members  then returned to the Commons, were in favour of his Majesty's  Government.  The principal Parliamentary struggle was in the county of  Inverness between Mackenzie of Prestonhall, strongly supported by  Glengarry and the other Jacobite chiefs, and Forbes of Culloden, brother  of the celebrated President, who carried the election through the influence  of Brigadier-General Grant and the friends of Lord Lovat.

The Earl of Mar, who had rendered himself extremely unpopular among the Jacobite chiefs, afterwards rewarded some of his former favourites by advocating the repeal of the Union.  He was again made Secretary of State for Scotland in 1713, but was unceremoniously dismissed from office by George I., and he vowed revenge.  He afterwards  found his way to Fife, and subsequently to the Braes of Mar.  On the 19th of August, 1715, he despatched letters to the principal Jacobites, among  whom was Lord Seaforth, inviting them to attend a grand hunting match at  Braemar on the 27th of the same month.  This was a ruse meant to cover  his intention to raise the standard of rebellion and that the Jacobites were  let into the secret is evident from the fact that as early as the 6th of August those of them in Edinburgh and its neighbourhood were aware of his intentions to come to Scotland.  Under pretence of attending this grand  match, a considerable number of noblemen and gentlemen arrived at  Aboyne at the appointed time.   Among them were the Marquis of Huntly,  eldest son of the Duke of Gordon the Marquis of Tullibardine, eldest son  of the Duke of Athole; the Earls of Nithsdale, Marischal, Traquair, Errol,  Southesk, Carnwarth, Seaforth, and Linlithgow; the Viscounts Kilsyth,  Kenmure, Kingston, and Stormont Lords Rollo, Duffus, Drummond,  Strathallan, Ogilvie, and Nairne; and about twenty-six other gentlemen of influence in the Highlands, among whom were Generals Hamilton and  Gordon, Glengarry, Campbell of Glendaruel, and the lairds of  Aucterhouse and Auldbar. [Rae, p 189; Annals of King George, pp. 15-16.]  Mar delivered a stirring address, in which he expressed regret for his  past conduct in favouring the Union, and, now that his eyes were opened,  promising to do all in his power to retrieve the past and help to make his countrymen again a free people.  He produced a commission from James  appointing him Lieutenant-General and Commander of all the Jacobite  forces in Scotland, and at the same time informed the meeting that he was supplied with money, and that an arrangement had been made by which he  would be able to pay regularly any forces that might be raised, so that no  gentleman who with his followers should join his standard would be put to any expense, and that the country would be entirely relieved of the cost of  conducting the war; after which the meeting unanimously resolved to take  up arms for the purpose of establishing the Chevalier on the Scottish throne.  They then took the oath of fidelity to Mar as the representative of  James VIII. and to each other, and separated, each going home after  promising to raise his vassals and to be in readiness to join the Earl  whenever summoned to do so.  They had scarcely arrived at their  respective destinations when they were called upon to meet him at  Aboyne on the 3d of September following, where, with only sixty  followers, Mar proclaimed the Chevalier at Castletown in Braemar, after  which he proceeded to Kirkmichael, and on the 6th of September, raised  his standard in presence of a force of 2000, mostly consisting of cavalry.

When in course of erection, the ball on the top of the flag-staff fell off.

This was regarded by the Highlanders as a bad omen, and it cast a gloom  over the proceedings of the day.

Meanwhile Colonel Sir Hector Munro, who bad served as Captain  in the Earl of Orkney's Regiment with reputation in the wars of Queen Anne, raised his followers, who, along with a body of Rosses, numbered  about 600 men.  With these, in November, 1715, he encamped at Alness  and on the 6th of October following he was joined by the Earl of  Sutherland, accompanied by his son, Lord Strathnaver, and by Lord Reay,  with an additional force of 600, in the interest of the Whig Government,  and to cover their own districts and check the movements of the Western  clans in effecting a junction with the Earl of Mar, whom Earl William and Sir Donald Macdonald had publicly espoused, as already stated, at the  pretended hunting match in Braemar.  The meeting at Alness was  instrumental in keeping Seaforth in the North.  If the Earl and his mother's  clans had advanced a month earlier the Duke of Argyll would not have dared to advance against Mar's united forces, who might have pushed an  army across the Forth sufficient to have paralyzed any exertion that might  have been made to preserve a shadow of the Government. It may be said  that if Dundee had lived to hold the commission of Mar, such a junction  would not have been necessary, which amounts to no more than saying  that the life of Dundee would have been tantamount to a restoration of the  Stuarts Mar was not trained in camp, nor did he possess the military  genius of Dundee.  Had Montrose a moiety of his force things would have  been otherwise. Mar, trusting to Seaforth's reinforcement, was inactive, and Seaforth was for a time kept in by the collocation of Sutherland's  levies, till he was joined by 700 Macdonalds and detachments from other clans, amounting, with his own followers, to 3000 men, with which he  promptly attacked the Earl of Sutherland, who fled with his mixed army  precipitately to Bonar-Bridge, where they dispersed. A party of Grants on  their way to join them, on being informed of Sutherland's retreat, thought  it prudent to retrace their steps. Seaforth, thus relieved, levied  considerable fines on Munro's territories, which were fully retaliated  for  during his absence with the Jacobite army, to join which he now set out;  and Sir John Mackenzie of Coul, whom he had ordered to occupy  Inverness, was, after a gallant resistance, forced by Lord Lovat, at the head  of a mixed body of Frasers and Grants, to retire with his garrison to Ross-shire.  "Whether he followed his chief to Perth does not appear; but on  Seaforth's arrival that Mar seems for the first time to have resolved on the  passage of the Firth--a movement which led to the Battle of Sheriffmuir--is evident and conclusive as to the different features given to the whole campaign by the Whig camp at Alness, however creditable to the noble  Earl and his mother's confederates.  But it is not our present province to enter on a military review of the conduct of either army preceding this  consequential conflict, or to decide to which party the victory, claimed by  both parties, properly belonged  suffice it to say that above 3000 of  Seaforth's men formed a considerable part of the second line, and seem  from the general account on that subject to have done their duty."  [Bennetsfield MS.]  A great many of Seaforth's followers were slain,  among whom were four Highlanders who appear to have signally  distinguished themselves. They were John Mackenzie of Hilton, who  commanded a company of the Mackenzies, John Mackenzie of  Applecross, John Mac Rae of Conchra, and John Murchison of Achtertyre.

Their prowess on the field had been commemorated by one of their  followers, John MacRae, who escaped and returned home, in an excellent  Gaelie poem, known as "Latha Blar an t-Siorra," the " Day of  Sheriffmuir."  The fate of these renowned warriors was keenly regretted  by their Highland countrymen, and they are still remembered and distinguished amongst them as "Ceithear Ianan na h-Alba," or The four Johns  of Scotland.

During the preceding troubles Ellandonnan Castle got into the  hands of the King's troops, but shortly before Sheriffmuir it was again secured by the following clever stratagem:--A neighbouring tenant applied to the Governor for some of the garrison to cut his corn, as he  feared from the appearance of the sky and the croaking of ravens that a  heavy storm was impending, and that nothing but a sudden separation of  his crop from the ground could save his family from starvation.  The  Governor readily yielded to his solicitations, and sent the garrison of  Government soldiers then in the castle to his aid, who, on their return,  discovered the ruse too late for the Kintail men were by this time reaping  the spoils, and had possession of the castle.  "The oldest inhabitant of the  parish remembers to have seen the Kintail men under arms, dancing on the  leaden roof, just as they were setting out for the Battle of Sheriffmuir, where this resolute band was cut to pieces." [Old Statistical Account of  Kintail, 1792.]

Inverness continued meanwhile in possession of the Mackenzies, under command of the Governor, Sir John Mackenzie of Coul, and George  Mackenzie of Gruinard.  Macdonald of Keppoch was on the march to  support Sir John at Inverness, and Lord Lovat, learning this, gathered his  men together, and on the 7th of November decided to throw himself  across the river Ness and place his forces directly between Keppoch and  the Governor.  Sir John, on discovering Lovat's movement, resolved to  make a sally out of the garrison and place the enemy between him and the  advancing Keppoch, where he could attack him with advantage, but  Macdonald became alarmed and returned home through Glen-Urquhart,  whereupon Lord Lovat marched straight upon Inverness, and took up a  position about a mile to the west of the town.  The authorities were  summoned to send out the garrison and the Governor, or the town would  be burnt and the inhabitants put to the sword.  Preparations were made for  the attack, but Sir John Mackenzie, considering that any further defence  was hopeless, on the 10th of November collected together all the boats he could find and at high water safely effected his escape from the town, when Lovat marched in without opposition.  His Lordship advised the Earl  of Sutherland that he had secured possession of Inverness, and on the 15th  of November the latter, leaving Colonel Robert Munro of Fowlis as  Governor of Inverness, went with his followers, accompanied by Lord  Lovat with some of his men, to Brahan Castle, and compelled the  responsible men of the Clan Mackenzie who were not in the South with  the Earl of Seaforth to come under an obligation for their peaceable  behaviour, and to return the arms previously taken from the Munros by   Lord Seaforth at Alness; to release the prisoners in their possession, and  promise not to assist Lord Seaforth directly or indirectly in his efforts against the Government; that they would grant to the Earl of Sutherland  any sum of money he might require from them upon due notice for the use  of the Government; and, finally, that Brahan Castle, the principal  residence of the Earl of Seaforth, should be turned into a garrison for King George.

Seaforth returned from Sheriffmuir, and again collected his men near Brahan, but the Earl of Sutherland with a large number of his own  men, Lord Reay's, the Munros, Rosses, Culloden's men, and the Frasers,  marched to meet him and encamped at Beauly, within a few miles of  Mackenzie's camp, and prepared to give him battle, which, when my Lord  Seaforth saw, he thought it convenient to capitulate, own the King's  authority, disperse his men, and propose the mediation of these  Government friends for his pardon.  Upon his submission the King was  graciously pleased to send down orders that upon giving up his arms and  coming into Inverness, he might expect his pardon; yet upon the  Pretender's Anvil at Perth and my Lord Huntly's suggestions to him that  now was the time for them to appear for their King and country, and that  what honour they lost at Dunblane might yet be regained; but while he  thus insinuated to my Lord Seaforth, he  privately found that my Lord  Seaforth had by being an early suitor for the King's pardon, by promising to lay down his arms, and owning the King's authority, claimed in a great measure to an assurance of his life and fortune, which he thought proper  for himself to purchase at the rate of disappointing Seaforth, with hopes of  standing by the good old cause, till Seaforth, with that vain hope, lost the  King's favour that was promised him; which Huntly embraced by taking  the very first opportunity of deserting the Chevalier's cause, and  surrendering himself upon terms made with him  of safety to his life and  fortune.  This sounded so sweet to him that he sleeped so secure as never to dream of any preservation for a great many good gentlemen that made  choice to stand by him and serve under him that many other worthy nobles  who would die or banish rather that not show their personal bravery, and  all other friendly offices to their adherents." [Lord Lovat's Account of the  taking of Inverness.  Patten's Rebellion.]

In February, 1716, hopeless of attaining his object, the unfortunate son of James II. left Scotland, the land of his forefathers, never to visit it  again, and Earl William followed him to the common resort of the exiled  Jacobites of the time.  On the 7th of the following May an Act of attainder  was passed against the Earl and the other chiefs of the Jacobite party.   Their estates were forfeited, though practically in many cases, and  especially in that of Seaforth, it was found extremely difficult to carry the forfeiture into effect.  The Master of Sinclair is responsible for the base  and unfounded allegation that the Earl of Seaforth, the Marquis of Huntly,  and other Jacobites, were in treaty with the Government to deliver up the Chevalier to the Duke of Argyll, that they might procure better terms for themselves than  they could otherwise expect.  This odious charge, which  is not corroborated by any other writer, must be looked upon as highly  improbable." [Fullarton's Highland Clans, p. 471.]  If any proof of the untruthfulness of this charge be required it will be found in the fact that  the Earl returned afterwards to the Island of Lewis, and re-embodied his  vassals there under an experienced officer, Campbell of Ormundel, who  had served with distinction in the Russian army; and it was not until a  large Government force was sent over against him, which he found it  impossible successfully to oppose, that he recrossed to the mainland and  escaped to France.

Among the "gentlemen prisoners" taken to the Castle of Stirling on  the day following the Battle of Sheriffmuir the following are found in a  list published in Patten's Rebellion--Kenneth Mackenzie, nephew to Sir  Alexander Mackenzie of Coul Joh Maclean, adjutant to Colonel  Mackenzie's Regiment Colonel Mackenzie of Kildin, Captain of  Fairburn's Regiment; Hugh MacRae, Donald MacRae, and Christopher MacRae.

The war declared against Spain in December, 1718, again revived the hopes of the Jacobites, who, in accordance with a stipulation between the British Government and the Duke of Orleans, then Regent of France,  had previously, with the Chevalier and the Duke of Ormont at their head,  been ordered out of France.  They repaired to Madrid, where they held  conferences with Cardinal Alberoni, and concerted an invasion of Great  Britain.  On the 10th of March, 1719, a fleet, consisting of ten men-of-war  and twenty-one transports, having on board five thousand men, a large  quantity of ammunition, and thirty thousand muskets, sailed from Cadiz  under the command of the Duke of Ormond, with instructions to join the  rest of the expedition at Corunna, and to make a descent at once upon  England, Scotland, and Ireland.  The sorry fate of this expedition is well known.  Only two frigates reached their destination, the rest having been dispersed and disabled off Cape Finisterre by a violent storm which lasted  about twelve days.  The two ships which survived the storm and reached  Scotland had on board the Earl of Seaforth and Earl Marischal, the  Marquis of Tullibardine, some field officers, three hundred Spaniards, and  arms and ammunition for two thousand men.  They entered Lochalsh  about the middle of May; effected a landing in Kintail and were there  joined by a body of Seaforth's vassals, and a party of Macgregors under  command of the famous Rob Roy; but the other Jacobite chiefs,  remembering their previous disappointments and misfortunes, stood aloof  until the whole of Ormond's forces should arrive.  General Wightman,  who was stationed at Inverness, hearing of their arrival, marched to meet them with 2000 Dutch troops and a detachment of the garrison at   Inverness. Seaforth's forces and their allies took possession of the pass of Glenshiel, but on the approach of the Government forces they retired to  the pass of Strachell, which they decided to defend at all hazards.  They were there engaged by General Wightman, who, after a smart skirmish of  about three hours duration, and after inflicting some loss upon the  Jacobites, drove them from one eminence to another, till night came on,  when the Highlanders, their chief having been seriously wounded, and  giving up all hopes of a successful resistance, retired during the night to  the mountains, carrying Seaforth along with them and the Spaniards next  morning surrendered themselves prisoners of war. [The Spaniards kept  their powder magazine and ball behind the manse, but after the battle of  Glenshiel they set fire to it lest it should fall into the hands of the King's troops.  These balls are still gathered up by sportsmen, and are found in great abundance upon the glebe. Old Statistical Account of Kintail.]

Seaforth, Marischal, and Tullibardine, with the other principal officers, managed to effect their escape to the Western Isles, from which they  afterwards found their way to the Continent.  Rob Roy was placed in  ambush with the view of attacking the Royal troops in the rear and it is  said of him that having more zeal than prudence he attacked the rear of  the enemy's column before they had become engaged in front  his small  party was routed, and the intention of placing the King's troops between  two fires was thus defeated. [A Statistical Account of Glenshiel, by the  Rev. John Macrae, who gives a minute description of the scenes of the  battle, and informs us that in constructing the parliamentary road which runs through the Glen a few years before he wrote, several bullets and  pieces of musket barrels were found and the green mounds which covered  the graves of the slain, and the ruins of a rude breast-work which the  Highlanders constructed on the crest of the hill to cover their position still  marked the scene of the conflict.]  General Wightman sent a detachment  to Ellandonnan Castle, which he ordered to be blown up and demolished.  General Wightman advanced from the Highland Capital by Loch-Ness and a recent writer pertinently asks, "Why he was allowed to pass by such a route without opposition?  It is alleged that Marischal and Tullibardine had interrupted the movements of the invaders by ill timed  altercations about command, but we are provoked to observe that some  extraordinary interposition seems evident to frustrate every scheme  towards forwarding the cause of the ill-fated house of Stuart.  Had the  Chevalier St George arrived earlier, as he might have done; had William  Earl of Seaforth joined the Earl of Mar some time before, as he ought to  have done; and strengthened as Mar would then have been, had he boldly  advanced on Stirling, as it appears he would have done, Argyll's force  would have been annihilated, and James VIII. proclaimed at the Cross of  Edinburgh. Well did the brave Highlanders indignantly demand, `What  did you call us to arms for?  Was it to run away?  What did our own King come for?  Was it to see us butchered by hangmen?'  There was a fatuity  that accompanied all their undertakings which neutralised intrepidity,  devotedness, and bravery  which the annals of no other people can exhibit,  and paltry jealousies which stultified exertions, which, independently of political results, astonished Europe at large." [Bennetsfield MS.]

An Act of Parliament for disarming the Highlanders was passed in 1716, but in some cases to very little purpose for some of the most disaffected clans were better armed than ever, although by the Act the  collectors of taxes were allowed to pay for the arms given in, in no case were any delivered except those which were broken, old, and unfit for use,  and these were valued at prices far above what they were really worth.   Not only so, but a lively trade in old arms was carried on with Holland and  other Continental countries, and these arms were sold to the  commissioners as Highland weapons, at exorbitant prices.  General Wade  afterwards found in the possession of the Highlanders a large quantity of arms which they obtained from the Spaniards who took part in the battle  of Glenshiel, and he computed that the Highlanders opposed to the Government possessed at this time no less than five or six thousand arms  of various kinds.

Wade arrived in Inverness on the 10th of August, 1723, and in  virtue of another Act passed the same year, he was empowered to proceed to the Highlands and to summon the clans to deliver up their arms, and to carry several other recommendations of his own into effect. On his arrival  he immediately proceeded to business, went to Brahan Castle, and called  on the Mackenzies to deliver up their weapons. He took those presented  to him on the word of Murchison, factor on the estate and by the  representation of Sir John Mackenzie Lord Tarbat, Sir Kenneth Mackenzie  of Cromarty, and Sir Colin Mackenzie of Coul, at the head of a large  deputation of the clan, he compromised his more rigid instructions and  accepted a selection of worn-out and worthless arms, and at the same time promised that if the clan exhibited a willing disposition to comply with the orders of the Government he would use his influence in the next Parliament to procure a remission for their chief and his followers; and we  find, that "through his means, and the action of other minions of Court  (Tarbat was then in power), Seaforth received a simple pardon  by letters patent in 1726, for himself and his clan, whose submission was recognised in the sham form of delivering their arms, a matter of the less consequence  as few of that generation were to have an opportunity of wielding them  again in the same cause."

General Wade made a report to the Government, from which we  take the following extract:--"The Laird of the Mackenzies, and other chiefs of the clans and tribes, tenants to the late Earl of Seaforth, came to  me in a body, to the number of about fifty, and assured me that both they and their followers were ready to pay a dutiful obedience to your  Majesty's commands, by a peaceable surrender of their arms; and if your  Majesty would be graciously pleased to procure them an indemnity for the  rents that had been misplaced for the time past, they would for the future  become faithful subjects to your Majesty, and pay them to your Majesty's  receiver for the use of the public.  I assured them of your Majesty's  gracious intentions towards them, and that they might rely on your  Majesty's bounty and clemency, provided they would merit it by their  future good conduct and peaceable behaviour; that I had your Majesty's commands to send the first summons to the country they inhabited; which  would soon give them an opportunity of showing the sincerity of their  promises, and of having the merit to set the example to the rest of the  Highlands, who in their turns were to be summoned to deliver up their  arms, pursuant to the Disarming Act; that they might choose the place they  themselves thought most convenient to surrender their arms; and that I  would answer that neither their persons nor their property should be  molested by your Majesty's troops.  They desired they might be permitted  to deliver up their arms at the Castle of Brahan, the principal seat of their  late superior. who, they said, had promoted and encouraged them to this their submission; but begged that none of the Highland companies might  be present; for, as they had always been reputed the bravest, as well as the  most numerous of the northern clans, they thought it more consistent with their honour to resign their arms to your Majesty's veteran troops; to  which I readily consented.  Summonses were accordingly sent to the  several clans and tribes, the inhabitants of 18 parishes, who were vassals  or tenants of the late Earl of Seaforth, to bring or send in all their arms and  warlike weapons to the Castle of Brahan, on or before the 28th of August.    On the 25th of August I went to the Castle of Brahan with a detachment of 200 of the regular troops, and was met there by the chiefs of the several clans and tribes, who assured me they had used their utmost diligence in  collecting all the arms they were possessed of, which should be brought  thither on the Saturday following, pursuant to the summons they had  received; and telling me they were apprehensive of insults or depredations  from the neighbouring clans of the Camerons and others, who still  continued in possession of their arms.  Parties of the Highland companies were ordered to guard the passes leading to their country; which parties  continued there for their protection, till the clans in that neighbourhood  were summoned and had surrendered their arms.  On the day appointed the several clans and tribes assembled in the adjacent villages, and  marched in good order through the great avenue that leads to the Castle;  and one after the other laid down their arms in the court-yard in great  quiet and decency, amounting to 784 of the several species mentioned in  the Act of Parliament. The solemnity with which this was performed had  undoubtedly a great influence over the rest of the Highland clans; and  disposed them to pay that obedience to your Majesty's commands, by a  peaceable surrender of their arms, which they had never done to any of  your Royal predecessors, or in compliance with any law either before or  since the Union."

The  following account of Donald Murchison's proceedings and of Seaforth's vassals during his exile in France is abridged from an  interesting and valuable work. [Chambers's Domestic Annals of Scotland.]

It brings out in a prominent light the state of the  Highlands and the  futility  of the  power of the Government during that period in the North.

As regards several of the forfeited estates which lay in inaccessible situations in the Highlands, the commissioners had up to this time been  entirely baffled, never having been able even to get them surveyed.

This  was so in a very special manner in the case of the immense territory of the  Earl of Seaforth, extending from Brahan Castle, near Dingwall in the east,  across to Kintail in the west, as well as in the large island of the Lewis.   The districts of Lochalsh and Kintail, on the west coast, the scene of the  Spanish invasion of 1719, were peculiarly difficult of access, there being  no approach from the south, east, or north, except by narrow and difficult  paths, while the western access was only assailable by a naval force.  To all appearance this tract of ground, the seat of many comparatively  opulent tacksmen and cattle farmers, was as much beyond the control of  the six commissioners assembled at their office in Edinburgh, as if it had  been amongst the mountains of Tibet or upon the shores of Madagascar.

For several years after the insurrection, the rents of this district were collected, without the slightest difficulty, for the benefit of the exiled  Earl, and regularly transmitted to him.  At one time a large sum was sent to him in  Spain.  The chief agent in the business was Donald Murchison,  descendant of a line of faithful adherents of the "High Chief of Kintail."

Some of the later generations of the family had been entrusted with the  keeping of Ellandonnan Castle, a stronghold dear to the modern artist as a  picturesque ruin, but formerly of serious importance as commanding a  central point from which radiate Loch Alsh and Loch Duich, in the midst  of the best part of the Mackenzie country. Donald was a man worthy of a  more prominent place in his country's annals than he has yet attained; he acted under a sense of right which, though unfortunately defiant of Acts of  Parliament, was still a very pure sense of right; and in the remarkable  actions which he performed he looked solely to the good of those towards whom he had a feeling of duty.  A more disinterested hero--and he was  one--never lived.

When Lord Seaforth brought his clan to fight for King  James in 1715, Donald Murchison and an elder brother, John,  accompanied him as field officers of the regiment--Donald as Lieutenant-Colonel, and John as Major.  The late Sir Roderick Impey Murchison, the distinguished Geologist, great-grandson of John, possessed a large ivory  and silver "mill," which once contained the commission sent from France  to Donald, as Colonel, bearing the inscription:--"James Rex: forward and spare not."  John fell at Sheriffmuir, in the prime of life; Donald returning  with the remains of the clan, was entrusted by the banished Earl with the management or estates no longer legally but still virtually his.  And for this task Donald was in various respects well qualified, for, strange to say,  the son or the castellan of Ellandonnan--the Sheriffmuir Colonel--had been "bred a writer" in Edinburgh, and was as expert at the business of a factor or estate-agent as in wielding the claymore. [For a short time before  the insurrection, he had acted as factor to Sir John Preston of Preston Hall,  in Mid-Lothian, then also a forfeited estate, but of minor value.]

In bold and avowed insubordination to the Government of George  the First, Mackenzie's tenants continued for ten years to pay their rents to  Donald Murchison, setting at nought all fear of ever being compelled to  repeat the payment to the commissioners.

In 1720 his Majesty's representatives made a movement for  asserting their claims upon the property.   In William Ross of Easterfearn and Robert Ross, a bailie of Tain, they found two men bold enough to undertake the duty of stewardship in their behalf over the Seaforth property, the estates of Grant or Glenmoriston, and or Chisholm of Strathglass.  Little, however, was done that year   beyond  sending out   notices to the tenants, and preparing for more strenuous measures for next  year. The stir they made only produced excitement, not dismay. Some of  the duine-uasals from about Lochcarron, coming down with their cattle to  the south-country fairs, were heard to declare that the two factors would never get anything but leaden coin from the Seaforth tenantry.  Donald  went over the whole country showing a letter he had got from the Earl,  encouraging the people to stand out  at the same time telling them that the  old Countess was about to come north with a factory for the estate, when  she would allow as paid for any rents which they might hand to him. The  very first use to be made of this money was to bring both the old and the young Countesses home immediately to Brahan Castle, where they were  to live as they used to do.  Part of the funds thus acquired,  Murchison  used  in  keeping on foot a party of some sixty armed Highlanders, who, in  virtue of his commission as colonel, he proposed to employ in resisting  any troops of George the First which might be sent to Kintail.  Nor did he  wait to be attacked, but in June, 1720, hearing of a party of excisemen passing near Dingwall with a large quantity of aqua vitae, he fell upon  them and rescued their prize.  The collector of the district reported this  transaction to the Board of Excise, but no notice was taken of it.

In  February, 1721, the two factors sent officers of their own into  the western districts, to assure the tenants of good usage, if they would make a peaceable submission but the men were seized, robbed of their  papers, money, and arms, and quietly sent across the Frith of Attadale,  though only after giving their solemn assurance that they would never  attempt to renew their mission. Resenting this procedure the two factors caused a constable to take a military party from Bernera Barracks,  Glenelg, into Lochalsh, and, if possible, capture those who had been  guilty.  They made a stealthy night-march, and took two men; but the  alarm was given, the two men escaped, and began to fire down upon their  captors from a hillside; then they set fire to the bothy as a signal, and such  a coronach went over all Kintail and Lochalsh as made the soldiers glad to  beat a quick retreat.

After some further proceedings, all ineffectual, the two factors were enabled, on the 13th day of September, to set forth from Inverness  with a party of thirty soldiers and some armed servants of their own, with  the design of enforcing submission to their claims.  Let it be remembered that in those days there were no roads in the  Highlands, nothing but a few  horse-tracks along the principal lines in the country, where not the  slightest effort had ever been made to smooth away the natural difficulties  of the ground.  In two days the factors reached Invermoriston; but here they were stopped for three days, waiting for their heavy luggage, which  was storm-stayed in Castle Urquhart, and there nearly taken in a night  attack by a partisan warrior bearing the name of Evan Roy Macgillivray.   The tenantry of Glenmoriston at first fled with their cattle, but afterwards  a number of them came in and made the appearance of submission.  The  party then moved on towards Strathglass, while Evan Roy respectfully  followed, to pick up any man or piece of baggage that might be left  behind.  At Erchless Castle, and at Invercannich, seats of the Chisholm,  they held courts, and received the submission of a number of the tenants, whom, however, they subsequently found to be "very deceitful."

There were now forty or fifty miles of the wildest Highland country before them, where they had reason to believe they should meet  groups of murderous Camerons and Glengarry Macdonalds, and also  encounter the redoubtable Donald Murchison himself, with his guard of  Mackenzies, unless their military force should be sufficiently strong to  render all such opposition hopeless.  An arrangement having been made  that they should receive an addition of fifty soldiers from Bernera, with whom to pass through the most difficult part of their journey, it seemed  likely that they would appear too strong for resistance and, indeed,  intelligence was already coming to them, that "the people of Kintail, being  a judicious opulent people, would not expose themselves to the punishments of law," and that the Camerons were absolutely determined to give no further provocation to the Government.  Thus assured, they set out in cheerful mood along the valley of Strathglass, and, soon after  passing a place called Knockfin, they were reinforced by Lieutenant  Brymer with the expected fifty men from Bernera. There were now about  a hundred well armed men in the invading body.  They spent the next day  (Sunday)  together in  rest, to gather strength for the ensuing day's march  of about thirty arduous miles, by which they hoped to reach Kintail.

At four in the morning of Monday, the 2d of October, the  party went forward, the Bernera men first, and the factors in the rear. They were as yet far from the height of the country, and from its more  difficult passes; but they soon found that all the flattering tales of non-resistance were groundless, and that the Kintail men had come a good way  out from that district in order to defend it.  The truth was, that Donald Murchison had assembled not only his stated band of Mackenzies, but a  levy of the Lewis men under Seaforth's cousin, Mackenzie of Kildun; also  an auxiliary corps of Camerons, Glengarry and Glenmoriston men, and  some of those very Strathglass men who had been making appearances of  submission. Altogether he had, if the factors were rightly informed, three hundred and fifty men with long Spanish firelocks, under his command, and all posted in the way most likely to give them an advantage over the  invading force.

The rear-guard, with the factors, had scarcely gone a mile when they received a platoon of seven shots from a rising ground near them to  the right, which, however, had only the effect of piercing a soldier's hat    The Bernera company left the party at eight o'clock, as they were passing Lochanachlee, and from this time is heard of no more; how it made its  way out of the country does not appear.  The remainder still advancing,  Easterfearn, as he rode a little before his men, had eight shots levelled at  him from a rude breast-work near by, and was wounded in two places, but  was able to appear as if he had not been touched.  Then calling out some  Highlanders in his service, he desired them to go before the soldiers and do their best, according to their own mode of warfare, to clear the ground  of such lurking parties, so that the troops might advance in safety.

They  performed this service pretty effectually, skirmishing as they went on, and  the main body advanced safely about six miles. They were here arrived at  a place called Ath-na-Mullach, where the waters, descending from the  Cralich and the lofty mountains of Kintail, issue eastwards through a  narrow gorge into Loch Affric.  It was a place remarkably well adapted for  the purpose of a resisting party.  A rocky boss, called Torr-a-Bheathaich,  then densely covered with birch, closes up the glen as with a gate.  The black mountain stream, "spear-deep," sweeps round it.  A narrow path  wound up the rock, admitting of passengers in single file. Here lay  Murchison with the best of his people, while inferior adherents were ready  to make demonstrations at a little distance. As the invading party  approached, they received a platoon from a wood on the left, but  nevertheless went on.  When, however, they were all engaged in toiling up the pass, forty men concealed in the heather close by fired with deadly  effect, inflicting a mortal would on Walter Ross, Easterfearn's son while Bailie Ross's son was wounded by a bullet which swept across his breast.

The Bailie called to his son to retire, and the order was obeyed but the two  wounded youths and Bailie Ross's servant were taken prisoners, and  carried up the hill, where they were quickly divested of clothes, arms,   money, and papers.  Easterfearn's son died next morning.  The troops  faced the ambuscade manfully and are said to have given their fire thrice,  and to have beaten the Highlanders from the bushes near them; but,  observing at this juncture several parties of the enemy on the neighbouring  heights, and being informed of a party of sixty in their rear, Easterfearn deemed it best to temporise.

He thereupon sent forward a messenger to ask who they were that opposed the King's troops, and what they wanted.  The answer was that, in the first place, they required to have Ross of Easterfearn delivered up to  them.  This was pointedly refused; but it was at length arranged that  Easterfearn should go forward and converse with the leader of the  opposing party.  The meeting took place at Beul-ath-na-Mullach, and  Easterfearn found himself confronted with Donald Murchison.  It ended  with Easterfearn giving up his papers, and covenanting, under a penalty of  five hundred pounds, not to officiate in his factory any more; after which  he gladly departed homewards with his associates, under favour of a guard of Donald's men to conduct them safely past the sixty men who were lurking in the rear.  It was alleged afterwards that the commander was  much blamed by his own people for letting the factors off with their lives  and baggage, particularly by  the Camerons, who had been five days at  their post with hardly anything to eat; and Murchison only pacified them  by sending them a good supply of meat and drink.   He had in reality given  a very effective check to the two gentlemen-factors, to one of whom he  imparted in conversation that any scheme of Government stewartship in  Kintail was hopeless, for he and sixteen others had sworn that, if any person calling himself a factor came there, they would take his life,  whether at kirk or at market, and deem it a meritorious action, though they  should be cut to pieces for it the next minute.

A bloody grave for young Easterfearn in Beauly Cathedral  concluded this abortive attempt to take the Seaforth estates within the  scope of a law sanctioned by statesmen, but against which the natural feelings of nearly a whole people revolted.

A second attempt was then made to obtain possession of the  forfeited Seaforth estates for the Government.  It was calculated that what the two factors and their attendants with a small military force had failed  to accomplish in the preceding October, when they were beaten back with  fatal loss at Ath-na-Mullach, might now be effected by a military party  alone, if they should make their approach through a less critical passage.

A hundred and sixty of Colonel Kirk's regiment left Inverness under  Captain M'Neill, who had at one time been Commander of the Highland  Watch.  They proceeded by Dingwall, Strathgarve, and Loch Carron, an  easier, though a longer way.  Donald Murchison, nothing daunted, got  together his followers, and advanced to the top of Mam Attadale, by a  high pass from Loch Carron to the bead of Loch Long, separating  Lochalsh from Kintail.  Here a gallant relative, Kenneth Murchison, and a few others, volunteered to go forward and plant themselves in ambush in  the defiles of the Coille Bhan (White Wood), while the bulk of the party  should remain where they were.  It would appear that this ambush party  consisted of thirteen men, all peculiarly well armed.

On approaching this dangerous place the Captain of the invading party went forward with a sergeant and eighteen men to clear the wood,  while the main body came on slowly in the rear.  At a place called  Altanbadubh, in the Coille Bhan, he encountered Kenneth and his  associates, whose fire wounded himself severely, killed one of his  grenadiers, and wounded several others of the party. He persisted in  advancing, and attacking the handful of natives with sufficient resolution  they slowly withdrew, as unable to resist; but the Captain now obtained  intelligence that a large body of Mackenzies was posted in the mountain  pass of Attadale. It seemed to him as if there was a design to draw him  into a fatal ambuscade.  His own wounded condition probably warned him  that a better opportunity might occur afterwards.  He turned his forces about, and made the best of his way back to Inverness.  Kenneth Murchison quickly rejoined Colonel Donald on Mam Attadale, with the cheering intelligence that one salvo of thirteen guns had repelled the  hundred and sixty red-coats.  After this we hear of no more attempts to  comprise the Seaforth property.

Strange as it may seem, Donald Murchison, two years after this a second time resisting the Government troops, came down to Edinburgh with eight hundred pounds of the Earl's rents, that he might get the money  sent abroad for Seaforth's use.  He remained a fortnight in the city  unmolested.  He on this occasion appeared in the garb of a Lowland  gentleman; he mingled with old acquaintances, "doers" and writers; and  appeared at the Cross amongst the crowd of gentlemen who assembled  there every day at noon.  Scores knew all about his doings at Ath-na-Mullach and the Coille Bhan; but thousands might have known without  the chance of one of them betraying him to the Government.

General Wade, in his report to the King in 1725, stated that the  Seaforth tenants, formerly reputed the richest of any in the Highlands,  were now become poor, by neglecting their business, and applying  themselves to the use of arms,  "The rents" he says, "continue to be  collected by one Donald Murchison, a servant of the late Earl's, who  annually remits or carries the same to his master in France.  The tenants,  when in a condition, are said to have sent him free gifts in proportion to  their circumstances, but are now a year and a-half in arrear of rent.

The  receipts he gives to the tenants are as deputy-factor to the Commissioners  of the Forfeited Estates, which pretended power he extorted from the  factor (appointed by the said Commissioners to collect those rents for the  use of the public), whom he attacked with above four hundred armed men,  as he was going to enter upon the said estate, having with him a party of thirty of your  Majesty's troops.  The last year this Murchison marched in  a public manner to Edinburgh, to remit eight hundred pounds to France for his master's use, and remained fourteen days there unmolested.  I cannot  omit observing to your Majesty that this national tenderness the subjects of North Britain have one for the other is a great encouragement for rebels  and attainted persons to return home from their banishment."

Donald went again to Edinburgh about the end of August, 1725.

On the 2d of September, George Lockhart of Carnwath, writing from that city to the Chevalier St George, states, amongst other information regarding his party in Scotland, that Daniel Murchison (as he calls him)  "is come to Edinburgh, on his way to France"--doubtless charged with a  sum of rents for Seaforth. "He's been in quest of me, and I of him," says Lockhart, "these two days, and missed each other; but in a day or two he's  to be at my country house, where I'll get time to talk fully with him.

In  the meantime, I know from one that saw him that he has taken up and  secured all the arms of value on Seaforth's estate, which he thought better  than to trust them to the care and prudence of the several owners; and the  other chieftains, I hear, have done the same."

The Commissioners on the forfeited estates concluded their final report  in  1725,  by stating that they had not sold the estate of William,  Earl of Seaforth, "not having been able to obtain possession and  consequently to give the same to a purchaser." [In a Whig poem on the  Highland Roads, written in 1737, Donald is characteristically spoken of as  a sort of cateran, while, in reality, as every generous person can now well  understand, he was a high-minded gentleman.  The verses, nevertheless, as well as the appended note, are curious--

Keppoch, Rob Roy, and Daniel Murchison, Cadets are servants to some chief of clan, From theft and robberies scarce did ever cease, Yet `scaped the halter each, and died in peace. This last his exiled master's rents collected, Nor unto Ling or law would be subjected. Though veteran troops upon the confines lay, Sufficient to make lord and tribe a prey, Vet passes strong through which no roads were cut, Safe-guarded Seaforth's clan, each in his hu', Thus in strongholds the rogue securely lay, Neither could they by force be driven away, Till his attainted lord and chief of late By ways and means repurchased his estate.

"Donald Murchison, a kinsman and servant to the Earl of Seaforth, bred a writer, a man of small stature, but full of spirit and resolution, fought at Dunblane against the Government, anno 1715, but continued  thereafter to collect Seaforth's rents for his lord's use, and had some  bickerings with the King's forces on that account, till, about five years ago, the Government was so tender as to allow Seaforth to repurchase his  estate, when the said Murchison had a principal band in striking the  bargain for his master. How he fell under Seaforth's displeasure, and died  thereafter, is not to the purpose here to mention."]

The end of Donald's career can scarcely now be passed over in a  slighting manner.  The story is most painful.  The Seaforth of that day--very unlike some of his successors--proved unworthy of the devotion  which this heroic man had shown to him.  When his lordship took  possession of the estates which Donald had in a manner preserved for him, he discountenanced and neglected him.  Murchison's noble spirit pined  away under this treatment, and he died in the very prime of his days of a broken heart.  He lies in a remote little church-yard in the parish of Urray,  where his worthy relative, the late Sir Roderick Impey Murchison, raised a  suitable monument over his grave.  The traditional account of Donald  Murchison, communicated to Chambers by the late Finlay Macdonald,  Druidaig, states that the heroic commissioner had been promised a  handsome reward for his services; but Seaforth proved ungrateful.  "He  was offered only a small farm called Bun-Da-Loch, which pays at this day  to Mr Matheson, the proprietor, no more than ?0 a year; or another place opposite to Inverinate House, of about the same value.  It is no wonder he  refused these paltry offers.  He shortly afterwards left this country, and  died in the prime of life near Conon.  On his death-bed, Seaforth went to see him, and asked how he was, when he said, `Just as you will be in a  short time,' and then turned his back. They never met again."

The death of George I. in 1726, suggested to the Chevalier a favourable opportunity for attempting a second Rising, and of again stirring up his adherents in Scotland, whither he was actually on his way,  until strongly remonstrated with on the folly and hoplessness of such an  undertaking.  It was pointed out to him that it could only end in the ruin of  his family pretentions, and in that of many of his friends who might be  tempted to enter on the rash scheme more through personal attachment to  himself than from any reasonable prospect they might see of success.  He  therefore retraced his steps to Boulogne; and the Earl of Seaforth having been pardoned in the same year, [By letters dated 12th July, 1726, King  George I. was pleased to discharge him from imprisonment or the  execution of his person on his attainder, and King George II. made him a  grant of the arrears of feu-duties due to the Crown out of his forfeited  estate.  An Act of Parliament was passed in 1733, to enable William  Mackenzie, late Earl of Seaforth, to sue or maintain any action or suit  notwithstanding his attainder, and to remove any disability in him, by  reason of his said attainder, to take or inherit any real or personal estate  that may or shall hereafter descend to him.--Wood's Douglas' Peerage.]  felt free once more to return to his native land, where, according to  Captain Matheson, he spent the remainder of his life in retirement, and "with few objects to occupy him or to interest us beyond the due regard of  his personal friends and the uninterrupted loyalty. of his old vassals."

He  must, however, have been in tightened circumstances, for, on the 27th of  June, 1728, he writes a letter to the Lord Advocate, in which he refers to a  request he had made to Sir Robert Walpole, who advised him to put his  claim in writing that it might be submitted to the King.  This was done,  but "the King would neither allow anything of the kind or give orders to  be granted what his Royal father had granted before.  On hearing this, I  could not forbear making appear how ill I was used.  The Government in possession of the estate, and I in the interim allowed to starve, though they  were conscious of my complying with whatever I promised to see put in  execution."  He makes a strong appeal to his friend to contribute to an  arrangement that would tend to the mutual satisfaction of all concerned,  "for the way I am now in is most disagreeable, consequently, if not  rectified, will choose rather to seek my bread elsewhere than continue  longer in so unworthy a situation." [Culloden Papers, pp. 103-4] Notwithstanding the personal remission granted in his favour for  the part he had taken in the Rising of 1715, the title of Earl of Seaforth,  under which alone he was proscribed, passed under attainder, while the  older and original dignity of Kintail, which only became subordinate  by a future elevation, remained unnoticed, and, consequently unvitiated in the male descent of Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, granted by  patent on the 19th of November, 1609, and it has accordingly been  claimed. [This Act (of Attainder) omits all mention of the subordinate  though older title of "Lord Kintail," which he and all the collateral  branches descended of George, the second Earl, had taken up and assumed  in all their deeds and transactions, though there was no occasion to use it  in Parliament, as they appeared there as Earls of Seaforth.  It is  questionable therefore, if the Act of Attainder of William, Earl of  Seaforth, by that designation only could affect the barony of Kintail; and  as the designation to the patentee of it, "Suisque heredibus maxulis,"  seems to render he grant an entailed fee agreeable to the 7th of Queen  Anne, c. 21, and the protecting clause of 26th Henry VIII. c. 13, the  claimant George Falconer Mackenzie, is entitled to the benefit of such remainder, and in fact such remainder was given effect to by the succession of Earl George to his brother Colin's titles as his heir male  collateral.--Allangrange Service.]

Earl William married in early life, Mary, the only daughter and co-heir of Nicholas Kenet of Coxhow, Northumberland, with issue, three  sons--

I.  Kenneth, who succeeded his father.

II.  Ronald, who died unmarried.

III.  Nicholas, who was drowned at Douay, without issue.

IV.  Frances, who married the Hon. John Gordon of Kenmure,  whose father was beheaded in 1715.

He died in 1740 in the Island of Lewis, was buried there in the Chapel of Ui, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XVIII.  KENNETH,  LORD  FORTROSE,

Which courtesy title he continued to bear as the subordinate title of his father; and under this designation he is named as a freeholder of Ross in 1741.  In the same year be was elected as member of Parliament for the  Burgh of Inverness, for his own County of Ross in 1747, and again  in  1754.  In 1741, the year after Earl William's death, the Crown sold the  Seaforth estates, including the lands of Kintail, the barony of Ellandonnan,  and others, for ?5,109 8s 31/2d, under burden of an annuity of ?000 to  Frances, Countess  Dowager of Seaforth.  The purchase was for the  benefit of Kenneth, Lord Fortrose. [Fraser's Earls of Cromartie.]   He does not appear to have passed much of his time in the Highlands, but about a  year after his succession, he seems, from a warrant issued by his authority  to have been in the North.  It is signed by Colin Mackenzie, Baillie," and  addressed to Roderick Mackenzie, officer of Locks, commanding him to  summon and warn Donald Mackenzie, tacksman of Lainbest, and others,  to compear before "Kenneth, Lord Fortrose, heritable proprietor of the  Estate of Seaforth, at Braan Castle, or before his Lordship's Baron  Baillies, or other judges appointed by him there, upon the 10th day of  October next, to come to answer several unwarrantable and illegal things  to be laid to their charge:"  Dated at "Stornoway, 29th September, 1741." There is no doubt that in early life Lord Fortrose, during the exile of his  father, held communications with the representative of the Stuarts.  It is a  common tradition in Kintail to this day that he and Sir Alexander  Macdonald of Sleat were school companions of the Prince in France, and  were among those who first imbued his mind with the idea of attempting  to regain possession of his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, promising him  that they would use their influence with the other northern chiefs to rise in  his favour, although when the time for action came neither of them joined him.

The unfortunate position in which Kenneth found himself by the Jacobite proclivities of his ancestors, and especially those of his father,  appears to have made a deep impression upon his mind, and to have  induced him to be more cautious in supporting a cause which seemed  certain to land him in final and utter ruin.  But though he personally held  aloof, several of the clan joined the Prince, mostly under George, third  Earl of Cromarty, and a few under John Mackenzie, III. of Torridon.

Several young and powerful Macraes, who strongly sympathised with the  Prince, though unaccompanied by any of their natural leaders, left Kintail  never again to return and, it is said, that several others had to be bound  with ropes by their friends, to keep them at home.  The influence of Lord President Forbes weighed strongly with Mackenzie in deciding him to  support the Government, and, in return for his loyalty, the honours of the  house of Seaforth were, in part, afterwards restored to his son.

In 1744 an exciting incident occurred in Inverness in which his Lordship played a conspicuous part, and which exemplifies the impetuous  character of the Highland chiefs of the day.  A court of the Freeholders of  the county was being held there at Michaelmas to elect a collector of the land tax, at which were present, among others, Lord President Forbes,  Norman  Macleod of Macleod, Lord Fortrose, Lord Lovat, and many  leading members of the Clan Fraser. A warm debate upon some burning  business arose between Lords Lovat and Fortrose, when the  former gave  the latter the lie direct.  To this Mackenzie replied by giving Lovat a smart  blow in the face. Mutual friends at one intervened between the fiery antagonists.  But the Fraser blood was up, and Fraser of Foyers, who was  present, interfered in the interest of the chief of his clan, but more, however, it is said, in that capacity than from any personal esteem in  which he held  him.  He felt that in his chief's person the whole clan had  been insulted as if it had actually been a personal blow to every man of the  name, and he instantly sprung down from the gallery and presented a  loaded and cocked pistol at Mackenzie's head, to whom it would  undoubtedly have proved fatal had not one of the gentlemen present, with  great presence of mind, thrown his plaid over the muzzle, and thus  arrested and diverted its contents. In another moment swords and dirks  were drawn on both sides, but the Lord President and Macleod laid hold of Mackenzie and hurried him from the Court.  Yet he no sooner gained the  outside than one of the Frasers levelled him to the ground with a blow  from a heavy bludgeon, notwithstanding the efforts of his friends to  protect him.  The matter was, however, afterwards, with great difficulty, arranged by mutual friends, between the great clans and their respective  chiefs, otherwise the social jealousies and personal irritations which then  prevailed throughout the whole Highlands, fanned by this incident, would  have produced a lasting and bloody feud between the Frasers and the  Mackenzies.

In the following year, shortly after the Lord President arrived at Culloden from the south, he wrote a letter to Mackenzie dated the 11th of October 1745, in which he tells him that the Earl of Loudon had come the  day before to Cromarty, and brought some "credit" with him, which "will  enable us to put the Independent Companies together for the service of the  Government and for our mutual protection."  He requested Fortrose to  give immediate orders to pick out those who are first to form one of the  companies, that they might receive their commissions and arms.

Alexander Mackenzie of Fairburn was to command.  There was, the President said, a report that Barrisdale had gone to Assynt to raise the men  of that country, to be joined to those of Coigeach, who were said to have orders to be in readiness to join Macdonald, and with instructions to  march through Mackenzie's territories in order to find out how many of  his Lordship's vassals could be persuaded, by fair means or foul, to join the standard of the Prince.  "I hope this is not true," writes the President;  "if it is, it is of the greatest consequence to prevent it.   I wish Fairburn  were at home; your Lordship will let me know when he arrives, as the  Lord Cromarty has refused the company I intended for his son.  Your  Lordship will deliberate to whom you would have it given." [Culloden  Papers, pp. 421-2.]

Exasperated at this time by the exertions made by President Forbes to obstruct the designs of the disaffected, a plan was formed to seize him  by some of the Frasers, a party of whom, amounting to about 200, attacked Culloden House during the night of the 15th of October, but the President being on his guard they were repulsed. [Fraser's Earls of Cromartie.]

On the 13th of October Mackenzie had written to Forbes that he surmised some young fellows of his name attempted to raise men for the  Prince, but that he sent expresses to the suspected parts, with orders to the  tenants not to stir under pain of death without his leave, though their  respective masters should be imprudent enough to desire them to do so.

The messengers returned with the people's blessings for his protection, and with assurances that they would do nothing without his orders, "so  that henceforward your Lordship need not be concerned about any idle  report from benorth Kessock."  In a letter dated "Brahan Castle, 19th  October 1745," Lord Fortrose refers to the attempt on the President's  house, which, he says, surprised him extremely, and "is as dirty an action  as I ever heard of," and he did not think any gentleman would be capable  of doing such a thing.  He adds, "as I understand your cattle are taken  away, I beg you will order your steward to write to Colin, or anybody else  here, for provisions, as I can be supplied from the Highlands.  I am  preparing to act upon the defensive, and I suppose will soon be provoked  to act on the offensive.  I have sent for a strong party to protect my house  and overawe the country.  None of my Kintail men will be down till  Tuesday, but as the river is high, and I have parties at all boats, nothing  can be attempted.  Besides, I shall have reinforcements every day.  I have  ordered my servants to get, at Inverness, twelve or twenty pounds of  powder with a proportionable quantity of shot.  If that cannot be bought at  Inverness, I must beg you will write a line to Governor Grant to give my  servant the powder, as I can do without the shot . Barrisdale has come  down from Assynt, and was collared by one of the Maclauchlans there for  offering to force the people to rise, and he has met with no success there.

I had a message from the Mackenzies in Argyllshire to know what they  should do.  Thirty are gone from Lochiel; the rest, being about sixty, are at  home.  I advised them to stay at home and mind their own business." On the 28th of the same month his Lordship writes to inform the  President that the Earl of Cromarty and his son, Macculloch of  Glastullich, and Ardloch's brother, came to Brahan Castle on the previous Friday; that it was the most unexpected visit he had received for some  time, that he did not like to turn them out, that Cromarty was pensive and  dull; but that if he had known what he knew at the date of writing he  would have made them prisoners, for Lord Macleod went since to  Lochbroom and Assynt to raise men.  He enclosed for the President's use  the names of the officers appointed to the two Mackenzie companies, and  intimated that he offered the commission to both Coul and Redcastle, but that both refused it.  It was from Coul's house, he says, that Lord Macleod  started for the North, and that vexed him.  On the same day Forbes  acknowledges receipt of this letter, and requests that the officers in the  two companies should be appointed according to Mackenzie's recommedations, "without any further consideration than that you judge it  right," and he desires to see Sir Alexander of Fairburn for an hour next  day to carry a proposal to his Lordship for future operations.  "I think," he  adds, "it would be right to assemble still more men about Brahan than you now have; the expense shall be made good and it will tend to make  Caberfey respectable, and to discourage folly among your neighbours."  In a letter of 6th November the President says, "I supposed that your  Lordship was to have marched Hilton's company into town (Inverness) on  Monday or Tuesday; but I dare say there is a good reason why it has not been done."

On the 8th of November Mackenzie informs the Lord President  that the Earl of Cromarty had crossed the river at Contin, with about a hundred men on his way to Beauly, "owing to the neglect of my spies, as  there's rogues of all professions."  Lord  Macleod, Cromarty's son came  from Assynt and Lochbroom the same day, and followed his father to the  rendezvous,  but after traversing the whole of that northern district he did  not get a single volunteer.  "Not a man started from Ross-shire, except  William, Kilcoy's brother, with seven men, and a tenant of Redcastle with a few more and if Lentran and Torridon did go off last night, they did not  carry between them a score of men.  I took a ride yesterday to the  westward with two hundred men, but find the bounds so rugged that it's  impossible to keep a single man from going by if he has a mind.   However, I threatened to burn their cornyards if anybody was from home  this day, and I turned one house into the river for not finding its master at  home.  It's hard the Government gives nobody in the North power to keep  people in order.  I don't choose to send a company to Inverness until I hear  what they are determined to do at Lord Lovat's." The Earl of Loudon writes to Marshal Wade, then Commander-in-Chief in the North, under date of 16th November, saying that 150 or 160  Mackenzies, seduced by the Earl of Cromarty, marched in the beginning  of that week up the north side of Loch-Ness, expecting to be followed by  500 or 600 Frasers, under command of the Master of Lovat, but the  Mackenzies had not on that date passed the mountains.  On the 16th of  December Fortrose writes asking for ?00 expended by him during two  months on his men going to and coming from the Highlands, for which he  would not trouble him only that he bad a very "melancholy appearance" of  getting his Martinmas rent, as the people would be glad of any excuse for non-payment, and the last severe winter, and their having to leave home,  would afford them a very good one.  He was told by the President in reply, that his letter had been submitted to Lord Loudon, that both of them  agreed that his Lordship's expenses must have been far greater than what  he claimed, "but as cash is very low with us at present, all we can possibly  do is to let your Lordship have the pay of the two companies from the date  of the letter signifying that they were ordered to remain at Brahan for the  service of the Government. The further expense, which we are both  satisfied it must have cost your Lordship, shall be made good as soon as  any money to be applied to contingencies, which we expect, shall come to  hand, and if it should not come so soon as we wish, the account shall be  made up and solicited, in the same manner with what we lay out of our  own purses, which is no inconsiderable sums."  This correspondence will  show the confidence which then existed between the Government and  Lord Fortrose.

On the 9th of December the two Mackenzie companies were  marched into Inverness.   Next day, accompanied by a detachment from Fort-Augustus, they proceeded to Castle Dounie for the purpose of bringing Lord Lovat to account.  The crafty old Simon agreed to come in  to Inverness and to deliver up his arms on the 14th of the month, but  instead of doing so he of course made good his escape. After the battle of Prestonpans, the Government, on the  recommendation of the Earl of Stair, forwarded twenty blank  commissions to President Forbes, with orders to raise as many companies  of 100 men each, among the Highlanders.  Eighteen of the twenty were  sent to the Earls of Sutherland and Cromarty, Lords Fortrose and Reay, the  Lairds of Grant and Macleod, and Sir Alexander Macdonald of Sleat, with  instructions to raise the Highland companies in their respective districts.   The Earl of Cromarty, while pretending to comply with the instructions of the Lord President, offered the command of one of the companies to a  neighbouring gentleman, whom he well knew to be a strong Jacobite, and  at the same time made some plausible excuse for his son's refusal of  another of the commissions.

When Lord John Drummond landed with a body of Irish and  Scotch troops, in the service of the French, to aid Prince Charles, he wrote  to Mackenzie announcing his arrival and earnestly requesting him to  declare at once for the Stuart cause, as the only means by which he could "now expect to retrieve his character."  All the means at Drummond's  disposal proved futile, and the Mackenzies were thus kept out of the  Rising of 1745.

That Prince Charles fully appreciated the importance of having the Mackenzies led by their natural chief, for or against him, will be seen  from Lord Macleod's Narrative of the Rebellion. [Printed at length in  Fraser's Earls of Cromartie.]  "We set out," his Lordship says, "from  Dunblain on the 12th of January, and arrived the same evening at  Glasgow.  I immediately went to pay my respects to the Prince, and found  that he was already set down to supper.  Dr Cameron told Lord George  Murray, who sat by the Prince, who I was, on which the Lord Murray  introduced me to the Prince, whose hand I had the honour to kiss, after  which the Prince ordered me to take my place at the table.  After supper I  followed the Prince to his apartment to give him an account of his affairs  in the North, and of what had passed in these parts during the time of his expedition to England.  I found that nothing surprised the Prince so much as to hear that the Earl of Seaforth had declared against him, for he heard  without emotion the names of the other people who had joined the Earl of  Loudon at Inverness; but when I told him that Seaforth had likewise sent  two hundred men to Inverness for the service of the Government, and that  he had likewise hindered many gentlemen of his clan from joining my  father (the Earl of Cromarty) for the service of the Stuarts, he turned to the  French Minister and said to him, with some warmth, Hc! mon Dieu! et Seaforth est aussi contre moi!"

At this stage a hero named Mackenzie, who had done good service to the Prince in his wanderings through the Highlands after the battle of Culloden, may be mentioned. Such a small tribute is due to the gallant  Roderick Mackenzie, whose intrepidity and presence of mind in the last  agonies of death, saved his Prince from pursuit at the time, and was  consequently the means of his ultimate escape in safety to France.

Charles had been pursued with the most persevering assiduity, but Roderick's ruse proved so successful on this occasion that further search was for a time considered unnecessary.  Mackenzie was a young man, of  respectable family, who joined the Prince at Edinburgh, and served as one of his life-guards.  Being about the same age as his Royal Highness, and, like him, tall, somewhat slender, and with features in some degree  resembling his, he might, by ordinary observers not accustomed to see the two together, have passed for the Prince himself.  As Roderick could not  venture with safety to return to Edinburgh, where still lived his two  maiden sisters, he after the battle of Culloden fled to the Highlands and lurked among the hills of Glenmoriston, where, about the middle of July, he was surprised by a party of Government soldiers.  Mackenzie endeavoured to escape, but, being overtaken, he turned on his pursuers,  and, drawing his sword, bravely defended himself.  He was ultimately shot by one of the red-coats, but as he fell, mortally wounded, he exclaimed,  "You have killed your Prince!  You have killed your Prince!" whereupon  he immediately expired.  The soldiers, overjoyed at their supposed good  fortune, cut off his head, and hurried off to Fort-Augustus with their prize.

The Duke of Cumberland, quite convinced that he had now obtained the  head of his Royal relative, packed it up carefully, ordered a post-chaise,  and at once went off to London, taking the head along with him.  After his  arrival the deception was discovered, but meanwhile it proved of great  assistance to Prince Charles in his ultimately successful efforts to escape.

Shortly after the battle of Culloden a fleet of ships appeared off the  coast of Lochbroom, under the command of Captain Fergusson. They  dropped anchor at Loch-Ceannard, when a large party went ashore and  proceeded up the Strath to the residence of Mr Mackenzie of Langwell,  connected by marriage with the Earl of Cromarty.  Langwell having  supported the Prince, fled out of the hated Fergusson's way; but his lady was obliged to remain at home to attend to a large family of young  children, who were at the time laid up with smallpox.  The house was  ransacked.  A large chest containing the family and other valuable papers,  including a wadset of Langwell and Inchvannie from her relative, George,  Earl of Cromarty, was burnt before her eyes; and about fifty head of fine Highland cattle were mangled by the swords and driven to the ships of the spoilers. Nor did this satisfy them.  They committed similar depredations, without any discrimination between friend or foe, for eight days during  which they remained in the neighbourhood. [New Statistical Account of  Lochbroom.]

It is well known that Mackenzie had strong Jacobite feelings although his own prudence and the influence of Lord President Forbes secured his support for the Government.  "Though many respectable individuals of the Clan Mackenzie had warmly espoused the cause of Charles, Lord Fortrose seems at no time to have proclaimed openly for  him, whatever hopes he might have countenanced when in personal communication with the expatriated Sovereign, as indeed there is cause to infer something of the kind from a letter which, towards the end of  November, 1745, was addressed by Lord John Drummond to Kenneth,  pressing him instantly to join the Prince, then successfully penetrating the  West of England, and qualifying the invitation by observing that it was the  only mode for his Lordship to retrieve his character.  Yet so little did  Fortrose or his immediate followers affect the cause, that when Lord Lovat  blockaded Fort-Augustus, two companies of Mackenzies, which bad been  stationed at Brahan, were withdrawn, and posted by Lord Loudon, the  commander-in-chief of the Government forces, at Castle Dounie, the  stronghold of Fraser and, with the exception of these, the Royal party  received no other support from the family of Seaforth, though many  gentlemen of the clan served in the King's army.  Yet it appears that a still greater number, with others whose ancestors identified themselves with  the fortunes of the House of Kintail, were inclined to espouse the more  venturous steps of the last of the Stuarts.  George, the last Earl of  Cromarty, being then paramount in power, and, probably so, in influence,  even to the chief himself, having been, for certain reasons, liable to  suspicions as to their disinterested nature, declared for Charles, and under  his standard his own levy, with all the Jacobite adherents of the clan,  ranged themselves, and were mainly instrumental in neutralizing Lord  Loudon's and the Laird of Macleod's forces in the subsequent operations  of 1746, driving them with the Lord President Forbes, to take shelter in the  Isle of Skye." [Bennetsfield MS.]

Kenneth married on the 11th of September, 1741, Lady Mary,  eldest daughter of Alexander Stewart, sixth Earl of Galloway, with issue--

I.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

II.  Margaret, who on the 4th of June, married William Webb.

III.  Mary, who married Henry Howard, of Effingham, with issue.

IV.  Agnes, who married J. Douglas.

V.  Catherine, who on the 1st of March, 1773, married Thomas  Griffin Tarpley, student of medicine.

VI.  Frances, who married General Joseph Wald.

VII.  Euphemia, who, on the 2nd of April, 1771, married William Stewart of Castle Stewart, M.P. for the County of Wigton.

His wife died in London on the 18th of April, 1751, and was buried at Kensington, where a monument was raised to her memory.  Kenneth died, also in London, on the 19th of October, 1761, and was buried in  Westminster Abbey, when he was succeeded by his only son,

XIX.  KENNETH,  SIXTH  EARL  OF  SEAFORTH,

Viscount Fortrose, and Baron Ardelve, in the Peerage of Ireland. From his  small stature, he was generally known among the Highlanders as the  "Little Lord."  He was born in Edinburgh on the 15th of January, 1744,  and at an early age entered the army.  As a return for his father's loyalty to  the House of Hanovar in 1745, and his own steady support of the reigning  family, George III., in 1764, raised him to the peerage by the title of Baron  Ardelve.  He was created Viscount Fortrose in 1766, and in 1771, Earl of  Seaforth, all in the peerage of Ireland.  To evince his gratitude for this magnanimous act, he, in 1778, offered to raise a regiment for general service.  The offer was accepted by his Majesty, and a fine body of 1130  men were in a very short time raised by his Lordship, principally on his  own estates in the north and by gentlemen of his own name.  Of these, five  hundred were enlisted among his immediate vassals, and about four  hundred from the estates of the Mackenzies of Scatwell, Kilcoy,  Redcastle, and Applecross.  The officers from the south to whom he gave  commissions in the regiment brought about two hundred men, of whom  forty-three were English and Irish.  The Macraes of Kintail, always such  faithful followers and able supporters of the House of Seaforth, were so  numerous in the new regiment that it was known more by their name than  by that of Seaforth's own kinsmen, and so much was this the case that the well-known mutiny which took place in Edinburgh, on the arrival of the  regiment there, is still known as "the affair of the Macraes." [The Seaforth  Highlanders were marched to Leith, where they were quartered for a short  interval, though long enough to produce complaints about the  infringement of their engagements, and some pay and bounty which they  said were due them.  Their disaffection was greatly increased by the  activity of emissaries from Edinburgh, like those just mentioned as having  gone down front London to Portsmouth.  The regiment refused to embark,  and marching out of Leith, with pipes playing and two plaids fixed on  poles instead of colours, took a position on Arthur's Seat, of which they kept possession for several days, during which time the inhabitants of  Edinburgh amply supplied them with provisions and ammunition.  After  much negotiation, a proper understanding respecting the cause of their  complaint was brought about, and they marched down the hill in the same  manner in which they had gone up, with pipes playing; and  "with the  Earls of Seaforth and Dunmore, and General Skene, at their head, they  entered Leith, and went on board the transports with the greatest  readiness, and cheerfulness."  In this case, as in that of the Athole  Highlanders, none of he men were brought to trial, or even put into  confinement for these acts of open resistance.--Stewart's Sketches--Appendix p. lxvviv.]  The regiment was embodied at Elgin in May, 1778, and inspected there by General Skene, when it was so effective that not a single man was rejected.  Seaforth, appointed Colonel on the 29th of  December, 1777, was now promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant, and the regiment was called the 78th (afterwards the 72nd),  or Ross-shire Regiment of Highlanders.

The grievances complained of at Leith being removed, the  regiment embarked at that port, accompanied by their Colonel, and the intention of sending them to India having been abandoned, one half of the corps was sent to Guernsey and the other half to Jersey. Towards the end of April, 1781, the two divisions assembled at Portsmouth, whence they  embarked for India on the 12th of June following, being then 973 strong,  rank and file.  Though in excellent health, the men suffered so much from scurvy, in consequence of the change of food, that before their arrival at  Madras, on the 2d of April, 1782, no fewer than 247 of them died. and out of those who landed alive only 369 were fit for service.  Their Chief and Colonel died in August, 1781, before they arrived at St Helena, to the great  grief and dismay of his faithful followers, who looked up to him as their principal source of encouragement and  support. His loss was naturally  associated in their minds with recollections of home, with melancholy  remembrances of their absent  kindred, and with forebodings of their own  future destiny and so strong was this feeling impressed upon them that it materially contributed to that prostration of mind which made them all the  more readily become the victims of disease.  They well knew that it was  on their account alone that he had determined to forego the comforts of a splendid fortune and high rank to encounter the privations and inconveniences of a long voyage and the dangers and other fatigues of  military service in a tropical climate. [Stewart's Sketches, and Fullarton's  History of the Highland Clans and Highland Regiments.]

His Lordship married on the 7th of October, 1765, Lady Caroline Stanhope, eldest daughter of William, second Earl of Harrington, and by  her--who died in London from consumption, from which she suffered for  nearly two years, on the 9th of February, 1767, at the early age of twenty,  [Scots' Magazine for 1767, p. 533.] and was buried at Kensington--he had issue, an only daughter, Lady Caroline, who was born in London on the  7th of July, 1766.  She formed an irregular union with Lewis Malcolm  Drummond, Count Melfort, a nobleman of the Kingdom of France,  originally of Scottish extraction, and died in 1547.  She is buried under a  flat stone inscribed with her name in the St Pancras (Old) Burial Ground, London.

Thus the line of George, second Earl of Seaforth, who died in 1633, became extinct; and the reader must therefore now accompany us  back to Kenneth Mor, the third Earl, to pick up the chain of legitimate  succession.  It has been already shown that the lineal descent of the  original line of Kintail was diverted from heirs male in the person of  Anna, Countess of Balcarres, daughter of Colin, first Earl of Seaforth.  Kenneth Mor, the third Earl, had four sons--(1) Kenneth Og, his  heir and successor, whose line terminated in Lady Caroline, as above; (2) John of Assynt, whose only son, Alexander, had an only son Kenneth, who  died in 1723 without issue; (3) Hugh, who died young; and (4)  Colonel  Alexander, afterwards designated of Assynt and Conansbay, who, as his  second wife, married Elizabeth, daughter of John Paterson, Bishop of Ross, and sister of John Paterson, Archbishop of Glasgow.  Colonel Alexander had no issue by his first wife, but by the second he had an only  son and six daughters.  The daughters were (1)  Isabella, who married  Basil Hamilton of Baldoon, became the mother of Dunbar, fourth Earl of  Selkirk, and died in 1725; (2)  Frances, who married her cousin, Kenneth  Mackenzie of Assynt, without issue; (3)  Jane, who married Dr  Mackenzie, a cadet of Coul, and died at New Tarbat, on the 18th of  September, 1776; (4)  Mary, who married Captain Dougall Stuart of Blairhall, a Lord of Session and Justiciary, and brother of the first Earl of Bute,  with issue; (5)  Elizabeth, who died unmarried at Kirkcudbright, on the  12th of March, 1796, aged 81; and (6)  Maria, who married  Nicholas  Price of Saintfield, County Down, Ireland, with issue.  She was maid of  honour to Queen Caroline, and died in 1732.  Colonel Alexander's only  son was Major William Mackenzie, who died on the 12th of March, 1770.

He married Mary, daughter and co-heir of Matthew Humberston, Lincoln, with issue, two sons--(1)  Thomas Frederick Mackenzie, Colonel of the  100th Regiment of foot, who assumed the name of Humberston in addition to his own on succeeding to his mother's property; and (2)   Francis Humberston Mackenzie.  Both of Major William's sons ultimately  succeeded to the Seaforth estates.  He had also four daughters--(1)   Frances Cerjat, who married Sir Vicary Gibbs, M.P., his Majesty's  Attorney-General, with issue; (2)  Maria Rebecca, who married Alexander  Mackenzie of Breda, younger son of James Mackenzie, III. of Highfield,  with issue, six sons--William, a Lieutenant in the 78th Highlanders, who died at Breda, in Holland, from a wound which he received on the  previous day at the taking of Merxein, in 1814 Thomas, a Midshipman,  R.N., drowned at sea; Frederick, R.N., murdered at Calcutta in 1820;  Francis, R.N., drowned at sea in 1828; and Colin, all without issue; also Captain Alexander, of the 25th Regiment, subsequently Adjutant of the Ross-shire Militia, who married Lilias Dunbar, daughter of James Fowler  of Raddery, with issue--James Evan Fowler, who died unmarried; Alexander, now residing at Fortrose, and three daughters who died unmarried; (3)  Elizabeth, who died without issue; and (4)  Helen, who married Major-General Alexander Mackenzie-Fraser of Inverallochy, fourth son of Colin Mackenzie, VI. of Kilcoy, Colonel of the 78th Regiment, and M.P. for the County of Ross, with issue.

Major William died on the 12th of March, 1770, at Stafford,  Lincolnshire. His wife died on the 19th of February, 1813, at Hartley,  Herts. His eldest son, Colonel Thomas Frederick Mackenzie-Humberston, it will be seen,  thus became male heir to his cousin, Earl Kenneth, who died, without  male issue, in 1781.  The Earl, finding his property heavily encumbered  with debts from which he could not extricate himself, conveyed the estates  to his cousin and heir male, Colonel Thomas, in 1779, on payment of  ?00,000.  Earl Kenneth died, as already stated, in 1781, and was  succeeded by his cousin,

XX.  COLONEL  THOMAS  FREDERICK  MACKENZIE-HUMBERSTON,

In all his estates, and in the command of the 78th Ross-shire Highland  Regiment, but not in the titles and dignities, which terminated with his  predecessor.  When the 78th was raised, in 1778, Thomas Frederick Mackenzie-Humberston was a captain in the 1st Regiment of Dragoon Guards,  but he gave this up and accepted a captaincy in Seaforth's regiment of  Ross-shire Highlanders. He was afterwards quartered with the latter in  Jersey, and took a prominent share in repelling the attack made on that  island by the French.  On the 2nd of September, 1780, he was appointed  from the 78th as Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant of the 100th Foot.  In 1781 he embarked with this regiment to the East Indies, and was  at Port Preya when the outward bound East India fleet under Commodore Johnston was attacked by the French   He happened at the time to be  ashore, but such was his ardour to share in the action that he swam to one  of the ships engaged with the enemy.  Immediately on his arrival in India he obtained a separate command on the Malabar Coast, but in its exercise  he met with every possible discouragement from the Council of Bombay.

This, however, only gave a man of his spirit greater opportunity of distinguishing himself, for, under all the disadvantages of having funds, stores, and reinforcements withheld from him, he undertook, with 1000  Europeans and 2500 Sepoys to wage an offensive war against Calicut.  He  was conscious of great personal resources, and harmony, confidence, and  attachment on the part of his officers and men.  He finally drove the  enemy out of the country, defeated them in three different engagements,  took the city of Calicut, and  every other place of strength in the kingdom.

He concluded a treaty with the King of Travancore, who was reinforced by  a body of 1200 men.  Tippoo then proceeded against him with an army of  30,000, more than one-third of them cavalry; Colonel Mackenzie-Humberston repelled their attack, and by a rapid march regained the Fort  of Panami, which the enemy attempted to carry, but he defeated them with  great loss.  He served under General Matthews against Hyder Ali in 1782;  but during the operations of that campaign, Matthews gave such proofs of  incapacity and injustice, that Colonels Macleod and Humberston carried  their complaints to the Council of Bombay, where they arrived on the 26th of February, 1783.  The Council ordered General Matthews to be  superseded, appointed Colonel Macleod to succeed him in command of  the army, and desired Colonel Humberston to join him.  They both sailed  from Bombay on the 5th of April, 1783, in the Ranger sloop of war; but, notwithstanding that peace had been concluded with the Mahrattas, their  ship was attacked on the 8th of that month by the Mahratta fleet, and after  a desperate resistance of four hours, captured. All the officers on board  were either killed or wounded, among them the young and gallant Colonel   Mackenzie-Humberston, who was shot through the body with a four  pound ball, and he died of the wound at Geriah, on the 30th April, 1783,  in the 28th year of his age.  A fine monument is erected to his memory in Fortrose Cathedral. He had only been Chief of the Clan for two years,  and, dying unmarried, he was succeeded as head of the house and in the  family estates by his next and only lawful brother, [Douglas' Peerage.

He  had a natural son, Captain Humberston Mackenzie, of the 78th, killed at  the storming of Ahmadnugger, on the 8th of August, 1803.]

XXI.  FRANCIS  HUMBERSTON  MACKENZIE,

Raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as Lord Seaforth and Baron  Mackenzie of Kintail, in 1797.  This nobleman was in many respects an  able and remarkable man, was born in 1754, in full possession of all his  faculties but a severe attack of scarlet fever, from which he suffered when  about twelve years of age, deprived him of hearing and almost of speech.

As he advanced in years he again nearly recovered the use of his tongue,  but during the last two years of his life, grieving over the loss of his four  promising sons, all of whom predeceased him, he became unable, or  rather never made the attempt to articulate. In his youth he was intended  to follow the naval profession, but his physical misfortunes made such a  career impossible.  Little or nothing is known of the history of his early life.  In 1784,  and again in 1790, he was elected M.P. for the County of Ross.  In 1787,  in the thirty-third year of his age, he offered to raise a regiment on his own  estates for the King's service, to be commanded by himself.  In the same  year the 74th, 75th, 76th, and 77th Regiments were raised, and the  Government declined his patriotic offer, but agreed to accept his services  in procuring recruits for the 74th and 75th.  This did not satisify him, and  he did not then come prominently to the front.  On the 19th of May 1790,  he renewed his offer, but the Government informed him that the strength  of the army had been finally fixed at 77 Regiments, and his services were again declined.  He was still anxious to be of service to his country, and  when the war broke out in 1793, he for the  third time renewed his offer, and  placed  his great influence at the service of the Crown.  On this  occasion a letter of service is granted in his favour, dated the 7th of  March, 1793, empowering him, as Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant, to  raise a Highland battalion, which, being the first embodied during the war,  was to be numbered the 78th, the original Mackenzie  regiment having  had its number previously reduced to the 72d.  The battalion was to consist of one company of grenadiers, one of light infantry, and eight  battalion companies.  The Mackenzie chief at once appointed as his Major  his own brother-in-law, Alexander Mackenzie, at that time of Belmaduthy  but afterwards of Inverallochy and Castle Fraser, fourth and younger son  of Colin Mackenzie, VI. of Kilcoy, then a captain in the 73d Regiment,  and a man who proved himself on all future occasions well fitted for the  post.  The following notice, headed by the Royal arms, was immediately  posted throughout the counties of Ross and Cromarty, on the mainland,  and in the Island of Lewis:--

"SEAFORTH'S  HIGHLANDERS  to be forthwith raised for the  defence of his Glorious Majesty, King George the Third, and the  preservation of our happy constitution in Church and State.  "All lads of true Highland blood willing to show their loyalty and  spirit, may repair to Seaforth, or the Major, Alexander Mackenzie of  Belmaduthy or the other commanding officers  at headquarters at ???, where they will receive high bounties and soldier-like entertainment.

"The lads of this regiment will live and die together, as they cannot  be draughted into other regiments, and must be reduced in a body, in their  own country.

"Now for a stroke at the Monsieurs, my boys!  King George for  ever! Huzza!"

The machinery once set agoing, applications poured in upon  Seaforth for commissions in the corps from among his more immediate  relatives, and from others who were but slightly acquainted with him.

[Besides Seaforth himself, and his Major mentioned in the text, the  following, of the name of Mackenzie, appear among the first list of  officers:--Major.--Alexander Mackenzie of Fairburn, General in 1809.  Captains.--John Mackenzie of Gairloch, "Fighting Jack," Major in  1794.  Lieutenant-Colonel the same year and Lieutenant-General in 1814;  died the father of the British Army in 1860; and John Randoll Mackenzie  of Suddie, Major-General in 1804, killed at Talavera in 1809.  Lieutenant.--Colin Mackenzie, Lieutenant-Colonel 91st Regiment.  Ensigns.--Charles Mackenzie, Kilcoy; and J. Mackenzie Scott,  Captain 57th Regiment; killed at Albuera.]

The martial spirit of the people soon became thoroughly roused,  and recruits came in so rapidly that on the 10th of July, 1793, only four months after the letter of service to Seaforth, the Regiment was marched  to Fort-George, inspected and passed by Lieutenant-General Sir Hector  Munro, when five companies were immediately embarked for Guernsey   and the other five companies were landed in Jersey in September, 1793,  and afterwards sent to Holland.

On the 13th of October, the same year, Mackenzie offered  to raise a second battalion for the 78th, and on the 30th of the same month the King gave him permission to raise five hundred additional men on the  original letters of service.  But this was not what he wanted, and on the 28th of December following he submitted to the Government three  alternative proposals for raising a second battalion,  On the 7th of  February, 1794, one of these was agreed to.  The battalion was to be  formed of eight battalion and two flank companies, each to consist of 100 men, with the usual number of officers and noncommissioned officers.

He was, however, disappointed by the Government; for while he intended  to have raised a second battalion for his own regiment, an order was  issued signed by Lord Amherst, that it was to be considered a separate  corps, whereupon the Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant addressed the  following protest to Mr Dundas, one of the Secretaries of State:--

St Alban Street, 8th February, 1794.

Sir,--I had sincerely hoped I should not be obliged to trouble you again; but on my going to-day to the War Office about my letter of service  (having yesterday, as I thought, finally agreed with Lord Amherst), I was,  to my amazement, told that Lord Amherst had ordered that the 1000 men I  am to raise were not to be a second battalion of the 78th, but a separate corps.  It will, I am sure, occur to you that should I undertake such a thing,  it would destroy my influence among the people of my country entirely  and instead of appearing as a loyal honest chieftain calling out his friends to support their King and country, I should be gibbeted as a jobber of the  attachment my neighbours bear to me.  Recollecting what passed between  you and me, I barely state the circumstance; and I am, with great respect and attachment, sir, your most obliged and obedient servant,		

                                 F. H. MACKENZIE.

This had the desired effect the order for a separate corps was  rescinded, and a letter of service was issued in his favour on the 10th of February, 1794, authorising him, as Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant, to  add the new battalion, the strength of which was to be one company of  grenadiers, one of light infantry, and eight battalion companies, to his own  regiment.  The regiment was soon raised, inspected and passed at Fort-George in June of the same year by Lieutenant-General Sir Hector Munro;  and in July following the King gave permission to have it named, as a  distinctive title, "The Ross-shire Buffs."  The two battalions were  amalgamated in June, 1796.  Another battalion was raised in 1804--letter of service, dated 17th April.  These were again amalgamated in July,  1817.

Although the regiment was not accompanied abroad by its Lieutenant-Colonel-Commandant, he continued most solicitous for its reputation and welfare, as we find from the various communications addressed to him regarding it and the conduct of the men by Lieutenant-Colonel Alexander Mackenzie of Fairburn, appointed its Lieutenant-Colonel from the first battalion, [John Randoll Mackenzie, also from the  first battalion, was appointed senior Major.] and then in actual command; but as the history of the 78th Highlanders is not our present object, we  must here part company with it and follow the future career of Francis  Humberston Mackenzie.

As a reward for his eminent services to the Government he was appointed Lord-Lieutenant of the County of Ross, and, on the 26th of  October, 1797, raised to the dignity of a peer of the United Kingdom, by  the titles of Lord Seaforth and Baron Mackenzie of Kintail, the ancient  dignities of his house, with limitation to the heirs male of his body.

His  Lordship, having resigned the command of the 78th, was, in 1798,  appointed Colonel of the Ross-shire Regiment of Militia.  In 1800 he was  appointed Governor of Barbadoes, an office which he retained for six  years, after which he held high office in Demerara and Berbice.  While  Governor of Barbadoes he was for a time extremely popular, and was  distinguished for his firmness and even-handed justice.  He succeeded in  putting an end to slavery, and to the practice of slave-killing in the island,  which at that time was of very common occurrence, and deemed by the  planters a venal offence punishable only by a small fine of ?5.  In  consequence of his humane proceedings in this matter he became  obnoxious to many of the colonists, and, in 1806, he finally left the island.

In 1808 he was made a Lieutenant-General.

These were singular incidents in the life of a man who may be said  to have been deaf and dumb from his youth but who, in spite of these  physical defects--sufficient to crush any ordinary man--had been able, by  the force of his natural abilities and the favour of fortune, to overcome them sufficiently to raise himself to such a high and important position in  the world.  He took a lively interest in all questions of art and science,  especially in natural history, and displayed at once his liberality and his  love of art by his munificence to Sir Thomas Lawrence, in the youth and struggles of that great artist and famous painter, and by his patronage of  others. On this point a recent writer says-- "The last baron of Kintail, Francis. Lord Seaforth, was, as Sir Walter Scott has said, `a nobleman of extraordinary talents, who must have made for himself a lasting reputation  had not his political exertions been checked by painful natural infirmities.'

Though  deaf from his sixteenth year and though labouring under a partial impediment of speech, he held high and important appointments, and was  distinguished for his intellectual activities and attainments.  His case  seems to contradict the opinion held by Kitto and others, that in all that  relates to the culture of the mind, and the cheerful exercise of the mental  faculties, the blind have the advantage of the deaf.  The loss of the ear,  that `vestibule of the soul,' was to him compensated by gifts and endowments rarely united in the same individual.  One instance of the  chief's liberality and love of art may be mentioned.  In 1796 he advanced a sum of ?000 to Sir Thomas Lawrence to relieve him from pecuniary  difficulties.  Lawrence was then a young man of twenty-seven.  His career from a boy upwards was one of brilliant success, but he was careless and  generous as to money matters, and some speculations by his father  embarassed and distressed the young artist.  In his trouble he applied to the Chief of Kintail. `Will you,' he said in that theatrical style common to  Lawrence, `will you be the Antonio to a Bassanio?'  He promised to pay  the ?000 in four years, but the money was given on terms the most agreeable to the feelings and complimentary to the talents of the artist.

He  was to repay it with his pencil, and the chief sat to him for his portrait.

Lord Seaforth also commissioned from West one of those immense sheets  of canvas on which the old Academician delighted to work in his latter  years.  The subject of the picture was the traditionary story of the Royal  hunt, in which Alexander the Third was saved from the assault of a fierce stag by Colin Fitzgerald, a wandering knight unknown to authentic history.

West considered it one of his best productions, charged ?00 for it, and  was willing some years afterwards, with a view to the exhibition of his  works, to purchase back the picture at its original cost. In one instance  Lord Seaforth did not evince artistic taste.  He dismantled Brahan Castle removing its castellated features and completely modernising its general  appearance.  The house, with its large modern additions, is a tall, massive  pile of building, the older portion covered to the roof with ivy.  It occupies  a commanding site on a bank midway between the river Conon and a range of picturesque rocks.  This bank extends for miles, sloping in successive terraces, all richly wooded or cultivated, and commanding a  magnificent view that terminates with the Moray Firth." [The Seaforth  Papers, in the North British Review, 1863, by Robert Carruthers, LL.D.]

The remarkable prediction of the extinction of this highly distinguished and ancient family is so well known that it need not be  recapitulated here, and its literal fulfilment is one of the most curious instances of the kind on record.  There is no doubt that the "prophecy"  was widely known throughout the Highlands generations before it was  fulfilled.  Lockhart, in his Life of Sir Walter Scott, says that "it connected  the fall of the house of Seaforth  not  only  with  the  appearance of  a deaf  `Cabarfeidh,' but with the contemporaneous appearance of various  different physical misfortunes in several of the other Highland chiefs, all of which are said to have actually occurred within the memory of the  generation that has not yet passed away.  Mr Morrit can testify thus far, that he heard the prophecy quoted in the Highlands at a time when Lord  Seaforth had two sons alive, and in good health, and that it certainly was  not made after the event," and then he proceeds to say that Scott and Sir Humphrey Davy were most certainly convinced of its truth, as also many  others who had watched the latter days of Seaforth in the light of those  wonderful predictions. [Every Highland family has its store of traditionary  and romantic beliefs.  Centuries ago a seer of the Clan Mackenzie, known  as Kenneth Oag (Odhar), predicted that when there should be a deaf Caberfae the gift land of the estate would be sold. and the male line  become extinct.  The prophecy was well known in the North, and it was  not, like many similar vaticinations, made after the event.  At least three  unimpeachable Sassenach writers, Sir Humphrey Davy, Sir Walter Scott,  and Mr Morritt of Rokeby, had all heard the prediction when Lord  Seaforth had two sons alive, both in good health.  The tenantry were, of  course, strongly impressed with the truth of the prophecy, and when their Chief proposed to sell part of Kintail, they offered to buy in the land fur  him, that it might not pass from the family.  One son was then living,, and  there was no immediate prospect of the succession expiring; but, in  deference to their clannish prejudice or affection, the sale of any portion of the estate was deferred for about two years.  The blow came at last.   Lord Seaforth was involved in West India plantations, which were  mismanaged, and he was forced to dispose of part of the "gift land."

About the same time the last of his four sons, a young man of talent and  eloquence, and then representing his native county in Parliament, died  suddenly, and thus the prophecy of Kenneth Oag was fulfilled.--

"Of the name of Fitzgerald remained not a male To bear the proud name of the Chief of Kintail."

--Robert Carruthers, LL.D., in the North British Review.]

His Lordship outlived all his four sons, as predicted by the Brahan Seer.  His name became extinct, and his vast possessions were inherited  by a stranger, James Alexander Stewart, who married his eldest daughter,  Lady Hood.  The sign by which it would be known that the prediction was  about to be fulfilled was also foretold in the same remarkable manner,  namely, that in the day's of the last Seaforth there should be four great contemporary lairds, distinguished by certain physical defects described  by the Seer.  Sir Hector Mackenzie, Bart. of Gairloch,  was buck-toothed, and is to this day spoken of among the Gairloch tenantry as "An Tighearna storach," or the buck-toothed  laird.  Chisholm of Chisholm was hair-lipped, Grant of Grant half-witted, and Macleod of Raasay a stammerer. [For full details of this remarkable instance of family fate, see The  Prophecies of the Brahan Seer.--A. & W, Mackenzie, Inverness.]

To the testimony of those whose names have been already given  we shall add the evidence of a living witness when the first edition of this  work was in preparation.  Duncan Davidson of Tulloch, Lord-Lieutenant  of the county of Ross, in a letter addressed to the author, dated May 21, 1878, says--"Many of these prophecies I heard of upwards of 70 years  ago, and when many of them were not fulfilled, such as the late Lord  Seaforth surviving his sons, and Mrs Stewart Mackenzie's accident, near   Brahan, by which  Miss Caroline  Mackenzie was killed."

It is impossible not to sympathise with the magnificent old Chief as he mourned over the premature death of his four promising sons, and  saw the honours of his house for ever extinguished in his own person.

Many instances are related of his magnificent extravagance at home, while sailing round the West Coast, visiting the great principality of the Lewis,  and calling on his way hither and thither on the other great chiefs of the  West and Western Islands.  Sir Walter Scott, in his "Lament for the Last of  the Seaforths," adds his tribute--

In vain the bright course of thy talents to wrong. Fate deadened thine ear and imprisoned thy tongue, For brighter o'er all her obstructions arose The glow of thy genius they could not oppose And who, in the land of the Saxon or Gael Could match with Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail?

Thy sons rose around thee in light and in love, All a father could hope, all a friend cou'd approve; What `vails it the tale of thy sorrows to tell? In the spring time of youth and of promise they fell Of the line of MacKenneth remains not a male, To bear the proud name of the Chief of Kintail.

This sketch of the great chief cannot better be closed than in the words of one already repeatedly quoted:--"It was said of him by an acute observer and a leading wit of the age, the late Honourable Henry Erskine, the Scotch Dean of Faculty, that `Lord Seaforth's deafness was a merciful interposition to lower him to the ordinary rate of capacity in  society,' insinuating that otherwise his perception and intelligence would have been  oppressive.  And the aptness of the remark was duly appreciated by all  those who had the good fortune to be able to form an estimate from  personal observation, while, as a man of the world, none was more  capable of generalizing.  Yet, as a countryman, he never affected to  disregard those local predilections which identified him with the County of Ross, as the genuine representative of Kintail, possessing an influence  which, being freely ceded and supported, became paramount and  permanent in the county which he represented in the Commons House of  Parliament, till he was called to the peerage on the 26th October, 1797, by  the title of Lord Seaforth and Baron of Kintail, with limitation to heirs male of his body, and which he presided over as his Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant.  He was commissioned, in 1793, to reorganise the 78th or   Ross-shire Regiment of Highlanders, which, for so many years, continued  to be almost exclusively composed of his countrymen.  Nor did his  extraordinary qualifications and varied exertions escape the wide ranging eye of the master genius of the age, who has also contributed, by a  tributary effusion, to transmit the unqualified veneration of our age to  many that are to follow.  He has been duly recognised by Sir Walter Scott,  nor was he passed over in the earlier buddings of Mr Colin Mackenzie; but while the annalist is indebted to their just encomiums, he may be  allowed to respond to praise worthy of enthusiasm by a splendid fact  which at once exhibits a specimen of reckless imprudence joined to those  qualities which, by their popularity, attest their genuineness.  Lord  Seaforth for a time became emulous of the society of the most  accomplished Prince of his age.  The recreation of the Court was play; the  springs of this indulgence then were not of the  most delicate  texture; his  faculties, penetrating as they were, had not the facility of detection which  qualified him for cautious circumspection; he heedlessly ventured and  lost.  It was then to cover his delinquencies elsewhere, he exposed to sale the estate of Lochalsh; and it was then he was bitterly taught to feel, when  his people, without an exception, addressed his Lordship this pithy  remonstrance--`Reside amongst us and we shall pay your debts.'  A  variety of feelings and facts, unconnected with a difference, might have  interposed to counteract this display of devotedness besides ingratitude, but these habits, or his Lordship's reluctance, rendered this expedient so  hopeless that certain of the descendants of the original proprietors of that  valuable locality were combining their respective finances to buy it in,  when a sudden announcement that it was sold under value, smothered  their amiable endeavours.  Kintail followed, with the fairest portion of Glenshiel, and the Barony of Callan Fitzgerald ceased to exist, to the  mortification, though not to the unpopularity of this still patriarchal  nobleman among his faithful tenantry and the old friends of his family."  [Bennetsfield MS.]

He married on the 22d of April, 1782, Mary, daughter of the Rev. Baptist Proby, D.D., Dean of Lichfield. and brother of John, first Lord  Carysfort, by whom he had issue--

I.  William Frederick, who died young, at Killearnan.

II.  George Leveson Boucherat, who died young at Urquhart.

III.  William Frederick, who represented the County of Ross in Parliament, in 1812, and died unmarried at Warriston, near Edinburgh, in  1814.

IV.  Francis John, a midshipman in the Royal Navy, who died  unmarried at Brahan, in 1813.

V.  Mary  Frederica  Elizabeth,  who  succeeded  her father and of whom presently.

VI.  Frances Catherine, who died without issue.

VII.  Caroline, who was accidentally killed at Brahan, unmarried.

VIII.  Charlotte Elizabeth, who died unmarried.

IX.  Augusta Anne, who died unmarried.

X.  Helen Ann, who married the Right Hon. Joshua Henry  Mackenzie of the Inverlael family, anciently descended from the Barons  of Kintail, a Lord of Session and Justiciary by the title of Lord Mackenzie, with issue--two daughters, Frances Mary and Penuel Augusta.

Lord Seaforth, having survived all his male issue, died on the 11th  of January, 1815, at Warriston, near Edinburgh, the last male  representative of his race.  His lady outlived him, and died at Edinburgh on the 27th of February, 1829.  The estates, in virtue of an entail executed  by Lord Seaforth, with all their honours, duties, and embarrassments,  devolved upon his eldest daughter, then a young widowed lady,

XXII.	MARY  ELIZABETH  FREDERICA  MACKENZIE, LADY  HOOD,

Whom Scott commemorated in the well-known lines--

And thou, gentle dame, who must bear to thy grief, For thy clan and thy country the cares of a Chief, Whom brief rolling moons in six changes have left Of thy husband, and father, and brethren bereft; To thine ear of affection how sad is the hail That salutes thee the heir of the line of Kintail.

She was born at Tarradale, Ross-shire, on the 27th of March, 1783, and married, first, at Barbadoes on the 6th of November, 1804, Sir Samuel Hood, K.B., Vice-Admiral of the White, and afterwards, in 1806, M.P. for  Westminster.  Sir Samuel died at Madras, on the 24th of December, 1814,  without issue.  Lady Hood then returned home, and, in 1815, entered into  possession of the family estates, which had devolved upon her by the  death of her father without male issue, when the titles became extinct.

She married secondly, on the 21st of May, 1817, the Right Hon. James Alexander Stewart of Glasserton, nephew of the seventh Earl of Galloway,  who assumed the name of Mackenzie, was returned M.P. for the County  of Ross, held office under Earl Grey, and was successively Governor of  Ceylon, and Lord High Commissioner to the Ionian Islands.  He died on  the 24th of September, 1843.  Mrs Sewart-Mackenzie died at Brahan  Castle on the 28th of November, 1862, and was buried in the family vault  in the Cathedral of Fortrose.  Her funeral was one of the largest ever  witnessed in the Highlands, many thousands being present on foot, while  the vehicles that followed numbered more than 150.  By her second marriage she had issue--

I.  Keith William Stewart, her heir and successor.

II.  Francis Pelham Proby, Lieutenant 71st Highlanders. He died unmarried in 1844.

III.  George Augustus Frederick Wellington, who, born in 1824, married in November, 1850, Maria Louisa, daughter of General Thomas Marriot, H.E.IC.S., and died, without issue, in 1852.

IV.  Mary Frances, who married, in 1838, the Hon. Philip  Anstruther, Colonial Secretary of Ceylon, with issue.

V.  Caroline Susan, who, in 1844, married John Berney Petre, and died in 1867.

VI.  Louisa Caroline, who, on the 17th of November, 1858,  married, as his second  wife, William Bingham second Lord Ashburton,  who died on the 23rd of March, 1864, with issue, an only daughter, Mary Florence, who, in 1884, married the Hon. William George Spencer Scott,  Earl Compton, M.P., eldest surviving son and heir of William Douglas  Compton, fourth Marquis of Northampton, born in 1851, with issue--William Bingham Lord Wilmington, born in 1885; and Lady Margaret  Louisa Lizzie.

Mrs Stewart Mackenzie and her husband, on her death on the 28th  of November, 1862, were succeeded in the estates by their eldest son,

XXIII.  KEITH  WIILLIAM  STEWART  MACKENZIE,

Born on the 9th of May, 1818.  He was an officer in the 90th Regiment  and subsequently Colonel-Commandant of the Ross-shire Highland Rifle  Volunteers.  He sold what remained of Kintail in 1869.  He married first, on the 17th of May, 1844, Hannah Charlotte, daughter of James Joseph  Hope Vere of Craigie Hall and Blackwood, Midlothian, with issue--

I.  James Alexander Francis Humberston, his heir.

II.  Susan Mary Elizabeth, who on the 15th of August, 1871,  married, first, the Hon. John Constantine Stanley, Colonel Grenadier  Guards, second son of the Right Hon. Edward Lord Stanley of Alderley.   He was born on the 30th of September, 1837, and died on the 27th of April, 1878, leaving issue-two daughters. She married, secondly, the Right  Hon. Sir Francis Henry Jeune, Q.C., President of the Probate, Divorce, and  Admiralty Division of the High Court of Justice, with issue--one son.

III.  Julia Charlotte Sophia, who on the 8th of October, 1873, married, as his second wife, the Right Hon. Arthur, ninth Marquis of Tweeddale, who died in 1878, without issue.  In 1887 she married, secondly, as his second wife, the Right Hon. Sir John Rose, Baronet, G.C.M.G., of Queensgate, London, who died in 1888, without issue. In  1892 she married, thirdly, Captain William Evans Gordon, without issue.

IV.  Georgina Henrietta, who died young, on the 15th of October, 1868.

His first wife died in June, 1868.  He married, secondly, on the 2nd  of June, 1871, Alicia Almeira Bell, with issue--one daughter.

Keith Stewart Mackenzie died in June, 1881, when he was  succeeded by his only son,

XXIV.   JAMES  ALEXANDER  FRANCIS  HUMBERSTON STEWART  MACKENZIE,

Who was born on the 9th of October, 1847, Lieutenant-Colonel  Commanding the 9th Lancers, and now of Seaforth.  He is still unmarried.


THE  CHIEFSHIP.

It has been shown at p. 343 that the male line of Colonel Alexander  Mackenzie of Assynt, fourth son of Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth,  became extinct on the death, in 1815, of Francis Humberston Mackenzie,  who survived all his male issue.  It has also been proved that the male line  of George, second Earl of Seaforth, who died in 1651, terminated in  Kenneth, XIX. of Kintail and sixth Earl of Seaforth, whose only child,  Lady Caroline Mackenzie, formed an irregular union with Lewis  Drummond, Count Melfort, a French nobleman. It was shown earlier, at p.  246, that the lineal representation of the original line of Kintail was  diverted from heirs male in the person of Anna, Countess of Balcarres,  eldest daughter of Colin, first Earl of Seaforth, who had no surviving male  issue; and the male line of Colonel Mackenzie of Assynt having  terminated in "The Last of the Seaforths," who died in 1815, we must go  back beyond all these to an earlier collateral branch to pick up the  legitimate male succession, and for ever dispose of the various unfounded claims hitherto made to the Chiefship of the clan.

Before the appearance of the former edition of this work there had been several claimants to this highly honourable position; and this is not  to be wondered at, for whoever proves his right to the Chiefship of the  Mackenzies establishes at the same time his right to the ancient honours of  the house and Barons of Kintail. In an earlier part of the work, at p.  316,  it is shown that the original title of Lord Mackenzie of Kintail did not  come under the attainder of William, the fifth Earl, for the part which he  took in the Rising of 1715, and therefore the Chief of the Mackenzies, as heir male of the first  Lord  Mackenzie of Kintail, is, in virtue of that position, we believe, entitled to assume that ancient title.

The first formal claim to the Chiefship is one by a Captain Murdoch Mackenzie, "of London," who claimed "the titles, honours, and  dignities of Earl of Seaforth and Baron Mackenzie of Kintail," in virtue of  a pretended descent and pedigree from the Hon. John Mackenzie of  Assynt, second son of Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth.  This pedigree and claim is before us.  According to that document the Hon. John  Mackenzie of Assynt had a son "Murdoch Mackenzie of Lochbroom, who,  having shown a disposition of enterprise like his kinsman Earl William,  left his native parish in 1729 or 1730, first for Aberdeen and afterwards for Northumberland, where, in consequence of the unsettled state of  Scotland, he resided with his family."  This Murdoch had a son, John  Mackenzie, "born in Beadnall, parish of Bamborough, county of  Northumberland, in 1738, who married Miss Isabella Davidson in 1762,  and died in 1780, in his forty-second year."  John had a son, "Captain  Murdoch Mackenzie, the claimant, who was born at Beadnall, county of Northumberland, in 1763, and married in 1781, Miss Eleanor Brown of  the same place, and has issue.  He commanded the ship Essex, transport  81, of London, during the late war.  Being desirous to see his clan in the  North, in 1790 he visited the late Francis Lord Seaforth, who in the true spirit of Scotch sincerity, hospitality, and nobility received him with  demonstrations of pleasure.  After talking over family matters his Lordship candidly said that Captain Murdoch ought to have been the peer in  point of primogeniture." A short account of the family accompanies the  pedigree and claim, which concludes in these terms--"In consequence of  the death of the last peer it has been discovered in Scotland that the titles and family estates have devolved upon Captain Murdoch Mackenzie of  London.  This gentleman is naturally anxious to establish his rights, but being unable to prosecute so important a claim without the aid of  sufficient funds he has been advised to solicit the aid of some individuals  whose public spirit and liberal feelings may prompt them to assist him on the principle that such timely assistance and support will be gratefully and  liberally rewarded. Captain Mackenzie hereby offers to give his bond for ?00 (or more if required) for every ?00 that may be lent him to prosecute his claim--the same to become due and payable within three  months after he shall have recovered  his titles and estates."  The result of this appeal has not been ascertained, but it is certain that Captain Murdoch  Mackenzie did not succeed in establishing any claim either to the titles or  estates of the House of Kintail and Seaforth.

It was, on the contrary, placed absolutely beyond dispute by the evidence produced at the Allangrange Service in 1829 that the eldest and  only surviving son of the Hon. John Mackenzie of Assynt was not  Murdoch but Kenneth, and there is no trace whatever of his having had  any son but Kenneth.  In an original Precept issued by the Provost and  Magistrates of Fortrose on  the 30th of October, 1716, the son of the then  late John Mackenzie of Assynt is designated "Kenneth Mackenzie, now of  Assynt, grandchild and apparent heir to the deceased Isobel, Countess  Dowager of Seaforth, his grandmother on the father's side."  In the same  document Kenneth is described as her Ladyship's "nearest and lawful  heir," conclusively showing that he was her son John's eldest son.  It is thus fully established that Captain Murdoch Mackenzie's genealogical  chain fails at the very outset--is broken in its initial link.  The Hon.  John  Mackenzie of Assynt had only one son.  His name was Kenneth, not  Murdoch, and he died without issue.  If any additional proof be required to show that the male line of the Hon. John Mackenzie of Assynt has long  been extinct, it will be found in the fact that on the death of Earl Kenneth,  known as "the Little Lord," in 1781, the succession to the representation and ancient honours of the family of Kintail and Seaforth, devolved upon  the heir male of Colonel Alexander Mackenzie of Assynt, who was the  fourth son of Kenneth Mor, third earl, and a younger brother of the Hon.  John Mackenzie of Assynt, apart altogether from the conclusive parole  evidence given by very old people at the Allangrange Service in  1829.

This effectually disposes of Captain Murdo Mackenzie.

Now as to the more plausible but equally baseless claim of Captain William Mackenzie of Gruinard, and his cousin, the late Major-General Alexander Mackay Mackenzie of the Indian Army.  Captain Murdoch Mackenzie's claim having failed, we must go back another step in the  chain to pick up the legitimate succession to the honours of Kintail and  Seaforth.  Here we are met on the way by another claim, put forward by  the late Captain William Mackenzie of Gruinard, in the following letter  addressed to George F. Mackenzie, then of Allangrange:--

11 Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, London, 24th October 1829.

My Dear Allangrange,--Having observed in the Courier of the 21st inst., at a meeting at Tain, that you were proceeding with the Seaforth  Claims, I take the earliest opportunity of communicating to you a  circumstance which I am sure my agent, Mr Roy, would have informed  you of sooner, did he know that you were proceeding in this affair; and  which, I think probable, he has done ere this; but lest it might have  escaped his notice, I deem it proper to acquaint you that on Mr Roy having  discovered, by authenticated documents, that I was the lineal descendant  of George, Earl of Seaforth, he authorised an English counsellor to make  application to the Secretary of State to that effect, who made a reference  to the Court of Exchequer in Scotland to examine the evidence--Mr Roy having satisfied them with having all which he required to establish my  claim.  I therefore am inclined to address you in order that you may be  saved the trouble and expense attending this affair. Indeed, had I known you were taking any steps in this business, be assured I would have written  to you sooner.

I had not the pleasure of communicating with you since your  marriage, upon which event I beg leave to congratulate you, and hope I  shall soon have the pleasure of learning of your adding a member to the Clan Kenneth.  Believe me, my dear Mac, yours most sincerely,

WM. MACKENZIE.

This claim is founded on a Genealogical Tree in possession of the present representatives of the Gruinard family, by which John Mackenzie,  their progenitor is incorrectly described as the son of George Mackenzie  of Kildun, second son of George, second Earl of Seaforth.  It is believed that the descendants of this George, who was the second George  designated of Kildun, are long ago extinct; but whether they are or not, it  will be conclusively shown, by reference to dates, that John, I. of  Gruinard, could not possibly have been a son of his.  And to the  indisputable evidence of dates may be added the testimony of all the  Mackenzie MSS. in existence which make any reference to John of  Gruinard.  In every instance where his name appears in these he is  described as a natural son of George, second Earl of Seaforth.

Before this Earl succeeded he also was known as George  Mackenzie of Kildun, hence the error in the Gruinard Genealogical Tree.

The author of the Ancient MS., so often quoted in the course of this work,  was a contemporary of John, I. of Gruinard, and he states that Earl George  "had also ane naturall son, called John Mackenzy, who married Loggie's  daughter."  The author of the Ardintoul MS., who was the grandson, as  mentioned by himself, of the Rev. Farquhar Macrae, Constable of  Ellandonnan Castle in Earl Colin's time, and who died advanced in years  as far back as 1704--consequently a contemporary of John of Gruinard--describing the effects of the disastrous battle of Worcester, says that  Earl  George, who was then in Holland, was informed of the result of the battle "by John of Gruinard, his natural son, and Captain Hector Mackenzie,  who made their escape from the battle," that the tidings "unraised his melancholy, and so died in the latter end of September, 1651."  The Letterfearn MS. is also contemporary, for the author of it speaks of Earl Kenneth as "now Earl of Seaforth," and of George of Kildun in the present tense, while he speaks of his father in the past tense, and he say's that "He  (Earl George) left ane natural son, who is called John, who is married  with Logie's daughter."  That John of Gruinard was married to Christina,  daughter of Donald Mackenzie, III. of Loggie, is proved by a sasine dated 1655, in which that lady is described as his wife.  It may be objected to these MSS. that, however probable it may be  that they are correct, they are not necessarily authentic.  But there is ample  evidence of an official and incontestible character on the point.  A sasine, dated 6th of February, 1658, is recorded in the Particular Register of  Sasines of Inverness, vol. 7, fol. 316, from which the following is an  extract--"Compearit personally John Mackenzie, naturall broyr to ane  noble Erle Kenneth Erle of Seaforth Lord of Kintail, etc., as bailzie in that  part," on behalf of "the noble Lady, Dame Isobell Mackenzie, Countess of  Seaforth, sister german to Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbat, Knight, future ladie to the said noble Erle."  Another authentic document having a most  important bearing on this question was recently discovered in the office of the Sheriff-Clerk of Tain.  It is a discharge by Patrick Smith of Braco,  dated and registered in the Commissary Books at Fortrose, on the 4th of  December, 1668, in which the parties are described as "Kenneth Erle of  Seafort, Lord Kintail, as principal, and John Mackenzie of Gruinyard,  designit in the obligatione vnder-wrytten his naturall brother, as  cautioner."  Further, George of Kildun married, first, Mary Skene,  daughter of Skene of Skene, in 1661. This is proved by a charter to her of  her jointure lands of Kincardine, etc. (see Particular Register of Sasines  Invss., vol. ix. fol. 9).  He married, secondly, Margaret, daughter of  Urquhart of Craighouse.  The absolute impossibility is at once obvious of George of Kildun--who only married his first wife in 1661--having had a son, John Mackenzie of Gruinard, in a position to have obtained a charter in his favour of the lands of Little Gruinard, etc., in 1669--within eight  years of his reputed father's marriage to his first wife--and who was  himself designated in that charter as of "Meikle Gruinard," while it is  proved by undoubted official documents that John of Gruinard's wife had  lands disponed to her as his wife in 1655; that is, six years before the  marriage of George of Kildun, John's alleged father.  And further, how  could John of Gruinard's second son, Kenneth, have married, as be is  known to have done, the widow of Kenneth Og, fourth  Earl  of Seaforth, who died  in  1701, if John, his father, had been the son by a second  marriage of George of Kildun, who married his first wife in 1661?  The  thing is absolutely impossible.

Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth, who, according to the  Gruinard Genealogy, was John of Gruinard's uncle, was born at Brahan  Castle in  1635.  In 1651 he is described as "a child" by a contemporary writer, who says that the Kintail people declined to rise with him in that  year during his father's absence on the Continent, because "he was but a  child, and his father, their master, was in life." Colin, first Earl of  Seaforth, died in 1633, and the author of the Ancient MS. says that "Earl George, being then the Laird of Kildun, married before his brother's death,  the Lord Forbes's daughter." Thus, George of Kildun could not have been  born before 1636 or 1637 at the very earliest; and the date of his first  marriage, twenty-four years later, strongly corroborates this.  How then could he have had a married son, John Mackenzie of Gruinard, whose wife undoubtedly obtained lands in 1655; that is, when Kildun himself  was only 18 years of age, and when John, already designated of Gruinard,  was, in 1656, old enough to be cautioner for Kenneth, Earl of Seaforth?

Proof of the same conclusive character could be adduced to any extent,  but in face of the documents already quoted, it is obviously superfluous to  do so.

John Mackenzie, I. of Gruinard, could not in the nature of things have been a son of the second George Mackenzie of Kildun.  He was, on the other hand, undoubtedly, the natural son of the first George, who  succeeded  his brother Colin as second Earl of Seaforth, and it necessarily  follows that his representatives can have no claim whatever to the  Chiefship of the Clan, or to the ancient honours of the family of Kintail and Seaforth.  We shall now proceed to show that these distinctions  belong to and are at present possessed by the male representative of


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  ALLANGRANGE.


HAVING disposed of the only two serious claims made to the Chiefship of the Clan in later times our next step is to show who the present Chief is.

To do this we must go back to Kenneth, created Lord Mackenzie of Kintail in 1609; for there is no male representative of any later head of the  House in existence, so far as can be ascertained, between that date and  this.  Lord Kenneth had seven sons--

1.  Colin Ruadh or "the Red Earl," his heir and successor, who died, in 1633, without surviving male issue.

2.  John Mackenzie of Lochslinn, who married Isabel, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, and died in 1631, having been poisoned at Tam, without issue male.  His only daughter, Margaret, married Sir Norman Macleod, I. of Bernera, with issue.

3.  Kenneth, who died unmarried.  Lord Kenneth, XII. of Kintail, married secondly, Isabel, daughter  of Sir Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, with issue--

4.  Alexander, who died unmarried.

5.  George, who succeeded his brother Colin, as second Earl of Seaforth, and whose line terminated in Lady Caroline Mackenzie, who died without issue in 1847, her father Kenneth, Baron Ardelve and Earl of Seaforth in the peerage of Ireland, the last male of his line, having died at  the Cape of Good Hope in 1781.

6.  Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine, whose male issue was  proved extinct at the Allangrange Service in 1829.

7.  SIMON  MACKENZIE, who, after the death of his brother  John, was designated of Lochslinn, and whose representative will be shown to be the present head and heir male of the ancient family of Kintail and Seaforth, and Chief of the Clan.  This SIMON married, first,  Elizabeth, daughter of the Rev. Peter Bruce of Ferrar, D.D., Principal of St. Leonard's College, St. Andrews, and son of Bruce of Fingask, by  Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Wedderburn of Blackness, with issue--  five sons and one daughter, Jane, who married Robert Douglas of  Katewell, in the parish of Kiltearn, Ross-shire, and secondly, Sir James  Grant of Moyness.

The eldest of Simon's five sons was the famous SIR  GEORGE  MACKENZIE of Rosehaugh, Lord Advocate for  Scotland, whose history is so well known that it would serve no good  purpose to give only such a brief account of it as could be given in the  space here available. He wrote several works of admitted literary merit, his Institutes being to this day considered a standard legal authority.

He  left an autobiography in MS. which was published by his widow in 1716.

The estate of Rosehaugh, where he always took up his residence while in  the Highlands, was, in his time, profusely covered with the Dog Rose, a  fact which first suggested to the famous lawyer the idea of designating  that property by the name of "Vallis Rosarum," or Rosehaugh.  Sir George  married first, Elizabeth, daughter of John Dickson of Hartree, with issue--(1) John; (2) Simon; (3) George, all of whom died young and unmarried;  (4) Agnes, who in 1705 married Sir James Stuart Mackenzie, first Earl of  Bute, with issue, whose descendants, now represented by the Earl of Wharncliffe, succeeded to his Ross-shire estates, but since sold by them, though still retaining the name and arms of the family. (For the succession  see Retour of James Marquis of Bute, January, 1721); (5) Elizabeth, who  married, first, Sir Archibald Cockburn of Langton, with issue, and,  secondly, the Hon. Sir James Mackenzie of Royston, Baronet, with issue--  George (who married but died before his father, without male issue), and  two daughters--Anne, who married Sir William Dick of Prestonfield; and  Elizabeth, who married Sir John Stuart of Grandtully, with issue.

Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh married, secondly, Margaret, daughter of Haliburton of Pitcur, with issue, (6) James, who died young;  (7) George, who succeeded his father as II. of Rosehaugh, and married--  with issue, an only daughter, who died without issue; (8) Jean, and (9)  Margaret, both of whom died without issue.  From this it will be seen that  the male representation of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, eldest son  of the Hon. Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, terminated at the death of his  only son.  We must therefore revert to SIMON  MACKENZIE, the immediate younger brother of Sir  George Mackenzie, and second son of the Hon. Simon Mackenzie of  Lochslinn, from whom JAMES  FOWLER  MACKENZIE  OF   ALLANGRANGE, present Chief of the Clan, is descended as follows:--

SIMON, who died at Lochbroom in 1664, married Jane, daughter  of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Ballone, brother of Sir John Mackenzie of  Tarbat and uncle to George, first Earl of Cromarty (marriage contract  1663) with issue--an only and posthumous son,

I.  SIMON  MACKENZIE, first of Allangrange, an Advocate at the Scottish Bar.  This property he acquired through his wife in the following  manner.  Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Kilcoy, third son of Colin, XI. of  Kintail, had four sons, of whom the youngest, Roderick, obtained the  lands of Kilmuir, in the Black Isle.  He became a successful lawyer,  Sheriff-Depute, and Member of Parliament, and was knighted by Charles  II.  Sir Roderick, at the same time proprietor of Findon, acquired several  other properties by purchase. He died in 1692, and on the death of his  only son in the following year, without issue, his unentailed estates, which  were not included in the Barony, and which had become very  considerable, and all his moveable property, were divided equally among  his four daughters, as heirs portioners. Isobel, the third of these ladies, on  the 22nd of August, 1693, married, as his first wife, Simon Mackenzie, the  Advocate, and carried to him in 1699 as her portion, the estate of Allan--formerly the property and residence of the Earl of Seaforth--which has  ever since been known as Allangrange. By Isobel Mackenzie, daughter of  Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Findon, Simon had issue--

1.  Roderick, who died unmarried.

2.  George, who succeeded his father as II. of Allangrange.

3.  Kenneth, of whom there is no trace.

4.  William, a Captain in the Dutch army.  He married a Miss  Innes, with issue, since proved extinct.

5.  Simon, who died, without issue, in the West Indies.

6.  Lilias, who died unmarried.

7.  Elizabeth, who in 1745 married, as his third wife John  Matheson, V. of Fernaig, ancestor of Sir Kenneth James Matheson,  Baronet of Lochalsh, with issue--one son, Captain Alexander Matheson,  of the 78th Highlanders, who died in India in 1809, without issue.

8.  Eliza, who married Ludovic, son of Roderick Mackenzie, V. of Redcastle.

9.  Isobel, who married Murdoch Cameron, with issue, at  Allangrange.

Simon married, secondly, on the 28th of August, 1718, Susanna, daughter of Colonel Alexander Fraser of Kinneries, generally known as  "the Coroner," with issue--

10.  Colin, who married a Miss Macdonald in Lochaber, with issue--William, who died unmarried in the West Indies; Susanna, who married  a Mr Cameron, with issue; and a daughter, who died unmarried.

11.  Alexander, a Doctor of Medicine, who died without issue, in Jamaica, in 1780.

12.  Margaret, married Dr John Mackenzie of Newton, who died in  1759, with issue--Dr Simon of Mullet Hall, Jamaica, who there married  Catherine, daughter of Samuel Gregory from Nairn; George; Roderick;  Kenneth; and Isobel.

13.  Frances, who married Lieutenant James Cumming of the  Marines (marriage contract 1752), without issue.

14.  Susanna, and

15.  Janet, both of whom died unmarried.

Simon was drowned in the River Orrin, in February, 1730, while returning home from a visit to a friend in Fairburn, when he was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

II.  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, second of Allangrange, who in May,  1731, married Margaret, daughter of John and grand-daughter of Sir  Donald Bayne of Tulloch. They have a retour in 1732.  The male heirs of  the Baynes of Tulloch--originally a sept of Mackays from Sutherlandshire, who settled down in the vicinity of Dingwall early in the  sixteenth century--having terminated in John, this lady's father, she  carried the lineal representation of that old and respectable house to the  family of Allangrange.  By Margaret Bayne, George Mackenzie had issue--

1.  Simon, who died young in 1731.

2.  William, a Captain in the 25th Regiment.  He died before his father, unmarried, in 1764.

3.  George, who died young.

4.  Alexander, who died unmarried before his father, in 1765.

5.  John, who succeeded his father in Allangrange.

6.  Margaret, who, as his second wife, married Alexander  Chisholm, XXII. of Chisholm, with issue, and carried on the succession of that family.

7.  Isobell, who married Simon Mackenzie of Langwell, a Captain in the 4th Regiment (marriage contract 1767), with issue.

8.  Mary, who married Kenneth Chisholm, Fasnakyle, a cadet of Knockfin, with issue--Margaret, who married John Chisholm, Comar. George had six other daughters--Anne, Janet, Susanna, Lilias,  Ann, Barbara, and Elizabeth, all of whom died young or unmarried.

He died in 1773, when he was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Allangrange, who at an early  age was appointed Examiner of Customs in Edinburgh.  He married, first, Catherine, eldest daughter and co-heiress of James Falconer of Monkton  (marriage contract 1781), and grand-daughter of the Right Hon. Lord  Halkerton and the Hon. Jane Falconer.  By the acquisition of his wife's  fortune John was able to devote himself to his favourite agricultural  pursuits, in which he was eminently successful in his day.  By his wife,  who died in 1790, he left issue--

1.  George Falconer, his heir and successor.

2.  Jane Falconer, who married John Gillanders of Highfield, with issue--(1) Captain George Gillanders, who died without issue; (2) Captain  John Mackenzie Bowman Gillanders, H.E.I.C.S., of Highfield, who died,  without issue, in 1852; (3) Alexander Gillanders; (4) James Falconer  Gillanders, of Highfield, who in 1852 married Amy, daughter of the late  Major Charles Robertson of Kindeace, with issue--George Francis  Gillanders, late of Highfield, who, on the 21st of December, 1876, married  Geraldine Anne Isabella Mary Jane, daughter of Major James Wardlaw,  Belmaduthy, with issue--an only daughter, Frances Geraldine; (5) Frances Williamina Gillanders, who died without issue; (6)  Margaret Mackenzie  Gillanders; (7) Catherine, who married William Inglis, of the H.E.I.C.S.

3.  Margaret Bayne, who died young.

4.  Margaret Bayne, who also died young.

John married, secondly, Barbara, daughter of George Gillanders, first of Highfield, widow of John Bowman, an East India merchant in  London, without issue.  She died in 1823.  He died in 1812, when he was  succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  GEORGE  FALCONER  MACKENZIE, fourth of  Allangrange, who was in 1829 served heir male to his ancestor, the Hon.  Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, and heir male in general to Simon's  father, Kenneth, created first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail in 1609, and to  Lord Kenneth's brother, Colin, created first Earl of Seaforth in 1623.

He  matriculated arms accordingly in the Lyon Office of Scotland. On the 9th of January, 1828, he married Isabella Reid, daughter of James Fowler of  Raddery and Fairburn, in the county of Ross, and The Grange, Jamaica,  with issue--

1.  John Falconer, who succeeded his father, and died unmarried in 1849.

2.  James Fowler, who succeeded his brother John.

3.  George Thomas, who married Ethel Newman, London, without  issue male.

4.  Catherine Sophia, who died young.

5.  Anna Watson.

George Falconer Mackenzie died in  1841, and was succeeded by  his eldest son,

V.  JOHN  FALCONER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Allangrange, who  died unmarried in 1849, when he was succeeded by his next brother,

VI.  JAMES  FOWLER  MACKENZIE, now of Allangrange, Chief  of the Mackenzies, and heir male to the dormant honours and ancient titles  of the historic family of Kintail and Seaforth.  He is still unmarried, and it  is much to be feared that after his death and that of his brother, George,  who is without issue male, the Chiefship of this great Clan may go a-begging.  The only member of the family whose male representation has  not been proved extinct is Kenneth, third son of Simon, I. of Allangrange,  born about two hundred years ago, and of whom  or of his descendants, if  any, nothing is known for two centuries. And trace of them is now scarcely within the region of possibility, even if in existence, which is extremely improbable.

The Hon. Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, seventh son of Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, had by his first wife, three other sons--Thomas Mackenzie, I. of Loggie; John Mackenzie, I. of Inchcoulter or  Balcony and Colin Mackenzie, Clerk to the Privy Council, but the male  issue of all three has been proved extinct. He, however, married again;  and it is among the descendants of the second marriage that the Chiefship of the Clan must be sought for should the heirs male of Allangrange at any  time fail.


THE  OLD  MACKENZIES  OF  DUNDONNEL.

THE  HON. SIMON  MACKENZIE of Lochslinn married, secondly, in  1630 (marriage contract dated at Kingillie on the 12th of January), Agnes,  daughter of William Fraser, V. of Culbokie, and widow of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Ballone, brother of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth Mor Mackenzie, first of Glenmarkassie and  Dundonnel.

2.  Isobel, who, in 1673, married Murdoch Mackenzie, VI. of  Fairburn, with issue.

3.  Elizabeth, who married the Rev. Roderick Mackenzie, minister and laird of Avoch--the land of which he had purchased--son of John, Archdean of Ross, natural son of Sir Roderick Mackenzie, Tutor of Kintail, with issue.  This

I.  KENNETH  MOR  MACKENZIE, first of Glenmarkassie,  acquired the lands of Dundonnel,  or  "Achadh-Tigh-Domhnuill," from  Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Redcastle, in 1690, by excambion for Meikle Scatwell.  In 1681 he is described as Chamberlain of Assynt, and in 1690  he receives a discharge from the Hon. John Mackenzie, then designed "of  Assynt," for 2448 merks, being the full rent for the estate crop of 1689.     He married Annabella, daughter of John Mackenzie, I. of Gruinard,  natural son of George, second Earl of Seaforth, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, of whom nothing is known.

3.  Colin Riabhach of Ardinglash, who married Annabella,  daughter of Simon Mackenzie of Loggie, without surviving issue.

4.  Simon, of whom there is no trace.

5.  Barbara, who married Alexander Mackenzie III. of Ballone  (sasine 1727), with issue.

6.  Sibella, who married John Mackenzie, II. of Ardloch, with issue.

7.  Annabella, who married James Mackenzie of Keppoch,  Lochbroom, brother of John Mackenzie, II. of Ardloch, with issue.

Kenneth Mor was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE,  second  of  Dundonnel, who  married Jean, daughter of John Chisholm, XX. of Chisholm, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Captain Alexander, of the 73rd Regiment, who died in 1783,  and whose issue, if any, is unknown.

3.  John, who married Barbara, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie,  I. of Ardloch, with issue, several sons, all of whom died young, and two  daughters--Annabella, who married Alexander Mackenzie, Rivochan, Kishorn, with issue, twenty-five children; and Isabella.  John's widow  married, as her second husband, Roderick, sixth son of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, with issue.

Kenneth was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, third of Dundonnel, who in 1737,  married Jean, daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, IV. and first Baronet of Scatwell, with issue--

1.  George, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, a W.S. who died in 1790, and whose issue, if any, is unknown.

3.  William, an Episcopalian minister, who married, with issue. If  any male descendants of his exist and can be traced one of them may, at  no distant date, become Chief of the Clan.

4.  Roderick, who was also married, with issue, but of whose descendants, if any, nothing is known.

5.  Captain Alexander, who died in India, without issue.

6.  Captain Simon, who was married, and died in Nairn in 1812, whether with or without issue, at present unknown.

7.  Captain Lewis, who died in India, without issue.

8.  Janet, who married Colin Mackenzie,  Jamaica brother of  George Mackenzie, Kildonan of Lochbroom without issue.  She died in  1783.

9.  Isabella, who died unmarried.

Kenneth, whose wife predeceased him in 1786, died in 1789, when he was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, fourth of Dundonnel, who married  Abigail, daughter of Thomas Mackenzie, V. of Ord, with issue--

1.  Alexander, who died young.

2.  Kenneth, who succeeded his father in the estates.

3.  Thomas, who succeeded his brother Kenneth.

4.  Jane, who married the Rev. Dr Ross, minister of Lochbroom, with issue.

George was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

V.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, fifth of Dundonnel, who, in 1817,  married Isabella, daughter of Donald Roy of Treeton, without issue.  He left the estate by will to his brother-in-law, Robert Roy, W.S., who,  however, lost it after a long and costly litigation with Kenneth's brother,

VI.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, sixth of Dundonnel, who was  financially ruined by the litigation in the case, and the property had to be  sold in 1835, to meet the costs of the trial.  It was bought by Murdo  Munro-Mackenzie of Ardross, grandfather of the present owner, Hugh  Mackenzie of Dundonnel, and of Bundanon, Shoulhaven, New South  Wales.  Thomas married his cousin, Anne, eldest daughter of Alexander,  VI. of Ord, with issue--

1.  George Alexander, who became the representative of the family on the death of his father.

2.  Thomas, who emigrated to California, and of whose issue, if any, nothing is known.

3.  John Hope, who for some time resided at Tarradale House, Ross-shire.

4.  Helen, who married the Hon. Justice Charles Henry Stewart of Ceylon, without issue.

5.  Isabella, who resided in Elgin, unmarried.

Thomas was succeeded as representative of the family by his  eldest son

VII.  GEORGE  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who, on the death  of his father, became head of the original Mackenzies of Dundonnel,  although the estates had been sold to another family.  He married Louisa, daughter of Captain Stewart of the Celyon Rifles, without issue. If his  next brother, who went to California, survived George Alexander, then, on his death, he--

VIII.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, would have succeeded as head of  his house, and failing him and his descendants, if any, the representation of the old Mackenzies of Dundonnel would have fallen to JOHN  HOPE MACKENZIE, third son of Thomas, VI. of  Dundonnel and last proprietor of the family estates.  He married Louisa,  daughter of Captain Stewart of the Ceylon Rifles, widow of his deceased  brother, George Alexander, without issue, and died in London in 1892.

The only members of this family whose descendants can ever now  by any possibility succeed to the Chiefship should it pass from the Mackenzies of Allangrange are (1) Alexander, second son of Kenneth Mor, first of Dundonnel, but of him there is no trace for more than two  hundred  years, and  never likely to be.  (2) Simon, Alexander's youngest brother, of whom nothing has been heard during the same period.  (3)  Captain Alexander, of the 73rd Regiment, second son of Kenneth  Mackenzie, II. of Dundonnel, who died, probably unmarried, in 1783.  In  any case there is nothing known of any descendants.  (4) Kenneth, W.S.,  second son of Kenneth Mackenzie, III. of Dundonnel, who died in 1790,  and is not known to have been married.  (5) William, third son of the same  Kenneth, an Episcopalian minister, who was married, and left issue, of  whom, however, we know nothing.  (6) Roderick, William's immediate  younger brother, and third son of the same Kenneth Mackenzie, III. of Dundonnel, who was also married, with issue, but whether extinct or not  we cannot say.  (7) Captain Simon, who was married and died in Nairn in  1812, but of his descendants, if any, we at present know nothing.  (8)  Captain Lewis, who died in India, probably, unmarried, but this has not  been conclusively established; and (9) Thomas, second son of Thomas,  VI. of Dundonnel, who in early life emigrated to California, and regarding  whom nothing has since been heard.  If he is still alive or has left any  surviving male issue the late John Hope Mackenzie could not have  succeeded as head of the family, and Thomas, or his male heir, if now in  life, occupies that position; and on the failure of the Mackenzies of Allangrange, he or his representative will become Chief of the Mackenzies.  Failing Thomas, or his male heirs, that honour would fall to the heirs male, if any, of each of the eight others mentioned, in the inverse  order in which their names are here set forth.


THE  MACKENZIES OF  HILTON.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  HILTON are descended from Alexander  Mackenzie, VI. of Kintail, known among the Highlanders as "Alastair  Ionraic," by his first wife, Anna, daughter of John Macdougall of Dunolly.

The first of the family was

I.  DUNCAN  MACKENZIE, designated of Hilton, a barony  situated in Strathbraan, bounded on the north by Loch Fannich, on the  south by the ridge of the hills on the north side of Strathconan, on the east  by Achnault, and on the west by Ledgowan.  Duncan married a daughter  of Ewen Cameron, XIII. of Lochiel, with issue--an only son, his heir and successor--

II.  ALLAN  MACKENZIE, second of Hilton, Loggie or Brea,  from whom the family is known in Gaelic as "Clann Alain."   He married a daughter of Alexander Dunbar of Conzie and Kilbuyack, third son of the  Sheriff of Moray, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  John, progenitor of the Mackenzies of Loggie.

3.  Roderick, who married, with issue, an only daughter, Agnes, who married Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Killichrist, with issue.

4.  Alastair, who married, with issue--a daughter, who married Roderick, son of Murdoch Mackenzie, III. of Achilty, with issue--the Rev.  Murdo Mackenzie, Bishop of Ranfoe, in Ireland.

Allan's wife survived him, and married, as her second husband, Kenneth Mackenzie of  Meikle Allan, now Allangrange, second son of Hector Roy Mackenzie, I. of Gairloch.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, third of Hilton, who married a  daughter of Innes of Innerbreakie, now Invergordon, with issue--an only son,

IV.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, fourth of Hilton, who married  Margaret, daughter of Dunbar of Inchbrook, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir.

2.  Alexander, who, in 1640, married Margaret, natural daughter of  John Roy Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch, apparently without issue. The  marriage contract is in the Gairloch charter chest.

3.  Colin, M.A. of Aberdeen University, and minister of Kilearnan, where he died.  He married Miss Dundas, with issue--Kenneth, well known in his day as Deacon of the Edinburgh Goldsmiths, who left no  issue.

4.  A daughter who married John Sinclair, Caithness.

5.  A daughter, who married John Matheson, "Ian Og," in  Lochalsh, whose eldest son, Alexander, became the progenitor of the  Mathesons of Lochalsh, Attadale, and Ardross, represented in this country by Sir Kenneth James Matheson, Baronet, and others.

John was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  MURDOC   MACKENZIE, fifth of Hilton, who married Mary,  eldest daughter of the Rev. Murdoch Murchison, Auchtertyre, minister of Kintail, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir.

2.  Roderick, who married the eldest daughter of Alexander, third son of Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Redcastle, with issue--a son, Colin,  who died without issue, in 1682.

3.  Colin, who married Isobel, daughter of Donald Simpson,  Chamberlain of Ferintosh, with issue--(1) Alexander, locally called  "Sanders," who succeeded his grandfather, Donald Simpson, as  Chamberlain of Ferintosh.  He married Helen, daughter of William  Munro, Ardullie, with issue--two sons and two daughters--(a) Colin, who died unmarried, but left a natural son, of whom are descended several  respectable families in Ferintosh; (b) Donald, who married Jean,  legitimate male succession of his paternal grandfather, Alexander, eldest son of Colin, third son of Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Hilton.  Donald had  several daughters; first Mary, who was along with her father and brother  when they were drowned, but she was saved, and married, as his second  wife, the Rev. Colin Mackenzie, minister of Fodderty, first of the family of Glack, of whom presently second, Jean, who married Colin Murchison  third, Isabel, who married David Ross; fourth, a daughter, who married  Mackenzie of Ussie, with issue--two sons, Donald and Frank; fifth, Anne, who married Lewis Grant; and sixth, Helen, who married Alexander  Mackenzie of Ardnagrask, afterwards at Loggie-side, from whom was  descended Bailie John Mackenzie, of Inverness.  Alexander's ("Sanders")  eldest daughter, Mary, in 1723, married Donald, son of John Murchison,  Achtertyre; the second, Elizabeth, married William Martin of Inchfure,  with issue--a daughter, Ann, celebrated for her beauty, who, as his second wife, married Norman Macleod, XIX. of Macleod, with issue--three daughters, Elizabeth, Anne, and Rich Mary, for whose marriage and descendants see Mackenzie's History of the Macleods, pp. 154-155. (2)  Roderick, Colin's second son, whose male heir carried on the representation of the family on the death, without legitimate male issue, of  Alexander Mackenzie, X. of Hilton, when he was succeeded by  Roderick's grandson, Alexander, as XI. of Hilton, whose descent will be  shown presently.  John, a third son of Colin, is on record in 1730, but  nothing more is known of him.

4.  Murdoch, fourth son of Murdoch, V. of Hilton, married Agnes Helen, daughter of Donald Taylor, a Bailie of Inverness (1665), with issue--an only son, Alexander, who in early life entered the service of Kenneth,  Earl of Seaforth, and who, in 1709, became Chamberlain of the Lewis for  Earl William.  In the same year Alexander married Katherine, daughter of  Andrew Duncan, factor for Viscount Stormont, with issue, whose  descendants are unknown. Murdoch had also a daughter, Jean, who  daughter of Thomas Forbes of Raddery and of the lands of Fortrose as far  as Ethie, with issue--an only son, Alexander, who was drowned along  with his father, while fording the Conon, Opposite Dingwall, in 1759,  when, the son being unmarried, perished the married Hector Mackenzie,  by whom she had a son, Kenneth, a Jesuit Priest in Spain, and several daughters.

5.  Isobel, who married the Rev. Donald Macrae, minister of  Kintail, with issue.

Murdoch was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, sixth of Hilton, who, in  1630,  married, first, Annabella, second daughter of John Mackenzie, I. of Ord, without issue, and secondly, Sibella, eldest daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, I. of Applecross, widow in succession of Alexander Macleod, V. of Raasay, and Thomas Graham of Drynie, with issue--an only son,

VII.  EWEN  MACKENZIE, who succeeded as seventh of Hilton.   He married, in 1685, Elizabeth, third daughter of Colin Mackenzie, IV. of Redcastle, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, who succeeded his brother John as IX. of Hilton.

3.  Florence, who married her cousin, Alexander Macrae, son of  the Rev. Donald Macrae, minister of Kintail.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, eighth of Hilton, who married  Margaret, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie of Alduinny (marriage contract 1710), without issue.  He joined the Earl of Mar, and was one of "The four  Johns of Scotland,"--Ceithear Ianan na h-Alba--killed at the battle of  Sheriff-Muir in November,  1715, where he commanded a Company of  the Mackenzies.  He was succeeded by his brother,

IX.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, ninth of Hilton, who married  Catherine, daughter of Christopher Mackenzie, Arinhugair, with issue--

1.  John, who married Helen, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie,  VII. of Fairburn, and died without issue, before his father, in 1751.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded to the estate.

3.  A daughter, who, as his first wife, married John Macdonell, XII.  of Glengarry, with issue--Alastair, who carried on the representation of that family, and another son.

He died in 1756, aged 65, and was succeeded by his only surviving son,

X.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, tenth of Hilton, who married   Mary, daughter of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, without issue, when the direct male line of Murdoch, V. of Hilton, came to an end. He,  however, had a natural son--Alexander, well known in his day and yet  affectionately spoken of by very old people as "Alastair Mor mac Fhir  Bhaile Chnuic," Seaforth's principal and most successful recruiting  serjeant when originally raising the 78th Highland Regiment.  And many a  curious story is still told of Alastair's successful efforts to procure willing  and sometimes hesitating recruits for the Regiment of his Chief.  He  married  Annabella Mackenzie, of the Gruinard family, by whom he had a  numerous offspring; and many of his descendants, one of whom is Major  Alexander Colin Mackenzie, of the 1st V.B. Seaforth Highlanders,  Maryburgh, occupy responsible positions in several parts of the country.

We must now revert, in order to pick up the legitimate male line of  succession, to

RODERICK  MACKENZIE, I. of Brea, Chamberlain of Ferintosh,  second son of Colin, by his wife Mary Simpson, third son of Murdoch, V. of Hilton, all the intermediate male heirs having, as has been shown,  become extinct.  He acquired Brea in Ferintosh, in wadset and it remained in his family for two generations.  By marriage he became possessed of  the ruined Castle of Dingwall, and the lands adjoining, the ancient  residence of the Earls of Ross; also the lands of Longcroft.  Roderick  married Una, or Winifred, daughter of John Cameron, Town Clerk of  Dingwall, with issue--

1. John of Brea, commonly known as "John the Laird."  He resided at Tarradale and married, in 1759, Beatrice, second daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of Davochmaluag, by Magdalen, daughter of Hugh Rose,  XIII. of Kilravock, with issue--(1) Roderick, who died unmarried;  (2)  Alexander, who succeeded as XI. of Hilton, and of whom presently; (3)  Kenneth of Inverinate, who married Anne, daughter of Thomas  Mackenzie, IV. of Highfield and VI. of Applecross, with issue--(a)  Thomas, who succeeded as X. of Applecross, in right of bis mother, and  whose male heirs have died out (see Applecross genealogy); (b)  Alexander, who married Harriet, daughter of Newton of Curriehill, with  issue-Kenneth, who died unmarried; Alexander, a Lieutenant in the Royal.  Engineers, who died  unmarried; Marion, who married Charles Holmes,  barrister, without issue; and Harriet, unmarried; (c) Jean, who died  unmarried; (d) Elizabeth, who married her cousin, Major John Mackenzie,  XII. of Hilton, with issue, whose descendants, in Australia, now represent  the male line of the family; (e) Flora, who married the Rev. Charles  Downie, minister of Contin who died in  1852, leaving issue--Kenneth Mackenzie Downie, a surgeon in Australia, and five daughters, all dead;  (f) Catherine, (g) Mary, and (h) Johanna, all three of whom died  unmarried.  The other sons and daughters of John Mackenzie of Brea, "the  Laird," were (4) Colin, called "the Baron," born at Tarradale, on the 3rd of  December, 1759, and died unmarried; (5) Peter, who also died unmarried;  (6) Duncan, who married Jessie, daughter of Mackenzie of Strathgarve,  without issue; (7) Arthur, who died unmarried; (8) Magdalen, who died  unmarried; (9) Marcella or Medley, who married the Rev. Dr Downie, in  the Lewis; (10) Mary, who in 1790, married her cousin, the Rev. Donald  Mackenzie minister of Fodderty, with issue--Major Colin, Royal  Engineers, who married Anne, daughter of John Pendrill, of Bath, without  issue; and (11) Elizabeth, who died unmarried.

2.  Colin Mackenzie, minister of Fodderty, who purchased an  estate in Aberdeenshire, and was the first of the Mackenzies of Glack, in that county, of whom later on.

3.  Sir Peter, M.D., a knight of Nova Scotia, Surgeon-General in the army, who died unmarried.

Roderick Mackenzie was succeeded in Brea by his eldest son,

JOHN  MACKENZIE, II. of Brea, with surviving issue, among  several others already mentioned, Alexander, who as nearest male heir collateral, succeeded to the lands and barony of the family as

XI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, eleventh of Hilton and Brea,  who was, as has just been shown, the great-grandson of Colin, third son of Murdoch, V. of Hilton, and his heir of line.  Alexander was born at Tigh-a-phris of Ferintosh, on the 3rd of July, 1756.  He was educated at the  University of Aberdeen, but was afterwards bred a millwright to qualify  him for the supervision of family estates and business connections in  Jamaica, where he subsequently became a Colonel of Militia.  On the  death of his maternal uncle, Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of  Davochmaluag, in 1776, and of that gentleman's grandson, Lieutenant  Kenneth Mackenzie, who was killed at Saratoga in  1777, Alexander of  Hilton succeeded also to the Davochmaluag estate.  The adjoining  properties of Davochpollo and Davochcairn having been previously  acquired by his father, John Mackenzie, second of Brea, Alexander  combined the three properties into one, and gave it the name of Brea, after  the former possession of the family in Ferintosh.  He greatly improved this  estate and laid it out in its present beautiful form.  His land improvements,  however, turned out unremunerative.  His Hilton property was heavily  encumbered in consequence of the part taken by members of the family in  the Risings of 1696, 1715, and 1745, and great losses having been incurred in connection with his West Indian estates, Alexander got into  pecuniary difficulties, and all his possessions, at home and abroad, had to  be sold either by himself or by his trustees to meet the demands of his  creditors.  He was a distinguished agriculturist for his time, and was the  first, along with Sir George Mackenzie, VII. of Coul, and his own cousin, Major Forbes Mackenzie, to introduce Cheviot sheep to the Highlands for  hill grazings.

He married  Mary James, in Jamaica, with issue--

1.  John, his heir.

2.  Alexander, who married his cousin Charlotte, daughter of the Rev. Dr Downie, with issue--(1) Alexander, who died unmarried; (2) Downie, who died unmarried; (3) John; (4) Kenneth, who married Flora,  daughter of the Rev. John Macdonald, a native of Inverness, who emi-grated to and was a minister in Australia, by his wife Mary (who died in  1878), third daughter of Neil Macleod, XI. of Gesto, Isle of Skye; (5)  Charles, who died unmarried; (6) William, who died unmarried; (7) Mary  James, who married her cousin, Kenneth Mackenzie, XIV. of Hilton, in  Australia; and (8) Jessie, who died unmarried.  Alexander emigrated to  Australia, where he died.

3.  Kenneth, W.S., who married Anne Urquhart, Aberdeen, with issue--an only daughter, who died unmarried.  He married, secondly, Elizabeth Jones, with issue, and died in Canada, where his widow and  children continued to reside, in the city of Toronto.

4.  Mary, who died unmarried in Australia a few years ago.

Alexander died at Lasswade in 1840, and was succeeded as  representative of the family by his eldest son,

XII.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, Colonel of the 7th Regiment of  Bengal Cavalry, and for many years Superintendent of the Government breeding stud at Buxar, India.  He married, in 1813, his cousin, Elizabeth,  daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie of Inverinate, W.S., with issue--

1.  Alexander, who succeeded him as representative of the family.

2.  Kenneth, who succeeded his brother Alexander.

3.  Mary, who married Dr James of the 30th Regiment, without  issue.

4.  Anne, who married General Arthur Hall of the 5th Bengal  Cavalry, with issue.

5.  Elizabeth Jane, who died unmarried.

Colonel John died at Simla in 1856, when he was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

XIII.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who emigrated to Australia,  and died unmarried in New South Wales in 1862, when he was succeeded  as representative of the family by his younger brother,

XIV.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, who recently resided at Tyrl-Tyrl, Taralga, near Sydney, New South Wales. He married his cousin,  Mary James, daughter of Captain Alexander Mackenzie of Brea, second  son of Alexander, XI. of Hilton, with issue--

1.  John, his heir;  (2) Kenneth; (3) Downie; (4) Flora; (5) Jessie, all in Australia.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  GLACK.

THIS family is descended from Roderick, second son of Colin, third son  of Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Hilton, The issue of Roderick, Hilton's  second son, by the daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of Redcastle, and  Roderick's eldest brother, has already been proved extinct. Colin,  Murdoch of Hilton's third son, had--(1) a son, Alexander, whose male  issue died out in 1759; and (2) Roderick, Chamberlain of the Lewis.  This Roderick had three sons--(1) John Mackenzie, I. of Brea, who carried on  the male line of Hilton, and whose representative, now in Australia, is  head of that family; (2) Colin; and (3) Sir Peter, a Surgeon-General in the  army, who died unmarried.  Roderick's second son,

I.  THE  REV.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, minister of Fodderty,  purchased the estate of Glack--in Aberdeenshire, and became the first of this family.  He was born in 1707, educated at the University of Aberdeen, and in 1734 appointed parish minister of Fodderty.  Subsequently, for  services rendered to the family of the forfeited Earl of Cromarty, he was appointed by the Earl's eldest son, Lord Macleod, Chaplain to Macleod's  Highlanders, afterwards the 71st Highland Light Infantry, an office which proved more honorary than lucrative, for he had to find a substitute, at his  own expense, to perform the duties of the office.  Colin inherited a  considerable fortune in gold from his father, while in right of his mother  he succeeded to the ruined Castle of Dingwall, one of the ancients seats of  the old Earls of Ross, and its lands, as also the lands of Longcroft. He gave the site of the Castle, at the time valued at ?00, to Henry Davidson  of Tulloch as a contribution towards the erection of a manufactory which  that gentleman proposed to erect for the employment of the surplus male  and female labour in Dingwall and its vicinity, but which was never  begun.  He sold the remaining portion of the Castle lands and those of  Longcroft to his nephew, Alexander Mackenzie, XI. of Hilton, and  afterwards bought Glack in Aberdeenshire, of which he and his  descendants have since been designated.  Colin was on intimate terms  with the Lord President Forbes of Culloden, and maintained a constant  correspondence with his lordship, the result of which was, along with the demands and influence of his clerical calling, to keep him out of the  Rising of 1745, although all his sympathies were with the Jacobites.  He is  said to have been the first who, in his own district, received intelligence of  the landing of Prince Charles in Scotland.  It reached him during the night,  whereupon he at once crossed Knockfarrel to Brahan Castle, where,  finding his Chief in bed, he without awakening her ladyship, communicated to his lordship what had occurred.  Seaforth, having had his  estate recently restored to him, was easily prevailed upon by his clansmen  to keep out of the way in the meantime, and both of them started for the  West Coast of Ross-shire at the same time that the army of the Prince began its march eastwards.  The two were in retirement at Poolewe, when  two ships laden with his lordship's retainers from the Lewis sailed into  Lochewe.  They were at once signalled to return to Stornoway, Seaforth  waving them back with the jawbone of a sheep, which he was in the act of  picking for his dinner, and in this way, it is said, was fulfilled one of the  prophecies of the Brahan Seer, by which it was predicted "That next time  the men of Lewis should go forth to battle, they would be turned back by a  weapon smaller than the jawbone of an ass."  Meanwhile Seaforth's lady  (we shall for greater convenience continue to call him by his former title,  although it was at this time under attainder), not knowing what had  become of her lord or what his real intentions were, is said to have  entertained the Prince at Brahan Castle, and to have urged upon the Earl  of Cromarty and his eldest son, Lord Macleod, to call out the clan in her husband's absence.  Subsequently, when that Earl and his son were  confined in the Tower of London for the part which they took on her  advice, and when the Countess with ten children, and bearing another,  were suffering the severest hardships and penury, the Rev. Colin, at great  risk to himself and the interests of his family, collected the rents from the  Cromarty tenants, giving his own receipt against their being required to pay again to the Forfeited Estates Commissioners, and personally carried  the money to her ladyship in London. It was in acknowledgment of this  service that Lord Macleod afterwards appointed him Chaplain to his  newly raised regiment, Macleod's Highlanders.

It was this Colin who first fully recognised the health-giving properties of the Strathpeffer mineral springs, and who, by erecting a  covered shed over one of them, placed it, for the first time, in a condition  to benefit the suffering thousands who have since derived so much  advantage from it.  Shortly before his death, in 1801, at  the very old age  of ninety-five years, he conducted the opening services of the parish  church of Ferintosh, and contributed largely to the funds for its erection, to  commemorate the saving of his wife's life, when she was washed ashore  on her horse's back, near the site of the church, when her father and  brother perished by drowning while crossing the River Conon, opposite  Dingwall, in 1759.

The Rev. Colin married first, Margaret, daughter of Hugh Rose,  IV. of Clava, with issue, an only daughter, Margaret, who died young on  the 22nd of September. 1746.  He married, secondly, in 1754, his cousin,  Mary, eldest daughter of Donald Mackenzie, Balnabeen, who, as has been  already shown, carried on, in the female line, the succession of Alexander  (Sanders), eldest son of Colin, third son of Murdoch, V. of Hilton.  By her,  who died in 1828, the Rev. Colin of Fodderty, and Glack had issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Donald, who was educated at the University of Edinburgh, and afterwards appointed parish minister of Fodderty and Chaplain to the 71st Highlanders, his father having resigned both offices in his favour.  He was  a noted humorist and said by those who knew him best to be much more at  heart a soldier than a minister.  He married first, his cousin, Mary,  daughter of John Mackenzie of Brea, "the Laird," and sister of Alexander, XI. of Hilton, with issue--(1) Colin, a Colonel of Royal Engineers, who, born in 1793, married in 1838 Ann Petgrave, daughter of John Pendrill,  M.D., Bath, and died without issue, in 1869; (2) John, who ultimately succeeded as IV. of Glack, and of whom presently; (3) Elizabeth, who  married Lieutenant Stewart, R.N., with issue; and (4) Mary, who died  unmarried.  Colin married, secondly, Mary, daughter of the Rev. Mr Fyers, Fort-George, without issue.

3.  Forbes Mackenzie, a Captain in the North British (Ross-shire) Militia, afterwards Major in the East of Ross Militia, and for thirty-seven  years a Deputy Lieutenant for the county.  He reclaimed and laid out the  greater part of the valley of the Peffery, where, on the estate of Fodderty,  be was the first to apply lime to the land and to grow wheat north of the Moray Firth.  He was also the first to introduce Clydesdale horses and  shorthorn cattle to the Highlands, and was, as has been already said, along  with Sir George Mackenzie of Coul and his own cousin, Alexander  Mackenzie, XI. of Hilton, the first to import Cheviot sheep to the northern  counties. He married Catherine, daughter of Angus Nicolson, Stornoway,  and grand-daughter of the gentleman of the same name who commanded  and brought to Poolewe, with the intention of joining the standard of Prince Charles, the three hundred men ordered back to the Lewis, as  already mentioned, by Seaforth, in 1745.  By her Major Forbes Mackenzie  had issue--(1) Nicolson, a surgeon in the army, who was wrecked near  Pictou, Nova Scotia, and there drowned in his noble attempts to save the  lives of others, in 1853, unmarried; (2) Roderick, heir of entail to the  estate of Foveran, and a Colonel in the Royal Artillery, who, in 1878,  married Caroline Sophia, daughter of J. A. Beamont of Wimbledon Park;  (3) Thomas, a Major in the 78th Highlanders, Ross-shire now retired, and  still unmarried; (4) Mary, who married the late Rev. John Kennedy, D.D.,  Free Church minister of Dingwall, with issue--Jessie, unmarried, and  Mary, who married John Matheson, banker, Madras, only surviving son of  the late Rev. Duncan Matheson, late Free Church minister of Gairloch with issue.  Mrs Kennedy died at Strathpeffer in  1892.  (5) Dorothy Blair,  who died unmarried; and (6) Catherine Eunice, who married the late  Adam Alexander Duncan of Naughton, county of Fife, with issue--Catherine Henrietta Adamina.

4.  Anne, who married Hector Mackenzie, a Bailie of Dingwall (Baillidh Eachainn), to whom Alexander Campbell, the Gaelic bard, composed the beautiful elegy published in 1893 in the Scottish Highlander.  He was the second son of Alexander Mackenzie of Tollie,  Provost of Dingwall (third son of Charles Mackenzie, I. of Letterewe), by his second wife, Catherine, daughter of Bayne of Delny, and younger half  brother of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Portmore.  By his wife, Bailie  Hector had issue, Alexander, whose daughter, Katherine, in 1836, married  Major Roderick Mackenzie, H.E.I.C.S., and VII. of Kincraig, with issue.

5.  Mary, who married Captain John Mackenzie, VI. of Kincraig,  whose descendants, from her, now represent the Mackenzies of Redcastle.

6.  Johanna, who married Dr Millar, Stornoway.

7.  Una, who died unmarried.

8.  Beatrice, who married Peter Hay, a Bailie of Dingwall.

9.  Isabella, who died unmarried, and

10.  Jean, who married the Rev. Colin Mackenzie, Stornoway.

Rev. Colin Mackenzie was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, second of Glack.  He married  first, Margaret, daughter of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, X. of Gairloch, Baronet, without issue, and secondly, Christina, daughter of John Niven,  Peebles, with issue--

1.  Harry, who died unmarried, in 1828.

2.  John, who succeeded as III. of Glack.

3.  Roderick of Thornton, Aberdeenshire, who died unmarried, in 1858.

4.  James, a Major in the 72nd Highlanders, who died unmarried in India, in 1857.

5.  Mary, who married the late General Sir Alexander Leith,  K.C.B., of Freefield and Glenkindie, without issue.

6.  Rachael, who died unmarried.

7.  Christina of Foveran, who died unmarried.

8.  Jane Forbes Unice, who also died unmarried.

Roderick was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Glack.  He was born in 1810, succeeded his father in 1842, inherited his brother Roderick's estate in  1857, and Foveran, on her death, from his sister Christina. He acquired  Inveramsay by purchase.  He died. unmarried, in 1877, when he was  succeeded by his cousin, the second son of his uncle, the Rev. Donald,  minister of Fodderty,

IV.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, fourth of Glack.  He was born on the  21st of March, 1795, and married first, in 1817, at Malta, Anne, daughter of Thomas MacGill, without issue; and secondly, on the 21st of October,  1822, Margaret Campbell, daughter of John Pendrill, M.D., Bath, with  issue--

1.  The Rev. Duncan Campbell, rector of Shephall,  Hertfordshire, his heir.

2.  John Pendrill, M.A. of Oxford, who was born on the 7th  of February, 1825, and married first, on the 20th of October, 1859, Lucy Adelaide, daughter of Henry Thornton, with issue--Lucy Eleanor and Margaret Pendrill.  She died in 1870, and he married, secondly, on the  25th of July, 1878, Caroline Maria, daughter of J. H. Wottur of Hamburg.

3.  The Rev. Roderick Bain, M.A. of Exeter College,  Oxford, Rector of Ludbrooke, county of Lincoln.  He was born on the 14th  of September, 1834, and married on the 10th of November, 1868, Josepha Peyton, eldest daughter of Colonel Richard Ignatius Robertson of Portland Place, London, without issue.

4.  Margaret Campbell Pendrill, and

5.  Mary, both unmarried.

His second wife died at Sorrento, Naples, on the 7th of June, 1855.

He is succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

V.  THE REV.  DUNCAN  CAMPBELL  MACKENZIE, Vicar of Shephall, Herts, who was born on the 6th of January, 1824, and  married on the 31st of January, 1854, Louisa, daughter  of the late  Lieutenant-Colonel Nicolls, of Chichester, with issue--

1.  Donald, an officer in the Marines.

2.  Allan, an officer in the Ross-shire Militia.

3.  Malcolm; 4, Helen; 5, Edith; 6, Lilian; and 7, Amy.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  LOGGIE.


THE representative of this family, if alive, would succeed to the Chiefship  after the male representative of the family of Glack, but there is no trace  of any heir male of Loggie for two centuries. Before the Chiefship could come into this family, the descendants of Kenneth of Inverinate, third son  of John Mackenzie of Brea, and immediate younger brother of Alexander,  XI. of Hilton would have to be disposed of.  Thomas, the eldest son of  Inverinate, succeeded in terms of a disposition by John Mackenzie, VII.  of  Applecross, and in right of his mother, to the Applecross estates, but not to  the male representation of that family.  But the last male representative of  this family failed, a few years ago, in the person of his third and last  surviving son, Thomas Mackenzie, W.S., Edinburgh, who died unmarried.  It will be remembered that Allan Mackenzie, II. of Hilton and   Loggie, married a daughter of Alexander Dunbar of Conzie and  Kilbuyack, third son of the Sheriff of Moray, with issue--(1) Murdoch,  who succeeded as III. of Hilton, and (2) John, who was served heir to and afterwards designated,

I.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, first of Loggie, a barony situated in the  old parish of that name, but now forming the western portion of the modern parish of Urquhart.  John married a daughter of John Glassich Mackenzie, II. of Gairloch, with issue, one son, who succeeded him as

II.  ALLAN  MACKENZIE, second of Loggie.  He married a  daughter of Hector, sixth son of Murdoch Mackenzie, III. of Achilty, with issue--

1.  Donald, his heir and successor.

2.  Murdoch, who was married and left one daughter, Margaret,  who in 1634 married Murdoch Mackenzie, I. of Little Findon, third son of  Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Killichrist, with issue--a son, John, who  succeeded his father.  Allan was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  DONALD  MACKENZIE, third of Loggie, who married first,  in 1636, Catherine, daughter of Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Redcastle, with issue--

1.  Colin, a doctor of  medicine, educated at the University of Aberdeen, and afterwards under the most celebrated professors of the day  at Leyden, Paris, and Rheims, at the last-named of which he took his  degree of M.D.  He adopted extravagant theological views, in  consequence of which "and his immoral conduct in his youth" he was  disinherited by his father, whereupon he re-visited the Continent and  remained there for several years.  He subsequently returned to Inverness, where he practised his profession with considerable success, and had a  yearly pension settled upon him by his father, until his death there,  unmarried, in 1708.

Donald married, secondly, Annabella, eldest daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, with issue--

2.  Alexander, who succeeded his father.

3.  John, who was educated for the ministry at the University of  Aberdeen, and was for several years Chaplain to Major-General Mackay's  Regiment.  After the Revolution he was appointed minister of Kirkliston,  near Edinburgh, but soon removed to London, where he died unmarried,  before his brother Alexander, and was buried in St. Martin's Church,  Westminster.

4.  Murdoch, who succeeded as V. of Loggie.

5.  Margaret, who married first, in 1663, Roderick Mackenzie, V. of Fairburn, with issue, and secondly, the Rev. Hector Mackenzie of Bishop-Kinkell, second son of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, with  issue.

6.  Christian, who married John Mackenzie, I. of Gruinard, with issue, and

7.  Annabella, who married Mackenzie of Loggie in Lochbroom,  with issue.

He married, thirdly, Anne, daughter of the Rev. Donald Morison, minister in the Lewis (sasine to her in 1666), with issue--an only daughter,  Anne, who married the Rev. Angus Morison, minister of Contin.  Donald had also a natural son, Roderick, a Captain in the Confederate army under King William, who died in Holland, unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth of Loggie, who married  first, in 1667, Jane, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, J. of Ballone,  widow of Simon, second son of the Hon. Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, without issue.  He married, secondly, Catherine, second daughter of  William Mackenzie, I. of Belmaduthy, also without issue.

He was succeeded by his youngest brother,

V.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, fifth of Loggie, who was  educated at the University of Aberdeen.  He afterwards joined the Earl of Dumbarton's Regiment, and by his merit and valour soon raised himself to  the rank of Captain. It is said of him that, at the battle of Sedgmoor, fought on the 6th of February, 1685, during Monmouth's rebellion, "the  valiant Colonel Murdoch Mackenzie, under the command of Lord Feversham, signally distinguished himself."  He at the head of his Company attacked the enemy on that occasion with such bravery and resolution that, excepting the officers, there were only nine men who were  not either killed or wounded.  Personally he had the distinguished honour of taking the Duke of Monmouth's standard, twisting it out of the  standard-bearer's hand, and afterwards presenting it to James II. at  Whitehall. For this gallant exploit he was promoted at once to the rank of  Colonel.  He married an English lady, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir.

2.  George, a young man of promising parts, who was killed in a  duel, unmarried; and three daughters of whom nothing has been ascertained.

Murdoch died in London, was buried in St. Martin's Church, Westminster, and succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, who settled in London, and of  whose representatives nothing whatever is known.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  GAIRLOCH.

THIS family is descended from Alexander Mackenzie, VI. of Kintail, by his second wife Margaret, daughter of Roderick Macdonald, III. of Moydart and Clanranald. the famous "Ruairidh MacAlain," by Margaret, daughter of Donald Balloch of Islay, son of John Mor Tanastair (by his  wife Marjory Bisset, heiress of the Seven Lordships of the Glens in  Antrim), second son of John, first Lord of the Isles, by his wife Lady  Margaret Stewart, daughter of King Robert II. and brother of Donald,  second Lord of the Isles and first Earl of Ross. [For Alexander, VI. of  Kintail's first and second wives see pp. 81-83.]  By this lady the sixth  Baron of Kintail had one son--

I.  HECTOR  ROY  MACKENZIE, better known among his  countrymen as "Eachainn Ruadh."  He has been already noticed at  considerable length at pp. 113 to 132 in his capacity as Tutor or Guardian  to his nephew, John of Killin, IX. of Kintail, but he played such a prominent part in the history of his time that it will be necessary to give  his history at much greater length under this head.  It has been  conclusively shown that Kenneth a' Bhlair, VII. of Kintail, died in 1491, and that his only son by his first wife, Kenneth Og, killed in thc Torwood  by the Laird of Buchanan in  1497, outlived his father and became one of  the Barons of Kintail, although there is no record of his having been  served heir to the family estates. It has been said that Duncan of Hilton,  Kenneth a Bhlair's eldest brother, predeceased him, and that consequently Hector Roy succeeded, as a matter of course to the legal guardianship of  his nephew, Kenneth Og, VIII. of Kintail, he being the eldest surviving brother of the late Chief, who died in 1491.  But this has not been sufficiently established, although it is quite true that Duncan's name does  not appear after his brother's death in 1491, in any of the manuscript  histories of the clan, or in any known official document.  The author of the  Ardintoul MS. states distinctly that Duncan was dead, and that Hector,  John of Kuhn's younger uncle, "meddled with the estate."  The Earl of  Cromarty says that "Hector Roy, being a man of courage and prudence,  was left Tutor by his brother to Sir Kenneth, his own brother-uterine,  Duncan being of better hands than head.  This Hector, hearing of Sir  Kenneth's death, and finding himself in possession of an estate, to which those only now had title whose birthright was debateable, namely, the  children begot by Kenneth the third, on the Lord Lovat's daughter, with  whom he did at first so irregularly and unlawfully cohabit."  The objection  of illegitimacy could not apply to Duncan, or to his son Allan, and it is difficult to understand on what ground hector attempted to obtain personal  possession of the estates, unless it be true, as confirmed to some extent hereafter, that he was himself joint-heir of Kintail; for it is undoubted that  Allan, Duncan's eldest son, who was entitled to succeed before Hector,  was then alive.  There is no official evidence that Hector Roy was at any time appointed Tutor to John of Kuhn until an arrangement was made  between themselves, in terms of which Hector was to act as such, and to  keep the estates in his own bands until his nephew came of age.

There is no doubt that Hector was in possession of extensive  estates of his own at this period.  When the Lords of the Association, a factious party of the nobility, took up arms against James III., Alexander  of Kintail despatched his sons, Kenneth and Hector, with a retinue of 500,  to join the Royal standard; but Kenneth, hearing of the death of his father  on his arrival at Perth, returned home at the request of the Earl of Huntly;  and the clan was led by Hector Roy to the battle of Sauchieburn, near  Stirling but after the defeat of the Royal forces, and the death there in 1488 of the King himself, Hector, who narrowly escaped, returned to  Ross-shire and took the stronghold of Redcastle, then held for the rebels by Rose of Kilravock, and placed a garrison in it.  He then joined the Earl  of Huntly and the clans in the north who were rising to avenge the death of  His Majesty but meanwhile orders came from the youthful King James  IV., who had been at the head of the conspirators, ordering the Northern  chiefs to lay down their arms, and to submit to the powers that be.

Thereupon Hector, yielding to necessity, submitted with the rest, and he  was "not only received with favour, but to reward his previous fidelity and  also to engage him for the future  the young King, who at last saw his  error, and wanted to reconcile to him those who had been the friends of  his father, made him a present of the Barony of Gairloch in the western  circuit of Ross-shire by knight-service after the manner of that age.  He likewise gave him Brahan in the Low Country, now a seat of the family of  Seaforth, the lands of Moy in that neighbourhood, Glassletter (of Kintail), a Royal forest which was made a part of the Barony of Gairloch.  In the  pleasant valley of Strathpeffer, Castle Leod, part of Hector's paternal  estate, afterwards a seat of the Earl of Cromarty; Achterneed near  adjacent, also Kinellan, were likewise his, and so was the Barony of Allan,  now Allangrange, a few miles southwards. In the Chops of the Highlands  he had Fairburn the Wester, and both the Scatwells, the great and the  lesser.  Westward in the height of that country he had Kenlochewe, a  district adjoining Gairloch on the east, and southward on the same track  he had the half of Kintail, of which he was left joint-heir with his brother  Kenneth, chief of the family." [Manuscript history of the Gairloch family. Another MS. says that Hector's possessions in Kintail were "bounded by  the rivers Kilillan and Cro."]

The original Gairloch charters are lost, but a "protocol" from John de Vaux, or Vass, Sheriff of Inverness, whose jurisdiction at that time  extended to Ross and the other Northern counties, is conclusive as to their  having existed. This document, its orthography modernised, is in the  following terms:--

To all and sundry to whom it effeirs to whose knowledge these present letters shall come, John de Vaux, burgess of Dingwall and Sheriff in this part, sends greeting in God everlasting, to you universally I make it  known that by the commands of our Sovereign Lords Letters and  "precess" under his white wax directed to me as Sheriff in that part, and grants me to have given to Hector MacKennich heritable state and  possession of all and sundry the lands of Gairloch, with their pertinents,  after the form and tenour of our Sovereign Lord's charter made to the  foresaid Hector thereupon, the which lands with their pertinents extends  yearly to twelve merks of old extent, lying between the waters called Inverewe and Torridon within the Sheriffdom of Inverness, and I grant me  to have given to the foresaid Hector heritable state and possession of all  and sundry the foresaid lands with their pertinents, saving other men's  rights as use and custom is, and charge in our Sovereign Lord's name, and mine as Sheriff, that no man vex, unquiet, or trouble the said Hector nor his heirs in the peaceable brooking and enjoyment of the lands foresaid  under all pain and charges that after may follow:  In witness of the which I have appended to these my letters of sasine my seal at "Allydyll" (?  Talladale) in Gairloch, the 10th day of the month of December, the year of  God, 1494, before these witnesses--Sir Dougall Ruryson, Vicar of  Urquhart, Murchy Beg Mac Murchy, John Thomasson, Kenneth Mac-anleyson, Donald Mac-anleyson, Dugald Ruryson, and Duncan Lachlanson servant. with others divers.

The next authentic document in Hector's favour is a precept by the King to the Chamberlain of Ross commanding that functionary to obey a  former precept granted to Hector of the mails, etc., of Brahan and Moy, in  the following terms:--

Chamberlain of Ross we greet you well--Forasmuch as we  directed our special letters of before, making mention that we have given to our lovite Hector Roy Mackenzie the mails and profits of our lands of  Brahan and Moy, with arriage, carriage, and other pertinents thereof, lying  within our lordship of Ross for his good and thankful service done and to be done to us, enduring our will, and that it was our will that he should brook and enjoy the said lands with all the profits thereof enduring our  will, and so the tenants now inhabitants thereof brook their tacks and not  remove therefrom, the which letters, as, we are surely informed, you  disobeyed in great contemption and littling of our authority Royal;   Herefor we charge you now as of before that ye suffer the said Hector to brook and enjoy the same lands and take up and have all mails, fermes,  profits, arriage, carriage, and due service of the said lands, and that the  tenants and inhahitants thereof to answer and obey to him and to none  others till, we give command by our special letters in the contrary, and this  on no wise you leave undone, as you will incur our indignation and  displeasure.  These our letters seen and understood, deliver them again to  the bearer to be kept and shown by the said Hector upon account of your  warrant before our Comptroller and auditors of our Exchequer at your  next accounting, and after the form of our said letters past of before given  under our Signet, at Edinburgh, the 5th day of March, 1508, and of our  reign the twentieth year.

JAMES  R.

It will be seen from these documents that Hector had at this time large possessions of his own; and the dispute between him and his nephew, John of Killin, already fully described,  probably arose in respect  of Hector's rights to the half of Kintail, which his father is said to have left  him jointly with his eldest brother, Kenneth, VII. of Kintail.  Hector kept  possession of Ellandonnan Castle until compelled by an order from the  Privy Council to give it up in 1511 to John of Killin, and it appears from  the records of the Privy Council that from 1501 to 1508 Hector continued  to collect the rents of Kintail without giving any account of them; that he  again in 1509 accounted for them for twelve months, and for the two  succeeding years for the second time retained them, while he seems to  have had undisturbed possession of the stronghold of Ellandonnan  throughout.  No record can be found of his answer to the summons  commanding him to appear before the Privy Council, if he ever did put in  an appearance, but in all probability he merely kept his hold of that Castle  in order to compel his nephew to come to terms with him regarding his  joint rights to Kintail, without any intention of ultimately keeping him out  of possession. This view is strengthened by the fact that John obtained a  charter under the Great Seal granting him Kintail anew on the 25th of February, 1508-9 [Reg. of the Great Seal, vol. xv, fol. 89.]--the same year  in which Hector received a grant of Brahan and Moy--probably following  on an arrangement of their respective rights in those districts also from the  fact that Hector does not appear to have fallen into any disfavour with the  Crown on account of his conduct towards John of Kintail; for only two  years after Kuhn raised the action against Hector before the Privy Council,  the latter receives a new charter, dated the 8th April, 1513, [The original  charter is in the Gairloch Charter Chest.] under the Great Seal, of  Gairloch, Glasletter, and Coirre-nan-Cuilean "in feu and heritage for  ever," and he and his nephew appear ever after to have lived on the most friendly terms.

Gairloch, originally the possession of the Earls of Ross, and confirmed to them by Robert Bruce in 1306 and 1329 was subsequently granted by Earl William to Paul MacTire and his heirs by Mary Graham,  for a yearly payment of a penny of silver in the name of blench ferme in  lieu of every other service except the foreign service of the King when  required.  In 1372 Robert the II. confirmed the grant.  In 1430 James I.  granted to Nele Nelesoun (Neil son of Neil Macleod) for his homage and  service in the capture of his deceased brother, Thomas Nelesoun, a rebel, the lands of Gairloch. [Origines Parochiales Scotiae, vol. ii, p. 406]

Although Hector was in possession of Crown charters to at least two-thirds of the lands of Gairloch he found it very difficult to secure  possession of them from the Macleods and their chief, Allan MacRory,  the former proprietors.  This Allan had married, as his first wife, a  daughter of Alexander, VI. of Kintail, and sister of Hector Roy, with issue--three sons.  He married, secondly, a daughter of Roderick Macleod, VII.  of Lewis, with issue--one son, Roderick, subsequently known as Ruairidh  Mac Alain, author of an atrocious massacre of the Macleods of Raasay  and Gairloch at Island Isay, Waternish, Isle of Skye, erroneously attributed  in the first edition of this work to his grandfather, the above-named Roderick Macleod of Lewis.  Allan of Gairloch was himself related to the  Macleods of Lewis, but it is impossible to trace the exact connection.

Two brothers of Macleod of Lewis are said, traditionally, to have resolved  that no Mackenzie blood should flow in the veins of the future head of the  Gairloch Macleods, and determined to put Allan's children by Hector  Roy's sister to death, so that his son by their own niece should succeed to  Gairloch, and they proceeded across the Minch to the mainland to put  their murderous intent into execution.

Allan MacRuairidh, the then Macleod laird of Gairloch, was  personally a peacefully disposed man, and lived at the "Crannag," of  which traces are still to be found on Loch Tolly Island, along with his second wife, two of his sons by the first marriage, and a daughter. The  brothers, having reached Gairloch, took up their abode at the old Tigh  Dige, a wattled house, surrounded by a ditch, whose site is still pointed out in one of the Flowerdale parks, a few hundred yards above the stone  bridge which crosses the Ceann-an-t-Sail river at the head of Gairloch  Bay.  Next day the murderous barbarians crossed over to Loch Tolly.  On  the way they learnt that Allan was not then on the island, he having gone a-fishing on the Ewe. They at once proceeded in that direction, found him  sound asleep on the banks of the river, at "Cnoc na Mi-chomhairle," and  without any warning "made him short by the head."  Then retracing their steps, and ferrying across to the island where Allan's wife, with two of her  three step-children were enjoying themselves, they, in the most cold-blooded manner, informed her of her husband's fate, tore the two boys--the third being fortunately absent--from her knees, took them ashore, and  carried them along to a small glen through which the Poolewe Road now  passes, about a mile to the south of the loch, and there, at a spot still called "Creag Bhadain an Aisc," the Rock at the place of Burial, stabbed  them to the heart with their daggers, and carried their bloodstained shirts along with them to the Tigh Dige.  These shirts the stepmother ultimately secured  through  the  strategy of one of her husband's retainers, who at once proceeded with them to the boys' grandfather, Alexander Mackenzie,  VI. of Kintail, at  Kinellan or Brahan. Hector Roy started immediately,  carrying the bloodstained shirts along with him as evidence of the  atrocious deed, to report the murder to the King at Edinburgh.  His  Majesty on hearing of the crime granted Hector a commission of fire and  sword against the murderers of his nephews, and gave him a Crown  charter to the lands of Gairloch in his own favour dated 1494.  The  assassins were soon afterwards slain at a hollow still pointed out between Porthenderson and South Erradale, nearly opposite the northern end of the Island of Raasay, where their graves are yet to be seen, quite fresh and  green, among the surrounding heather. [Mackenzie's History of the  Macleods, pp. 342, 343.]

One of the family historians says that this was the first step that Hector Roy got to Gairloch.  His brother-in-law, Allan Macleod, gave him  the custody of their rights, but when he found his nephews were murdered, he took a new gift of it to himself, and going to Gairloch with a number of  Kintail men and others, he took a heirschip with him, but such as were  alive of the Siol `ille Challum of Gairloch, followed him and fought him  at a place called Glasleoid, but they being beat Hector carried away the  heirschip.  After this and several other skirmishes they were content to  allow him the two-thirds of Gairloch, providing he would let themselves  possess the other third in peace, which he did, and they kept possession till  Hector's great-grandchild put them from it." [Ancient MS.]

The Earl of Cromarty, and other MS. historians of the family fully corroborate this.  The Earl says that Hector, incited to revenge by the foul  murder of his nephews, made some attempts to oust the Macleods from  Gairloch during John of Killin's minority, but was not willing to engage in  war with such a powerful chief as Macleod of Lewis, while he felt himself insecure in his other possessions, but after arranging matters amicably  with his nephew of Kintail, and now being master of a fortune and  possessions suitable to his mind and quality, he resolved to avenge the  murder and to "make it productive of his own advantage."  He summoned  all those who were accessory to the assassination of his sister's children  before the Chief Justice.  Their well grounded fears made them absent themselves from Court.  Hector produced the bloody shirts of the murdered boys, whereupon the murderers were declared fugitives and outlaws, and a commission granted in his favour for their pursuit, "which he did so resolutely manage that in a short time he killed many, preserved  some to justice, and forced the remainder to a composition advantageous  to himself. His successors, who were both active and prudent men, did  thereafter acquire the rest from their unthrifty neighbours."  The greatest  defeat that Hector ever gave to the Macleods "was at Bealach Glasleoid,  near Kintail, where most of them were taken or killed."  At this fight  Duncan Mor na Tuaighe, who so signally distinguished himself at Blar-na-Pairc, was present with Hector, and on being told that four men were together attacking his son Dugal, he indifferently replied, "Well, if he be  my son there is no hazard for that," a remark which turned out quite true,  for the hero killed the four Macleods, and came off himself without any  serious wounds. [Duncan in his old days was very assisting to Hector,  Gairloch's predecessor, against the Macleods of Gairloch, for he, with his  son Dugal, who was a strong, prudent, and courageous man, with ten or  twelve other Kintailmen, were alwise, upon the least advertisement, ready to go and assist Hector, whenever, wherever, and in whatever he had to  do, for which cause there has been a friendly correspondence betwixt the  family of Gairloch and the MacRas of Kintail, which still continues."--Genealogy of the MacRas.]

The massacre of Island Isay followed a considerable time after this, and its object was very much the same as the murder of Loch Tolly,  although carried out by a different assassin.  Ruairidh "Nimhneach"  Macleod, son of Allan "Mac Ruairdh" of Gairloch, and nephew of the  Loch Tolly assassins, determined not only to remove the children of John  Mor na Tuaighe, brother of Alexander Macleod, II. of Raasay, by Janet  Mackenzie of Kintail, but also to destroy the direct line of the Macleods of  Raasay, and thus open up the succession to John na Tuaighe's son by his  second wife, Roderick Nimhneach's sister, and failing him, to Roderick's  own son Allan. By this connection it would, he thought, be easier for him  to attain repossession of the lands of Gairloch, from which his family was  driven by the Mackenzies.

Roderick's name appears as "Rory Mac Allan, alias  Nevymnauch," in a decree-arbitral by the Regent Earl of Murray between  Donald Macdonald, V. of Sleat, and Colin Mackenzie, XI. of Kintail,  dated at Perth, the 1st of August, 1569, in terms of which Macdonald becomes responsible for Roderick and undertakes that he and his kin shall "desist and cease troubling, molesting, harming or invasion of the said   Laird of Gairloch's lands and rowmes, possessions, tenants, servants, and goods, while on the other hand Kintail shall see to it  that Torquil  Cononach shall cease to do the same in all respects to Macdonald's  lands."  In 1586 Roderick is described as "of Lochgair," but another  person is named in the same document as "Macleud, heritor of the lands  of Gairloch," which proves that Roderick Nimhneach was not the actual  proprietor of even the small portion of that district which was still left to  his family.  He was the second son, and one of the objects of the massacre  on Island Isay was to cut off his father's only surviving son and heir by his  first wife--a daughter of Mackenzie of Kintail--who escaped the previous  massacre on the Island of Loch Tolly.

With the view of cutting off the legitimate male representation of his own Macleod relatives of Gairloch and of Raasay, he invited all the  members of both families, and most of them accepted the invitation.   Roderick on their arrival feasted them sumptuously at a great banquet.

In  the middle of the festivities he informed them of his desire to have each man's advice separately, and that he would after-wards make known to  them the important business which had to be considered, and which  closely concerned each of them.  He then retired into a separate  apartment, and called them in one by one, when they were each, as they  entered, stabbed with dirks through the body by a set of murderous  savages whom he had engaged and posted inside the room for the purpose.

Not one of the family of Raasay was left alive, except a boy nine years of  age, who was being fostered from home, and who had been sent privately  by his foster-father, when the news of the massacre became known, to the  laird of Calder, who kept him in safety during his minority.  He afterwards  obtained possession of Raasay, and became known as Gillecallum Garbh  MacGillechallum.  Macleod of Gairloch's sons, by Hector Roy's sister,  were all murdered. Roderick took his own nephew to the room where,  walking with his brutal relative, he heard one of his half-brothers cry on  being stabbed by the assassin's dirk, and saying "Yon's my brother's cry."

"Hold your peace," Rory replied, "yonder cry is to make you laird of  Gairloch; he is the son of one of Mackenzie's daughters." The boy,  fearing that his own life might be sacrificed, held his tongue, "but  afterwards he did what in him lay in revenging the cruel death of his  brothers and kinsmen on the murtherers." [Ancient MS.]

In acknowledgment of the King's favour, Hector gathered his  followers in the west, joined his nephew, John of Killin, with his vassals, and fought, in command of the clan, at the disastrous battle of Flodden,  from which both narrowly escaped  but most of their followers were slain.    Some time after his return home he successfully fought the desperate  skirmish at Druim-a-chait, already referred to, pp. 114-118, with 140 men against 700 of the Munros, Dingwalls, MacCullochs, and other clans  under the command of William Munro of Fowlis, on which occasion  Sheriff Vass of Lochslinn was killed at a bush near Dingwall, "called to  this day Preas Sandy Vass," or Alex.  Vass's bush, a name assigned to it  for that very cause. [Gairloch MS.]

Hector, during his life, granted to his nephew, John of Killin, his  own half of Kintail, the lands of Kinellan, Fairburn, Wester Brahan, and  other possessions situated in the Low Country, which brought his son John Glassich afterwards into trouble. [Ibid.] Hector Roy was betrothed to a daughter of the Laird of Grant--probably Sir Duncan, who flourished from 1434 to 1485--but she died  before the marriage was solemnised. He, however, had a son by her called Hector Cam, he being blind of an eye, to whom he gave Achterneed and  Culte Leod, now Castle Leod, as his patrimony.  Hector Cam married a  daughter of Mackay of Farr, ancestor of Lord Reay, by whom he had two  sons Alexander Roy and Murdo. ["These were both succeeded by the son  of Alexander, a slothful man, who dotingly bestowed his estate on his  foster child.  Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach, in detriment to his own  children, though very deserving of them, Captain Hector Mackenzie, late  of Dumbarton's Regiment, and also a tribe in the Eastern circuit of Ross, surnamed, from one of their progenitors, Mac Eanin, i.e., the descendants of John the Fair."--Gairloch MS.  Another MS. gives the additional names of--"Richard Mackenzie, vintner in Edinburgh, grandson of Alexander Mackenzie of Calder, Midlothian; Duncan Mackenzie, an eminent gunsmith in London; and James Mackenzie, gunsmith  in  Dundee." It  also adds that of the successors of the Mac Eanins in Easter Ross, were  "Master Alexander Mackenzie, an Episcopal minister in Edinburgh; and  preceptor to the children of the present noble family of Cromarty, whose  son is Charles Mackenzie, clerk to Mr David Munro of Meikle Allan."]

Alexander married a daughter of John Mor na Tuaighe MacGillechallum, a brother of Macleod of Raasay, by whom she had a son, Hector, who  lived at Kinellan, and was nicknamed the Bishop.  This Hector married a  daughter of Macleod of Raasay, and left a large family, one of the  daughters being afterwards married to Murdo Mackenzie, V. of Achilty,  without issue.  Hector Cam's second son, Murdo, married a daughter of  Murdoch Buy Matheson of Lochalsh, with issue--Lachlan, known as  "Lachlainn Mac Mhurchaidh Mhic Eachainn," who married a daughter of  Murdoch Mackenzie, III. of Achilty, with issue--Murdoch, who married a  daughter of Alexander Ross of Cuilich  and Alastair, who married a  daughter of William MacCulloch of Park.

Hector Roy, after the death of Grant of Grant's daughter, married his cousin Anne, daughter of Ranald MacRanald, generally known as Ranald Ban Macdonald, V. of Moydart and Clanranald.  Her brother Dougal was assassinated and his sons formally excluded from the succession, when the estate and command of the clan were given to his  nephew Alexander, "portioner," of Moydart, whose son, John Moydartach  afterwards succeeded and became the famous Captain of Clanranald  Gregory says, however, that "Allan, the eldest son of Dougal, and the  undoubted heir male of Clanranald, acquired the estate of Morar, which he transmitted to his descendants.  He and his successors were always styled `MacDhughail Mhorair,' that is MacDougal of Morar, from their ancestor  Dougal MacRanald."  This quite explains the various designations by  which these  Moydart and Clanranald ladies who had married into the  Gairloch family have been handed down to us.  Anne was the widow of  William Dubh Macleod, VII. of Harris, Dunvegan, and Glenelg, by whom  she had an only daughter, who, by Hector Roy's influence at Court, was married to Rory Mor of Achaghluineachan, ancestor of the Mackenzies of  Fairburn and Achilty, after she bad by her future husband a natural son,  Murdoch, who became progenitor of the family of Fairburn.  By this  marriage with Anne of Moydart and Clanranald Hector Roy had issue--

1.  John Glassich, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth of Meikle Allan, now Allangrange, who married a  daughter of Alexander Dunbar of Kilbuyack, and widow of Allan  Mackenzie, II. of Hilton, with issue--(1) Hector, who married an Assynt  lady, with issue--Hector Og, who was killed at Raasay, in 1611,  unmarried; and three daughters, the eldest of whom married, as her second husband, John, son of Alastair Roy, natural son of John Glassich, with  issue--Bishop Murdoch Mackenzie of Moray and Orkney, and several  other sons.  Hector's second daughter married "Tormod Mac Ean Lleaye"  --Norman, son of John Liath Macrae--who, according to the traditions of  the country, took such a prominent part against the Macleods at that  period--and a brother of the celebrated archers Domhull Odhar and lain  Odhar mic Ian Leith, of whose prowess the reader will learn more  presently.  The third daughter married Duncan, son of John, son of  Alastair Roy, son of John Glassich, II. of Gairloch.  (2) Angus, who  married, with issue--Kenneth, who left an only daughter, who married her cousin, Murdo Mac Ian, son of Alastair Roy.

3.  John Tuach of Davochpollo, who married with issue--a son,  John, who died without lawful issue.

4.  Dougal Roy, who inherited Scatwell, and was killed in a family feud in 1550, and

Three daughters, who married respectively, Bayne of Tulloch,  John Aberach Mackay, and Hugh Bayne Fraser of Bunchrew, a natural son of Thomas, fourth Lord Lovat, killed at Blar-na-Leine, ancestor of the  Frasers of Reelick.

He had also a son, John Beg, who was according to some  authorities illegitimate, from whom descended several Mackenzies who  settled in Berwick and Alloa.

Hector Roy died in 1528.  On the 8th of September in that year, a  grant is recorded to Sir John Dingwall, "Provost of Trinity College, beside  Edinburgh, of the ward of the lands of Gairloch, which pertained to the  umquhile Achinroy Mackenzie."  He was succeeded by his eldest lawful  son,

II.  JOHN  GLASSICH  MACKENZIE, who, from the above  quoted document, appears to have been a minor at his father's death.  His retour of service cannot be found, but an instrument of sasine, dated the 24th of June, 1536, in his favour, is in the Gairloch charter chest, wherein  he is designated  "John  Hector-son," and in which he is said to be the  heir, served and retoured, of his father, Hector Roy Mackenzie, in the  lands of Gairloch, and the grazings of Glasletter and Coirre-nan-Cuilean.    He is said to have objected to his father's liberality during his life in granting, at the expense of his successors, to his nephew, John of Kuhn, so  much of his patrimonial possessions.  According to the Gairloch  MS. already quoted Hector gave him his own half of Kintail, as well as Kinellan, Fairburn, Wester Brahan, and "other possessions in the Low Country besides."  John thought these donations far too exorbitant, and he  "sought to retrench them by recovering in part what with so much  profusion his father had given away, and for that, a feud having ensued  betwixt him and his Chief, he was surprised in his house by night,  according to the barbarous manner of the times, and sent prisoner to Iland  Downan, and there taken away by poison in A.D. l550.  His brother Dugal,  who sided with him, and John (Beg), his natural brother, were both slain  in the same quarrel." [Gairloch MS.  Another MS. says that his other  brother, John Tuach, was assassinated the same night.]

A bond, dated 1544, has been preserved, to which John Glassich's name, along with others, is adhibited, undertaking to keep the peace, and promising obedience to Kenneth, younger of Kintail (Kenneth na Cuirc),  as the Queen's Lieutenant. [Spalding Club Miscellany, vol. iv. p.213.]

John's obedience does not appear, however, to have been very complete.

Kintail having, according to another authority, received information of  John Glassich's intention to recover if possible part of the property given  away by his father, sent for him to Brahan, where he went, accompanied  by a single attendant, John Gearr.  The chief charged him with these  designs against him, and John's denials proving unsatisfactory, Kintail  caused him to be apprehended. John Gearr, seeing this, and feeling that  his master had been treacherously dealt with, drew his two handed sword  and made a fierce onslaught on the chief who sat at the head of the table, but smartly bowed his head under it, or it would have been cloven asunder.  John Gearr was instantly seized by Mackenzie's guards, who  threatened to tear him to pieces, but the chief, admiring his fidelity,  charged them not to touch him.  John Gearr, on being questioned why he  had struck at Mackenzie and took no notice of those who apprehended his  master, boldly replied that he "saw no one else present whose life was a  worthy exchange for that of his own chief."  John's sword made a deep  gash in the table, and the mark, which was deep enough to admit of a hand being placed edgeways in it, remained until Colin, first Earl of Seaforth,  caused the piece to be cut off, saying that "he loved no such remembrance of the quarrels of his relations."

John Glassich, it would appear, was not unduly circumspect at home, or a very dutiful and loyal subject to his King.  In 1547 his estate  was forfeited for refusing to join the Royal Standard, and the escheat  thereof granted to the Earl of Sutherland, as will be seen by the following  letter in favour of that nobleman:--

"A letter made to John, Earl of Sutherland, his heirs, assigns, one  or more, the gift of all goods moveable and unmoveable, debts, tacks,  steadings, corns, and obligations, sums of money, gold, silver, coined and  uncoined, and other goods whatsoever which pertained to John Hectors--son of Gairloch, and now pertaining to our Sovereign Lady by reason of  escheat through the said John's remaining and biding at home from the  `oist' and army devised to convene at Peebles, the 10th day of July instant,  for recovering of the house of Langholm furth of our enemies' hands of  England, in contrary to the tenour of the letters and proclamations made thereupon, incurred therethrough the pains contained thereuntil, or any  otherwise shall happen to pertain to us our Sovereign by reason foresaid  with power, etc.  At Saint Andrews the 23rd day of July, the year of God, 1547 years." [Reg. Sec. Sig., xxi. fol. 316.]

There is no trace of the reversal of this forfeiture.  It does not,  however, appear to have affected the succession.  Indeed it is not likely that it even affected the actual possession, for it was not easy even for the  Earl of Sutherland, though supported by the Royal authority to wield any  real power in such an out-of-the-way region in those days as John  Glassich's possessions in the west. It has been already stated that, in  1551, the Queen granted to John Mackenzie, IX. of Kintail, and his heir,  Kenneth na Cuirc, a remission for the violent taking of John Glassich,  Dougal, and John Tuach, his brothers, and for keeping them in prison, thus usurping "therethrough our Sovereign Lady's authority."  None of them is  spoken of in this remission as being then deceased, though tradition and  the family MS. history have it that John Glassich was poisoned or starved to death at Ellandonnan Castle in 1550. [One of the family MSS. says that by his marriage "he got the lands of Kinkell, Kilbokie, Badinearb,  Pitlundie, Davochcairn, Davochpollo, and Foynish, with others in the Low  Country, for which the family has been in the use to quarter the arm of  Fraser with their own. This John, becoming considerably rich and  powerful by those different acquisitions, became too odious to and envied by John, Laird of Mackenzie, and his son Kenneth then married to  Stewart, Earl of Atholes daughter, that they set upon him, having  previously invited him to a Christmas dinner, having got no other pretence than a fit of jealousy on account of the said Earl's daughter, bound him  with ropes and carried him a prisoner to Islandownan, where his death was occasioned by poison administered to him in a mess of milk soup by one  MacCalman, a clergyman and Deputy-Constable of the Fort."]  It is,  however, probable that Kintail considered it wise to conceal John's death until the remission had been already secured.  Only six weeks after the  date of the "respitt" John Glassich is referred to in the Privy Council  Records, under date of 25th July, 1551, as the "omquhile (or late) John  McCanze of Gairlocht," his lands having then been given in ward to the  Earl of Athole, "Ay and till the lawful entry of the righteous heir or heirs  thereto, being of lawful age." [Reg. Sec. Con., vol. xxiv., fol. 84.]

Although Hector obtained a  charter of the lands of Gairloch in 1494, the Macleods continued for a  time to hold possession of a  considerable part of it.  According  to the traditions of the district they  had all to the east and south-east of  the Crasg, a hill situated on the  west side of the churchyard of  Gairloch, between the present Free  and Established Churches.  At the  east end of the Big Sand, on a high  and easily defended rock, stood the  last stronghold occupied by the  Macleods in Gairloch--to this day  known as the "Dun" or Fort.  The  foundation is still easily traced.  It  must have been a place of consider-able importance, for it is over 200  feet in circumference. Various  localities are still pointed out in  Gairloch where desperate  skirmishes were fought between  the Macleods and the Mackenzies.   Several of these spots, where the  slain were buried, look quite green  to this day. The "Fraoch Eilean,"  opposite Leac-na-Saighid, where a  naval engagement was fought, is a  veritable cemetery of Macleods,  ample evidence of which is yet to  be seen.  Of this engagement, and  of those at Glasleoid, Lochan-an-Fheidh, Leac-na-Saighid, Kirkton, and many others, thrilling accounts  are still recited by a few old men in  the district; especially of the  prowess of Domh'ull Odhar Mac  Ian Leith, and the other Kintail  heroes who were mainly  instrumental in establishing the  Mackenzies of Gairloch permanently and in undisputed  possession of their beautiful and romantic inheritance.

John Glassich married Janet Agnes, daughter of James Fraser of Phoineas, brother of Hugh, sixth Lord Lovat (with whom he got the Barony of Inchlag, etc.), with issue--

1.  Hector, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded his brother Hector.

3.  John, who succeeded Alexander.

4.  A daughter, who married John Mackenzie, II. of Loggie, with issue,

John Glassich's widow married, secondly, Thomas Chisholm, XV.  of Chisholm, without issue male.

He had also two natural sons before his marriage, Alexander Roy and Hector Caol.

Alexander Roy had a son  John, who lived at Coirre Mhic  Cromaill in Torridon, and who had  a son, the Rev. Murdoch  Mackenzie, Chaplain to Lord  Reay's Regiment in the Bohemian  and Swedish service, under  Gustavus Adolphus.  He was  afterwards minister of Contin,  Inverness, and Elgin, and  subsequently Bishop of Moray and  of Orkney in succession.  His  family and descendants are dealt  with under a separate heading--MACKENZIES  OF   GROUNDWATER.

Hector Caol left a numerous tribe in Gairloch, still known as Clann Eachainn Chaoil, and said to be distinguished by their long and slender  legs.

John Glassich, who was assassinated in 1550, as already stated, at  Ellandonnan Castle, was buried in the Priory of Beauly, and succeeded by  his eldest lawful son,

III.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE.  He has a sasine, dated the 6th May,  1563, [Gairloch Charter Chest,] in which he is described as "Achyne  Johannis MacAchyne," and bearing that the lands had been in non-entry  for 12 years, thus carrying back the date of his succession to 1551, when the estate was given in ward to John, fourth of the Stewart Earls of Athole.

Hector died--probably killed, like his brother--without issue, on the 3rd of  September, 1566, and was buried at Beauly, when he was succeeded by  his next lawful brother,

ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who has a retour, dated the 2nd of  December, 1566, [Ing. Retour Reg., vol. i., fol. 22, and Origines  Parochiales Scotiae,] as heir to "Hector his brother-german," in the lands  of Gairloch, namely, "Gairloch, Kirktoun, Syldage, Hamgildail, Malefage, Innerasfidill, Sandecorran, Cryf, Baddichro, Bein-Sanderis, Meall, Allawdall, with the pasturage of Glaslettir and Cornagullan, in the  Earldom of Ross, of the old extent of ?;" but not to any of the other lands  which Hector Roy left to his descendants.  Alexander did not long possess the estates, for he died--to all appearance assassinated--a few weeks after  he succeeded, without making up titles.  It is, therefore, not thought  necessary to count him as one of the Barons of Gairloch.

It is probable that the  brothers, Hector and Alexander,  met with the same violent death as  their father and uncles, John  Glassich, John Tuach, and John  Beg and by the same authors.  This  is according to tradition, and an old  MS., which says that their mother  Agnes Fraser fled with John Roy  "to Lovat and her Fraser relatives," adds as to the fate of his brothers  that "In those days many acts of  oppression were committed that  could not be brought to fair tryales  befor the Legislator."  "She was  afterwards married to Chisholm of  Comar, and heired his family; here  she kept him in as concealed a  manner as possible, and, as is  reported, every night under a  brewing kettle, those who, through  the barbarity of the times,  destroyed his father and uncles,  being in search of the son, and in  possession of his all excepting his  mother's dower.  He was  afterwards concealed by the Lairds  of Moydart and of Farr, till he  became a handsome man and could  put on his weapon, when he had the  resolution to wait on Colin Cam  Mackenzie, Laird of Kintail, a most  worthy gentleman, who established  him in all his lands, excepting  those parts of the family estate for which Hector and his successors  had an undoubted right by writs."

Hector was succeeded by his next  brother,

IV.  JOHN  ROY MACKENZIE, John Glassich's  third son, who was at the time a  minor, although his father had been  dead for 15 or 16 years; and the  estate was given in ward by Queen  Mary in 1567. She "granted in  heritage to John Bannerman of  Cardeyne, the ward of the lands  and rents belonging to the deceased  Hector Makkenych, of Gairloch,  with the relief of the same when it  should occur and the marriage of  John Roy Makkenych, the brother  and apparent heir of Hector."  [Origines Parochiales Scotiae p.  406, and Reg. Sec. Sig., vol. xxxvi.  fol. 6.]  In 1569, John, being then  of "lauchful age," is served and  retoured heir to his brother-german, Hector, in the lands of Gairloch  [Ing. Retour Reg., vol. i., fol. 22,  and Origines Parochiales Scotiae.]  as specified in the service of 1566,  passing over Alexander, no doubt  because he never made up titles.

This retour of 1569 gives the date  of Hector's death as 30th September, 1566.  In 1574 John has  a sasine which bears that the lands  had been seven and a half years in  non-entry, taking it back to the date  of Hector's death, three months  before the gift of the ward to John  Bannerman.  He, in the same year,  acquired half the lands of  Ardnagrask from Lord Lovat, partly  in exchange for the rights he  inherited in Phoineas from his  mother, and he is described by his  Lordship in the disposition as "the  son, by her first husband, of his  kinswoman Agnes Fraser."  From  this it may be assumed that John  Glassich's widow had during her  life made over her own rights to her  son or that she had in the meantime died.

It is found from the old  inventory, already quoted, that  there was a charter of alienation by  Hugh Fraser of Guisachan, dated  the 29th of May, 1582, from which  it appears that John Roy in 1574, acquired Davochcairn and  Davochpollo, in Strathpeffer, from  this Hugh Fraser, and that in the  first-named year he obtained from him also the lands of Kinkell-Clarsach and Pitlundie, in terms of a contract of sale dated the 26th of  January, 1581.  The charter is  confirmed by James VI. in 1523.  It  appears from his daughter's retour  of service [Ing. Retours Reg., vol.  viii., fol. 284b.] that Gairloch's  eldest son, John, died in 1601.  He  had been infeft by his father in  Davochpollo and Pitlundie, and  married Isabel, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie II. of  Fairburn, by whom he had a  daughter, also named Isabel, who  married Colin Mackenzie of Strathgarve, brother to Kenneth,  first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, and first of the Mackenzies of  Kinnock and Pitlundie.  Colin of Strathgarve entered into a lawsuit  with Alexander V. of Gairloch, probably in connection with this  marriage, "to cut him out of his Low Country estate." ["Colin of  Kinnock, who entered a lawsuit against Alexander Mackenzie of  Gairloch, meaning to cut him out of  his low country estates, and being  powerfully supported by Mackenzie of Fairburn and Mr  John  Mackenzie of Tolly, minister of Dingwall, a plodding clergyman,  kept him sixteen sessions at Edinburgh; the last year of which  Gairloch and his brother Kenneth seeing Lord Kintail insulted by the  Earl of Glencairn, who was supported by most of those on the  street, put on their armour and came directly to his assistance, and  rescuing him from imminent danger brought him to their  lodging.  No sooner was the tumult over than they embraced very  cordially, and the whole matter in debate was instantly taken away,  aud Gairloch got a present of 600  merks to finish the Tower of  Kinkell, of which his father (John  Roy) only built three storeys."--Gairloch MS.]  In 1657 she mortgaged Davochpollo and  Pitlundie to her cousin, Kenneth  VI. of Gairloch; and her successor,  John Mackenzie of Pitlundie, completed the sale to him, which  brought the property back again to  the Gairloch family. [Papers in the  Gairloch Charter Chest.]

Under date of 11th August,  1587, the following complaint by  James Sinclair, Master of  Caithness, and James Paxtoun, his  servant, against John Mackenzie of  Gairloch appears in the Records of  the Privy Council--While they  "were in a peaceable and quiet  manner," in March last, in the  Chanonry of Ross, within the house  of William Robson, the following  persons, viz.:--John Mackenzie of Gairloch, Hector Mackenzie in  Fairburn, Meikle John Mackenzie,  his son, Thomas MacThomais Mac  Keanoch's son, Donald  Macintagairt, Mr John Mackenzie,  son of Murdo Mackenzie of  Fairburn, Mr Murdo Mackenzie,  parson of Lochcarron, Duncan  Mackenzie, John  Beg Mackenzie's  son, Duncan MacCulloch of  Achanault, David Aytoun, master  stabler to Colin Mackenzie of  Kintail, Finlay Roy, Stewart to the  said Colin, William Barbour,  burgess in the Chanonry, with convocation of the lieges, to the  number of 300, "bodin in feir of  weir," and hounded on by the said  John Mackenzie of Gairloch, "had  come to the said William Robson's  house, wherein the said complainers were, and had without  any occasion of offence, assegeit the said house and used all means  and engines for apprehending of the said James Sinclair and his said  servant."  Further, "seeing they  could not goodly recover the said  house," they "cried for fire, and  had not failed most treasonably to  have risen fire within the same had  not the said complainer delivered  the said James Paxton in their  bands, whom they immediately  conveyed and led to the castle of  Chanonry pertaining to the said  Colin, and kept and detained him  captive therein for the space of two  hours or thereby."  After such  detention of the said James "they  granted liberty to him to pass  home, and the better to cloak their  cruel and unmerciful decree, which  openly they durst not put to  execution, they secretly hounded  out a great number of cut-throats to  have beset the same James's way  and to have bereft him of his life, which they not failed to have done  had not God otherwise prevented their doings."  Moreover, "at that  same time they reft and took away  from the said complainers their  horses, saddles, and other gear  worth five hundred merks."  John  Mackenzie of Gairloch, master and  landlord of the foresaid persons,  having been charged to appear  personally and enter them this day  "to have answered and underlaid  punishment for the premises,"  according to the general band, but  making no such appearance or  entry, while the complainers appear  personally, the Lords order the said  Mackenzie of Gairloch to be  denounced rebel.

In 1606 John Roy received a charter of resignation in favour of himself in life-rent, and of his son, Alexander in fee, erecting Gairloch into a free barony and in 1619 he obtained another charter, [These charters  are in the Gairloch Charter Chest.] under the Great Seal, by which Kinkell  is included in the barony and constituted its chief messuage.  He built the  first three stories of the Tower of Kinkell, "where his arms and those of his first wife are parted per pale above the mantelpiece of the great hall."  [Gairloch MS.]

The son of Roderick  MacAllan "Nimhneach" of  Gairloch, in the absence of young  MacGillechallum Garbh of Raasay,  who, under the care of the Laird of  Calder escaped the massacre of  Island Isay, possessed himself of  Raasay and took up his quarters in  Castle Brochail, the ancient  residence of the Chiefs of Macleod,  of which the ruins are still to be  seen on the east side of the island.

Seeing this, Donald Mac Neill, who  previously sent young Macleod of  Raasay to the protection of Calder  brought back the rightful heir, and  kept him, in private, until an  opportunity occurred by which he  could obtain possession of the  castle.  This he soon managed by  coming to terms with the  commander of the stronghold, who  preferred the native heir to his  relative of the Gairloch Macleods.

It was arranged that when Mac  Neill should arrive at the castle  with his charge, access should be  given to young Raasay. The  commander kept his word, and  MacGillechallum Garbh was soon after proclaimed laird.  In 1610 a severe skirmish was fought at Lochan-an-Fheidh, in Glen  Torridon, between the Mackenzies--led by Alexander, since his brother's  death in 1601, the apparent heir of Gairloch--and the Macleods under  John MacAllan Mhic Rory, then the only surviving direct male  representative of Allan Macleod of Gairloch and grandson probably of  Rory Nimhneach.  John Tolmach, John's uncle was also present, but he  succeeded in effecting his escape, while John MacAllan and seventeen or  eighteen of his followers were taken prisoners.  Many more were killed  and a few who escaped alive with John Tolmach were pursued out of the  district. The slain were buried where they fell, and the graves can still be seen, the nettles which continue to grow over them at the present day  indicating the position of the last resting-place on the field of battle of  these Macleod warriors, on the west side of the Sgura Dubh, above Glen  Torridon, a little beyond the Gairloch estate march.

Shortly after this  engagement another attempt was  made by the Macleods to regain the  lands of Gairloch, the history of  which is still a prominent and  interesting feature in the local  traditions of the parish.  The affair  is called "Latha Leac-na-Saighead."

Mr John H. Dixon gives a good  version of it, as related to him by  Roderick Mackenzie, locally  known as Ruairidh an Torra--an intelligent man of about ninety who  only died two years ago--in his  interesting book on the history and  traditions of the parish of Gairloch.

According to Roderick's version, as  given by Mr Dixon, many of the  Macleods, after they had been  driven from Gairloch, settled in  Skye.  A considerable number of  the younger men were invited by  their chief to pass Hogmanay night  in the Castle of Dunvegan. In the  kitchen there was an old woman  known as Mor Bhan, who was usually occupied in carding wool,  and generally supposed to be a witch.  After dinner the men began  to drink, and when they had passed  some time in this occupation, they  sent to the kitchen for Mor Bhan.

She at once joined them in the hall,  and having drunk one or two glasses along with them, she  remarked that it was a very poor  thing for the Macleods to be  deprived of their own lands in  Gairloch, and to have to live in  comparative poverty in Raasay and  the Isle of Skye.  "But," she said to  them, "prepare yourselves and start to-morrow for Gairloch, sail in the  black birlinn, and you shall regain  it.  I shall be a witness of your  success when you return."

The men trusted her, believing she had the power of divination.  In the morning they set sail for Gairloch--the black galley was full of the Macleods.  It was evening when they entered the loch.  They were afraid  to land on the mainland, for they remembered that the descendants of  Domhnull Greannach (a celebrated Macrae) were still there, and they  knew the prowess of these men only too well. The Macleods therefore  turned to the south side of the loch, and fastened their birlinn to the  Fraoch Eilean, in the well-sheltered bay opposite Leac-nan-Saighead,  between Shieldaig and Badachro. Here they decided to wait until  morning, then disembark, and walk round the head of the loch.

But all their movements had  been well and carefully watched. Domhnull Odhar Mac lain Leith  and his brother Ian, the celebrated Macrae archers, recognised the  birlinn of the Macleods, and determined to oppose their landing.   They walked round the head of the  loch by Shieldaig and posted  themselves before daylight behind  the Leac, a projecting rock  overlooking the Fraoch Eilean. The steps on which they stood at  the back of the rock are still pointed out.  Donald Odhar, being  of small stature, took the higher of  the two ledges, and Ian took the  lower.  Standing on these they  crouched down behind the rock,  completely sheltered from the  enemy, but commanding a full  view of the island, while they were  quite invisible to the Macleods,  who lay down on the island.  As  soon as the day dawned the two  Macraes directed their arrows on  the strangers, of whom a number  were killed before their comrades  were even aware of the direction  from which the messengers of  death came.  The Macleods  endeavoured to answer their  arrows, but not being able to see  the foe, their efforts were of no  effect.  In the heat of the fight one  of the Macleods climbed up the  mast of the birlinn to discover the  position of the enemy.  Ian Odhar  observing this, took deadly aim at  him when near the top of the mast.

"Oh," says Donald, addressing  John, "you have sent a pin through his broth."  The slaughter  continued, and the remnant of the Macleods hurried aboard their  birlinn.  Cutting the rope, they turned her head seawards.  By this  time only two of their number were  left alive.  In their hurry to escape  they left all the bodies of their slain  companions unburied on the island.

A rumour of the arrival of the  Macleods had during the night spread through the district, and  other warriors, such as Fionnla Dubh na Saighead, and Fear  Shieldaig, were soon at the scene of action, but all they had to do on  their arrival was to assist in the  burial of the dead Macleods.  Pits  were dug, into each of which a  number of the bodies were thrown,  and mounds were raised over them  which remain to this day, as any  one landing on the island may  observe.

In 1611, Murdoch  Mackenzie, second surviving son of  John Roy Mackenze, IV. of  Gairloch, accompanied by  Alexander Bayne, heir apparent of  Tulloch, and several brave men  from Gairloch, sailed to the Isle of  Skye in a vessel loaded with wine  and provisions. It is said by some  that Murdoch's intention was to  apprehend John Tolmach, while  others maintain that his object was  to secure in marriage the daughter  and heir of line of Donald Dubh  MacRory. The latter theory is far  the more probable, and it is the  unbroken tradition in Gairloch.

John Macleod was a prisoner in  Gairloch, was unmarried, and  easily secured where he was, in the  event of this marriage taking place. By such a union, failing issue by  John, then in the power of John Roy, the ancient rights of the  Macleods would revert to the  Gairloch family, and a troublesome  dispute would be for ever settled, if John Tolmach were at the same  time captured or put to death.

It may easily be conceived how both objects would become  combined but whatever the real object of the trip to Skye, it proved  disastrous. The ship found its way--intentionally on the part of the crew,  or forced by a great storm--to the sheltered bay of Kirkton of Raasay, opposite the present mansion house, where young MacGillechallum at the  time resided.  Anchor was cast, and young Raasay, hearing that Murdoch  Mackenzie was on board, discussed the situation with his friend  MacGillechallum Mor MacDhomhnuill Mhic Neill, who persuaded him to  visit the ship as a friend, and secure Mackenzie's person by stratagem,  with the view of getting him afterwards exchanged for his own relative,  John MacAllan Mhic Rory, then a prisoner in Gairloch.  Acting on this  advice, young Raasay, with Gillecallum Mor and twelve of their men,  started for the ship, leaving word with his bastard brother, Murdoch, to get  ready all the men he could, to go to their assistance in small boats as soon as the a]arm was given.

Mackenzie received his  visitors in the most hospitable and unsuspecting manner, and supplied  them with as much wine and other viands as they could consume.

Four of his men, however, feeling  somewhat suspicious, and fearing the worst, abstained from drinking.   Alexander Bayne of Tulloch, and  the remainder of Murdoch's men  partook of the good cheer to excess, and ultimately became so  drunk that they had to retire below  deck.  Mackenzie, who sat between  Raasay and MacGillechallum Mor,  had not the slightest suspicion,  when Macleod, seeing Murdoch alone, jumped up, turned suddenly  round and told him that he must become his prisoner.  Mackenzie  instantly started to his feet, in a  violent passion, laid hold of Raasay  by the waist, and threw him down,  exclaiming, "I would scorn to be  your prisoner."  One of Raasay's  followers, seeing his young chief  treated thus, stabbed Murdoch  through the body with his dirk.

Mackenzie finding himself  wounded, stepped back to draw his  sword, and, his foot coming against  some obstruction, he stumbled over it and fell into the sea.

Those on shore observing the row, came out in their small boats and seeing Mackenzie, who was a dexterous swimmer, manfully making for Sconsar, on the opposite shore, in Skye, they pelted him with stones, smashed in his brains and drowned him.  The few of his men who kept  sober, seeing their leader thus perish, resolved to sell their lives dearly;  and fighting like heroes, they killed the young laird of Raasay, along with  MacGillechallum Mor, author of all the mischief, and his two sons.

Young Bayne of Tulloch and his six inebriated companions who had followed him below, hearing the uproar overhead, attempted to come on  deck, but they were all killed by the Macleods as they presented themselves through the hold.  Not a soul of the Raasay men escaped alive  from the swords of the four who had kept sober, ably supported by the  ship's crew.

The small boats now began  to gather round the vessel and the  Raasay men attempted to get on  board but they were thrown back,  slain, and pitched into the sea  without mercy.  The shot and  ammunition having become  exhausted, all the pots and pans,  and other articles of furniture on  board were hurled at the Macleods,  while the four abstainers plied their  weapons of war with deadly effect.

Having procured a lull from the  attempts of the enemy, they commenced to pull in their anchor,  when a shot from one of the boats  killed one of them--Hector  MacKenneth, "a pretty young gentleman."  The other three seeing  him slain, and being themselves more or less seriously wounded, cut  their cable, hoisted sail, and proceeded before a fresh breeze,  with all the dead bodies still lying  about the deck.  As soon as they got  out of danger, they threw the  bodies of young Raasay and his  men into the sea, that they might  have the same interment which  their own leader had received, and  whose body they were not able to  search for.

It is said that none of the bodies were ever found, except that of  MacGillechallum  Mor, which afterwards came ashore, and was buried, in  Raasay.  The Gairloch men carried the bodies of Bayne of Tulloch and his  companions to  Lochcarron, where they were decently interred.

The only survivors of the Rausay affair were John MacEachainn Chaoil, John MacKenneth Mhic Eachainn, and Kenneth MacSheumais.

The first named lived for thirty years after, dying in 1641; the second died  in 1662; and the third in 1663--all very old men. Amongst the slain was a  son of Mackenzie of Badachro, who is said to have signally distinguished  himself.  The conduct of the Mackenzies of Gairloch was such on this and  previous occasions that they deemed it wise to secure a remission from the  Crown, which was duly granted to them in 1614, by James VI.  [Mackenzie's History of the Macleods, pp. 361-366.]  The document,  modernised in spelling, is as follows:--

James R.--Our Sovereign Lord understanding the manifold cruel  and barbarous tyrannies and oppressions so frequent within he Highlands and Isles, of that (part of) his Highness's Kingdom of Scotland, before his  Majesty's departure furth of the same, that one part of the inhabitants  thereof being altogether void of the true ear of God, and not regarding that  true and loyal obedience they ought to his Majesty in massing and drawing themselves together n troops and companies, and after a most savage and  insolent form committing depredations, rieves,  "slouthis," and cruel  slaughters against the most honest, godly, and industrious sort of people dwelling within and bewest the said bounds, who were a ready prey to the said oppressors, so that the said honest and peaceable subjects were oft  and sundry times, for defence of their own lives, their wives and children,  forced to enter into actions of hostility against the said limmers and  broken men who oft and diverse times invaded and pursued them with tire  and sword, reft and spuilzied their whole goods, among whom his  Majesty, understanding that his Highness's lovites and true and obedient  subjects, John Mackenzie of Gairloch, Alexander, Kenneth, Duncan, and  William Mackenzie, his sons, dwelling within the Highlands most `ewest'  the Isles of Skye and Lewis, who many and sundry times before his  Majesty's going to England, has been most cruelly invaded and pursued  with tire and sword by sundry of the said vagabonds and broken men dwelling and resorting in the Skye and Lewis and other bounds of the  Highlands where they dwell, and has there-through sustained many and  great slaughters, depredations and heirschips, so that in the very action of  the said invasions and hostilities pursued against them, the said persons in  defence of their own lives, their wives' and children's, and of their goods,  have slain sundry of the said invaders and limmers, taken others of them  and thereafter put them to death, to the great comfort of his Majesty's  good, honest, and true subjects who were subject to the like inroads, invasions and tyrannies of the said vagabonds and fugitives, and settling of  his Majesty's peace within the bounds  and his Majesty being noways  willing that the said John Mackenzie of Gairloch and his said sons'  forawardness in their own defence, and withstanding of the foresaid open  and violent hostilities and tyrannies of the said broken men which has  produced so much and good benefit to his Majesty's distressed subjects,  shall suffer any hurt, prejudice, or inconvenience against the said John  Mackenzie of Gairloch and his said sons, which his Highness by these  letters decrees and declares to have been good and acceptable service  done to his Highness and the country :  Therefore, his Majesty, of his  special grace, mercy, and favour, ordains a letter to be made under his Highness's Great Seal in due form to the said John Mackenzie of Gairloch, Alexander, Kenneth, Duncan, and William Mackenzie, his sons,  remitting and forgiving them and everyone of them all rancour, hatred,  action, and crime whatsoever that his Majesty had, has, or anywise may  lay to the charge of the said John Mackenzie or his said sons, or any of  them, for the alleged taking and apprehending, slaying or mutilating of the  said vagabonds and broken men, or any of them, or for art and part  thereof, or for raising of tire against them, in the taking and apprehending  of them, or any of them, at any time preceding his Majesty's going to  England and of all that has passed or that may pass thereupon, and of  every circumstance thereanent and suchlike.  His Majesty, of his especial grace, taking knowledge and proper motive, remits and forgives the said  persons, and everyone of them, all slaughters, mutilations, and other  capital crimes whatsoever, art and part thereof committed by them, or any of them, preceding the day and date hereof (treason in our said Sovereign Lord's own most noble person only excepted), with all pains and  executions that ought and should be executed against them, or any of them for the same, exonerating, absolving, and relieving the said John and his said sons, and all of them of all action and challenge criminal and civil that may be moved thereupon to their prejudice for ever:  Discharging  hereby all judges, officers, magistrates, administrators of his Majesty's laws, from granting of any proofs, criminal or civil, in any action or causes  to be moved or pursued against the said John Mackenzie or his sons  foresaid for anything concerning the execution of the premises:   Discharging them thereof and their officers in that employed by them, and that the said letter he extended in the best form with ill clauses needful  and the precepts he directed orderly thereupon in form as effeirs. Given at  Theobald's, the second day of April, the year of God, 1614 years.  [Original in the Gairloch Charter Chest.]

John Roy purchased or rented the tithes of his lands, which appear to have led him into no end of disputes.  The Rev. Alexander Mackenzie  was appointed minister at Gairloch--the first after the Reformation--and  in 1583 he obtained a decree from the Lords of the Privy Council and   Session ordaining the teind revenue to be paid to him.  At the Reformation  Sir John Broik was rector of the parish ; after which  it was vacant until, in  1583, James VI. presented this Alexander Mackenzie to "the parsonage  and vicarage of Garloch vacand in our Souerane Lordis handis  contenuallie sen the reformatioun of the religioun within this realme by  the decease of Sir John Broik." [Reg. Sec. Sig., vol xlix, fol. 62.]  In 1584 the Rev. Alexander Mackenzie let the teinds to John Roy for three lives  and nineteen years more, for an annual payment of ?2 Scots. In 1588 the Crown granted a similar tack for a like payment.  In 1612 the Rev.  Farquhar MacGillechriost Macrae raised an action against John Roy and  his eldest surviving son Alexander for payment of the teind.  A certain  Robert Boyd became cautioner for the teind of 1610; but the action went  on for several years, and was apparently won by the Rev. Farquhar  Macrae, who, in 1616, lets the teind of Gairloch for nineteen years to  Alexander Mackenzie, Fiar of Gairloch, for ?0 Scots yearly.  Alexander  thereupon surrenders the tithes of the lands of Letterewe, Inverewe,  Drumchorc, and others to Colin Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, who on his  part, as patron of the parish, binds himself not to sanction the set of these  tithes to any other than the said Alexander and his heirs. [Papers in the Gairloch Charter Chest.]

John Roy married, first, Elizabeth, daughter of Angus Macdonald, VII. of Glengarry, by his wife, Janet, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, X.  of Kintail, by Lady Elizabeth, daughter of John, second Earl of Athole,  with issue--

1.  John, who married, as already stated, Isabel, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Fairburn, with issue--an only daughter, also named Isabel, who, as his second wife, married Colin Mackenzie of  Kinnock, with issue--an only son, who sold back his mother's jointure  lands of Davochpollo and Pitlundie in i666.  John died before his father, in 1601, at Kinkell, and was buried at Beauly.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded to the estates.

3.  Murdoch, killed, unmarried, at Raasay in 1611.

4.  Kenneth, I. of Davochcairn, who married, first, Margaret, daughter of James Cuthbert of Alterlies and Drakies, Inverness, with issue,  whose male representation is extinct.  He married, secondly, a daughter of  Hector Mackenzie, IV. of Fairburn, also with issue, of whose present  representation nothing is known. Kenneth died at Davochcairn in 1643,  and was buried at Beauly.

5.  Duncan of Sand, who  married a daughter of Hugh Fraser  of Belladrum, with issue--(1)   Alexander, who succeeded him at Sand; (2) John, who married a  daughter of the Rev. George  Munro, minister of Urquhart, and  resided at Ardnagrask; (3)  Katharine, who married, first, a son  of Allan Macranald Macdonald,  heir male of Moydart, at the time  residing at Baile Chnuic, or  Hiltown of Beauly, and secondly,  William Fraser of Boblanie, with  issue. (4) A daughter, who married  Thomas Mackenzie, son of  Murdoch Mackenzie,  IV. of  Achilty and (5) a daughter, who  married Duncan MacIan vic  Eachainn Chaoil.  Duncan died at  Sand, from the bite of a cat at  Inverasdale, in 1635, and is buried  at Gairloch.

Alexander, who succeeded  his father at Sand (retour 1647),  married a daughter of Murdo  Mackenzie of Kernsary, fifth son of  Colin Cam, XI. of Kintail, by his  wife, Barbara, daughter of John  Grant, XII. of Grant.  Murdoch  married the eldest daughter of John  Mackenzie, III. of Fairburn, by  whom he had, in addition to the  daughter who became the wife of  Alexander Mackenzie of Sand, an  only lawful son, John, killed in  1645 at the battle of Auldearn in  command of the Lewis Mackenzie  Regiment, whereupon the lineal  and sole representation of the  Kernsary family reverted to the  descendants of Alexander  Mackenzie of Sand, through Mary,  his wife, by whom he had issue--two sons and two daughters.  He  was succeeded, in 1656, by the  eldest son, Hector, who also  succeeded his uncle John in  Ardnagrask.  He married Janet  Fraser, with issue--John Mackenzie, who died in 1759, and  left a son Alexander, who got a new tack of Ardnagrask for forty  years, commencing in May, 1760; [Gairloch Papers.] and married  Helen Mackenzie, daughter of Donald, great-grandson of Murdo  Mackenzie, V. of Hilton (by his wife, Jean Forbes of Raddery), by  whom he had a large family of five  sons and six daughters.  The eldest  son, John Mackenzie, a merchant  and Bailie of Inverness, was born at  Ardnagrask in 1762, and married  Prudence, daughter of Richard Ord,  Merkinch, Inverness, by his wife,  Elizabeth, daughter of John, third  son of Alexander, VII. of  Davochmaluag, with issue--five  sons and two daughters.  Three of  the sons died without issue, one of  whom was John, a merchant in  Madras.  Another, Alexander,  married Maria Lascelles of  Blackwood, Dumfries, with issue--John Fraser Mackenzie, who  married Julia Linton, with issue;  Alexander, who married Adelaide  Brett, Madras, with issue and four  daughters, Margaret, Jane, Frances,  and Maria, of whom two married,  with issue.

Bailie John's second surviving son, the Rev. William Mackenzie, married Elizabeth Maclaren, with issue--John Ord, who married, without  issue; James, who married, with issue; Richard, who married Lousia Lyall, with issue Henry, of the Oriental Bank Corporation; Gordon, of the Indian Civil Service; and Alfred, of Townsville, Queensland; also Louisa,  Isabella, Maria, and Williamina, all married, the first three with issue.  Bailie Mackenzie's daughters were--Elizabeth,  who married  Montgomery Young, with issue; and Jane, who married Provost Ferguson,  of Inverness, with issue--John Alexander, who married, with issue; Mary, who married the late Walter Carruthers of the Inverness Courier, with  issue; and Agnes Prudence, who married the Rev. G. T. Carruthers, one of Her Majesty's Chaplains in India.

6. William Mackenzie of  Shieldaig, who married a daughter  of the Rev. Murdo Mackenzie,  minister of Kintail, with issue--(1) Murdoch, who married Mary,  daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, I.  of Applecross, with issue--Roderick, who, in 1727, married  Margaret Mackenzie, with issue--William Mackenzie, on record in  1736; (2) Duncan, who married a  daughter, by his second marriage,  of Hector Mackenzie, IV. of  Fairburn; (3) John, who married a  daughter of Murdo Mackenzie in  Sand; (4) Kenneth, who married a  daughter of Hector MacIan vic  Eachainn Mackenzie; (5) Hector;  (6) Roderick; (7) Alexander, the  last-named three unmarried in  1669; (8) a daughter, who married  Alexander Fraser of Reelick, with  issue; (9) a daughter, who married  Hector " Mac Mhic Alastair Roy";  (10) a daughter, who married  Murdo "Mac Ian Mhic Eachainn  Chaoil," a son of one of the Raasay  heroes; (11) a daughter, who  married Hector Mackenzie,  Chamberlain in Lochcarron; (12) a  daughter, who married the Rev.  Donald Macrae, minister of  Lochalsh; and (13) a daughter,  unmarried in 1669.  He had also a  natural son, John Mor "Mac  Uilleam," who married a natural  daughter or Murdoch Mackenzie,  II. of Redcastle.

7.  A daughter, who married Fraser of Foyers.

8.  Katherine, who married Hugh Fraser of Culbokie and  Guisachan.

9.  Another Katherine, who married Fraser of Struy.

10.  Janet, who married, first, George Cuthbert of Castlehill, Inverness (marriage contract 29th June, 1611); and secondly Neil Munro  of Findon marriage contract dated 5th of February, 1627). [Both marriage contracts are in the Gairloch Charter Chest.]

11.  A daughter, who married Alastair Mor, brother of Chisholm of Comar.

John Roy married, secondly, Isabel, daughter of Murdoch  Mackenzie, I. of Fairburn, with issue--

12.  Captain Roderick of Pitglassie, who served in the army of the Prince of Orange, and died, unmarried, in Holland, in 1624.

13.  Hector of Mellan, who married, first, the widow of the Rev.  John Mackenzie of Lochbroom, without issue and secondly, a daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of Achilty, with issue, five sons--Alexander, who married a daughter of "Murdo Mc Cowil vic Ean Oig"; Murdo, who married a daughter of Murdo Mackenzie of Sand and three others unmarried in 1669.

14.  John, a clergyman, who married a natural daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Kilcoy, with issue--four sons and two  daughters. He died at Rhynduin in 1666, and is buried at Beauly.

15.  Katherine Og, who married Fraser of Belladrum, with issue-from whom the Frasers of Achnagairn and Seafield.

16.  Isabel, who married  first, Alastair Og Macdonald [The  marriage contract is in the Gairloch  Charter Chest, dated 23rd Jan.  1629. This gentleman, in the  month of November, 1625, killed a  man in Uist named Alexander Mac  Ian Mhic Alastair, for which he  received a remission from Charles  I., dated at Holyrood, the first of  August, 1627, and which  Macdonald appears to have  deposited in the Gairloch Charter  Chest on his marriage with Isabel  of Gairloch.] of Cuidreach, brother-german to Sir Donald Macdonald  of Sleat, and ancestor of the  Macdonalds of Cuidreach and  Kingsburgh, Isle of Skye.  She  married, secondly, Hugh  Macdonald of Skirmish.

John had also a natural son, Kenneth Buy Mackenzie, by a woman named Fraser, who married a daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of  Achilty; and two natural daughters, one of whom married Donald Bain,  Seaforth's Chamberlain in the Lewis, killed in the battle of Auldearn in  1645; the other, Margaret, in 1640, married Alexander, "second lawful  son" of John Mackenzie, IV. of Hilton.

He died at Talladale in 1628, in the 80th year of his age; was buried in the old churchyard of Gairloch, and succeeded by his eldest  surviving son,

V.  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, who was advanced  in years at his father's death.  He  was most active in the duties  pertaining to the head of his house  during the life of his father, for it  was he who led the Mackenzies of  Gairloch against the Macleods in  their repeated incursions to  repossess themselves of their  estates,  "He was a valiant worthy  gentleman.  It was he who made an  end of all the troubles his  predecessors were in the  conquering of Gairloch from the  Shiel Vic Gille Challum.  [Applecross MS.]  Very little is known of him personally, his career  having been so much mixed up with that of his father.  By the  charter of 1619 he was infeft in the  barony as fiar, and he immediately  succeeded on his father's decease.   In 1627, while still fiar or feuer of  Gairloch, he obtained from his son-in-law, John Mackenzie of  Applecross (afterwards of Lochslinn), who married his  daughter Isobel, a disclamation of part of the lands of Diobaig,  previously in dispute between the Lairds of Gairloch and Applecross.

In the Gairloch Charter Chest there  is a feu charter of endowment by  John Mackenzie of Applecross, in  implement of the contract of marriage with his betrothed spouse,  Isobel, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, younger of Gairloch,  dated 6th of June, 1622.  After John  of Lochslinn's death, she married,  secondly, Colin Mackenzie of  Tarvie and there is a sasine in  favour of Margaret, second lawful  daughter of this Colin of Tarvie by  Isobel of Gairloch and spouse of  Matthew Robertson of Davoch-carty, in implement of a marriage  contract.

A little piece of scandal seems, from an extract of the Presbytery Records of Dingwall, of date 3rd of March, 1666, to have arisen in connection with this pair--Matthew Robertson and Margaret Mackenzie. "Rorie McKenzie of Dochmaluak, compearing desyred ane answer to his former supplication requiring that Matthew Robertson of Dochgarty should be ordained to make satisfaction for slandering the said Rorie with  alleged miscarriage with Matthew Robertson's wife.  The brethren  considering that by the witness led in the said matter there was nothing but  suspicion and jealousies, and said Matthew Robertson being called and  inquired concerning the said particular, did openly profess that he was in  no wayes jealous of the said Rorie Mackenzie and his wife, and if any  word did escape him upon which others might put such a construction, he  was heartily sorry for it, and was content to acknowledge so much to  Rorie Mackenzie of Dochmaluak, and crave pardon for the same, which  the brethren taking into their consideration, and the Bishop referring it to  them (as the Moderator reported), they have, according to the Bishop's appointment, ordered the said Matthew Robertson to acknowledge so much before the Presbytery to the party, and to crave his pardon in anything he has given him offence.  The which being done by the said  Matthew Robertson, Rory Mackenzie of Dochmaluak did acquiesce in it  without any furder prosecution of it," and we hear no more of the subject.

In 1637 Alexander  proceeded to acquire part of  Loggie-Wester from Duncan  Bayne, but the matter was not  arranged until 1640, during the  reign of his successor.

Alexander married, first, Margaret, third daughter of Roderick Mor Mackenzie, I. of Redcastle, by his wife, Finguala or Florence, daughter of  Robert Munro, XVth Baron of Fowlis, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Murdo of Sand, "predecessor to Sand and Mungastle," [There is great confusion about the families of the various Sands which we have not been able to clear up.  The following is from the public records:--In 1718  on the forfeiture of the Fairburn estate, Alexander Mackenzie of Sand  appeared and deponed that Murdoch Mackenzie of Sand, his father, had a  wadset of Mungastle and certain other lands from Fairburn.  In May 1730  Alexander Mackenzie of Sand purchased Mungastle for 3000 merks from  Dundonell, who had meantime become proprietor of it.  In January 1744  Alexander Mackenzie of Sand, son of the preceding Alexander, was infeft  in Mungastle in place of his father.  In 1741 the above Alexander (the younger) being then a minor, and John Mackenzie of Lochend being his  curator, got a wadset of Glenarigolach and Ridorch, and in 1745 Alexander being then of full age, apparently purchased these lands irredeemably.  In March 1765 Alexander Mackenzie of Sand, with consent of Janet Mackenzie, his wife, sold Mungastle, Glenarigolach, etc. One of the witnesses to this deed of disposition is Alexander Mackenzie, eldest  son to Alexander Mackenzie, the granter of the deed.] who married the  eldest daughter of John Mackenzie, III. of Fairburn, with issue--a   daughter, Margaret, who married Colin Mackenzie, I. of Sanachan,  brother to John Mackenzie, II. of Applecross.

3.  Hector, "portioner of Mellan," and a Cornet in Sir George Munro's regiment, who married a daughter of Donald Maciver, with issue  --three sons and a daughter, Mary--of whom under MACKENZIES OF   DAILUAINE.

4.  Alexander, from whom the author of this History, and of whose descendants under "SLIOCHD  ALASTAIR  CHAIM."

5.  Isobel, who married  John Mackenzie of Applecross  (afterwards of Lochslinn), brother-german to Colin, first Earl of  Seaforth. By him she had issue, a  daughter, who married Sir Norman  Macleod, I. of Bernera, with issue--John Macleod of Muiravenside and  Bernera, Advocate.  Isobel, on the  death of her husband, who was  poisoned at Tam, married secondly,  Colin Mackenzie of Tarvie, third  son of Sir Roderick Mackenzie, I.  of Coigach, Tutor of Kintail, with issue.  She married, thirdly,  Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Achilty, without issue.

6.  Margaret, who, as his third wife, married Alexander Ross of Cuilich, from whom the family of Achnacloich.

7.  A daughter, who married Robert Gray of Skibo, with issue. Alexander married, secondly, Isabel, eldest daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, progenitor of Coul and Applecross, with issue--

8.  William of Multafy and I. of Belmaduthy, of whom in their order.

9.  Roderick, who married Agnes, second daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Suddie, without issue.

10.  Angus, who married the eldest daughter of Hector Mackenzie, IV. of Fairburn, without issue.  Angus "was a brave soldier, and commanded a considerable body of Highlanders under King Charles the second at the Torwood.  He, with Scrymgeour of Dudhope and other Loyalists, marched at a great rate to assist the Macleans, who were cut to  pieces by Cromwell's dragoons at Inverkeithing, but to their great grief  were recalled by the Earl of Argyll, General of the army." [Gairloch  Manuscript.]

11.  Annabella, who, as his second wife, married Donald  Mackenzie, III. of Loggie, with issue--his heir and successor, and others.

12.  Janet, who married Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Ardross and Pitglassie, progenitor of the present Mackenzies of Dundonnel, with issue --his heir and successor.

Alexander had also a natural daughter, who, as his first wife, married George, fourth son of John Mackenzie, I. of Ord, without issue.

He died, as appears from his  successor's retour of service, on the 4th of January, 1638, [In this  service we have "Kirktoun with the manor and gardens of the same,"  and after a long list of the townships, the fishings of half the  water of Ewe and the rivers Kerry and Badachro follows, "the loch of  Loch Maroy, with the islands of the  same, and the manor place and  gardens in the Island of Illiurory,  the loch of Garloch, with the  fishings of the same," from which  it appears that the residence on,  Island Rory Beg, the walls of which  and of the large garden are yet  distinctly traceable, was quite as  early as that on Island Suthain in  which Alexander died.] in the 61st  year of his age, at Island Suthain, in  Loch Maree, where traces of his  house still remain.  He was buried  with his wife "in a chapel he  caused built near the Church of  Gairloch," during his father's  lifetime, and was succeeded by his  eldest son,

VI.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, a strong Loyalist during the wars  of Montrose and the Covenanters.  He was fined by the Committee of  Estates for his adherence to the King, under the Act of 3rd February, 1646,  entitled Commission for the moneys of Excise and Process against  delinquents," in a forced loan of 500 merks, for which the receipt, dated 15th March, 1647, signed by Kennedy, Earl of Cassilis, and Sir William  Cochrane, two of the Commissioners named in the Act, and by two or  three others, is still extant. Seaforth was, at the time, one of the  Committee of Estates, and his influence was probably exercised in favour  of leniency to the Baron of Gairloch; especially as he was himself  privately imbued with strong predilections in favour of the Royalists.

Kenneth commanded a  body of Highlanders at Balvenny under Thomas Mackenzie of Pluscardine, and his own brother-in-law, the Earl of Huntly; but when the Royalist army was surprised and disarmed, he was on a visit  to Castle Grant and managed to effect his escape.

In 1640 he completed the   purchase of Loggie-Wester,  commenced by his predecessor, but  in order to do so he had to have  recourse to the money market.  He  granted a bond, dated 20th of  October, 1644, for 1000 merks, to  Hector Mackenzie, alias MacIan  MacAlastair Mhic Alastair,  indweller in Eadill-fuill or South  Erradale.  On the 14th of January,  1649, at Kirkton, he granted to the  same person a bond for 500 merks;  but at this date Hector was  described as "indweller in  Androry," and again, another dated  at Stankhouse of Gairloch (Tigh  Dige), 24th of November, 1662;  but the lender of the money is on  this occasion described as living in  Diobaig. For the two first of these  sums Murdo Mackenzie of Sand,  Kenneth's brother-german, became  security.

In 1657 Kenneth is collateral security to a bond granted by the same Murdoch Mackenzie of Sand to Colin Mackenzie, I. of Sanachan, brother-german to John Mackenzie,  II. of Applecross, for  2000 merks,  borrowed on the 20th of March in that year the one-half of which was to  be paid by the delivery at the feast of Beltane or Whitsunday, 1658, of 50  cows in milk by calves of that year, and the other half, with legal interest,  at Whitsunday, 1659.  Colin Mackenzie, I. of Sanachan, married  Murdoch's daughter; the contract of marriage is dated the same day as the bond, and is subscribed at Dingwall by the same witnesses.

By letters of Tutorie Dative from Oliver Cromwell, he was, in 1658, appointed Tutor to Hector Mackenzie, lawful son of Alexander Mackenzie, lawful son of Duncan Mackenzie of Sand, Gairloch.  There is  nothing further to show what became of the pupil, Hector, but it is highly  probable that on the death of Alexander, son of Duncan of Sand, the farm  was given by Kenneth to his own brother, Murdoch, and that the 2000  merks, borrowed from Colin  Mackenzie of Sanachan, who married   Murdoch's only daughter, Margaret, may have been borrowed for the  purpose of stocking the farm.  The dates of the marriage, of the bond, and  of the Tutorie Dative, so near each other, strongly support this view.

Kenneth married, first,  Katharine, daughter of Sir Donald  Macdonald, IX. of Sleat, without  issue.  The contract of marriage is  dated 5th September, 1635, the  marriage portion being the  handsome sum of "6ooo merks,  and  her endowment 1000 libs  Scots yearly."  He married,  secondly, Ann, daughter of Sir John  Grant of Grant, by Ann Ogilvy,  daughter of the Earl of Findlater  (marriage  contract dated  17th   October, 1640).  There is a charter  by Kenneth in her favour of the  lands of Loggie-Wester, the miln  and pertinents thereof, with the  grazings of Tolly, in implement of  the marriage contract, dated 4th of  December, 1640, with a sasine of  the same date, and another charter  of the lands and manor-place of  Kinkell and Ardnagrask, dated the  15th of August, 1655, with sasine thereon, dated 5th September  following.  By her Kenneth had  issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, of Bishop-Kinkell, who married Margaret, eldest daughter of Donald Mackenzie, III. of Loggie, and widow of Roderick Mackenzie, V. of Fairburn, and with her obtained the lands of Bishop-Kinkell, to which his son John succeeded.

3.  John, who died unmarried.

4.  Mary, who, in 1656, married Alexander Mackenzie, at the time Younger and afterwards III. of Kilcoy, with issue.

5.  Barbara, who married, first,  Fraser of Kinneries, and secondly, Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Ardloch, with issue by both.

6.  Lilias, who married, as his first wife, Alexander Mackenzie, II.  of Ballone, with issue.

He married, thirdly, Janet, daughter of John Cuthbert of Castlehill (marriage contract dated  17th December, 1658, the marriage portion being 3000 merks, and her endowment 5 chalders victual yearly), with  issue--

7.  Charles, I. of Letterewe, who, by his father's marriage contract,  got Loggie-Wester, which had been purchased by Kenneth in 1640.  In  1696 Charles exchanged it with his eldest half-brother, Alexander, VII.  of  Gairloch, for Letterewe.  Charles married Ann, daughter of John  Mackenzie, II. of Applecross, with issue--See MACKENZIES  OF   LETTEREWE.

8.  Kenneth, who died unmarried.

9.  Colin, I. of Mountgerald,  who married Margaret, second  daughter of Alexander Mackenzie,  I. of Ballone, and widow of Sir  Roderick Mackenzie of Findon,  without issue; and secondly,  Katharine, daughter of James  Fraser of Achnagairn, with issue--See MACKENZIES OF   MOUNTGERALD.

10.  Isabella, who married  Roderick Mackenzie, second son of  John Mackenzie, II. of Applecross,  with issue, whose descendants now represent the original Mackenzies  of Applecross.

11. Annabella, who married  George, third son of Roderick  Mackenzie, V. of Davochmaluag,  with issue.

According to the retour of  service of his successor, Kenneth  died in 1669, was buried in Beauly  Priory, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who, by a charter of  resignation, got Loggie-Wester included in the barony of Gairloch.  It had,  however, been settled on his stepmother, Janet Cuthbert, in  life-rent, and after her on her eldest son, Charles of Mellan and subsequently of Letterewe, to whom, after her death, Alexander formally disponed it.

They afterwards entered into an excambion by which Alexander reacquired Loggie-Wester in exchange for Letterewe, which then became  the patrimony of the successors of Charles.

A tradition is current in the  Gairloch family that when  Alexander sought the hand of his  future lady, Barbara, daughter of  Sir John  Mackenzie of Tarbat, and  sister-german to the first Earl of  Cromarty and to Isobel Countess of  Seaforth, he endeavoured to make  himself appear much wealthier  than he really was, by returning a  higher rental than he actually  received at the time of making up  the Scots valued rent in 1670, in  which year he married.  This  tradition is corroborated by a  comparison of the valuation of the  shire of Inverness for 1644,  published by Charles Fraser-Mackintosh in Antiquarian Notes,  and the rental of 1670, on which  the ecclesiastical assessments are  still based.  In the former year the  rental of the parish of Gairloch was  ?134 13s 4d, of which ?081 6s  8d was from the lands of the  Barony, equal to 34 ?per cent.,  while in the latter year the valued  rental of the parish is put down at  ?400, of which ?549 is from the barony lands, or 45 ?per cent.  It  is impossible that such a rise in the  rental could have taken place in the  short space of twenty-six years; and  the presumption is in favour of the  accuracy of the tradition which  imports that the rental was over-valued for the special purpose of  making the Baron of Gairloch  appear more important in the eyes  of his future relatives-in-law than  he really was.  In 1681 he had his  rights and titles ratified by Act of  Parliament, printed at length in the  Folio edition.

He married, first, in 1670, Barbara, daughter of Sir John  Mackenzie, Baronet of Tarbat, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Isobel, who married John Macdonald of Balcony, son of Sir  James Macdonald, IX. of Sleat.

He married, secondly, Janet, daughter of William Mackenzie, I. of  Belmaduthy (marriage contract 30th of January 1679), on which occasion  Davochcairn and Ardnagrask were settled upon her in life-rent, and on her eldest son at her death, as appears from a precept of date clare constat, by  Colin Mackenzie of Davochpollo, in favour of William, his eldest  surviving son.  By her he had issue--

3.  Alexander, who died unmarried.

4.  William, who acquired the lands of Davochcairn, and married,  in 1712, Jean, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, V. of Redcastle, with issue--a son, Alexander, of the Stamp Office, London, and several daughters.  Alexander has a dare clare constat as only son in 1732. He  died in 1772, leaving a son, Alexander Kenneth, who emigrated to New  South Wales, where several of his descendants now reside; the  representative of the family, in 1878, being Alexander Kenneth Mac-kenzie, Boonara, Bondi, Sydney.

5.  John, who purchased the  lands of Lochend (now Inverewe),  with issue--Alexander Mackenzie,  afterwards of Lochend and George, an officer in Colonel Murray  Keith's Highland Regiment also  two daughters, Lilias, who married  William Mackenzie, IV. of  Gruinard, and Christy, who married  William Maciver of Tournaig, both  with issue--See MACKENZIES   OF  LOCHEND.

6.  Ann, who, in 1703,  married Kenneth Mackenzie, II. of  Torridon, with issue.  She married,  secondly, Kenneth Mackenzie, a  solicitor in London.

He died in December 1694, at the age of 42, which appears from his general retour of sasine, dated 25th February, 1673, in which he is said  to be then of lawful age.  He was buried in Gairloch, and was succeeded  by his only son by his first marriage,

VIII.  SIR  KENNETH MACKENZIE, created a Baronet  of Nova Scotia, by Queen Anne, on  the 2nd of February, 1703.  He was  educated at Oxford, and afterwards  represented his native county of  Ross in the Scottish Parliament.

He strongly opposed the Union,  considering that if it should take  place, it would be "the funeral of  his country."  After the succession  of Queen Anne he received from  her, in December 1702, a gift of the  taxed ward, feu-duties, non-entry,  and marriage dues, and other  casualties payable to the Crown,  from the date of his father's death,  which, up to 1702, do not appear to  have been paid.  Early in the same  year he seems to have been taken seriously ill, whereupon he  executed a holograph will and  testament at Stankhouse, dated the  23rd of May, 1702, which was  witnessed by his uncle, Colin  Mackenzie of Findon, and by his  brother-in-law, Simon Mackenzie,  I. of Allangrange.  He appoints as  trustees his "dear friends "John,  Master of Tarbat, Kenneth  Mackenzie of Cromarty, Kenneth  Mackenzie of Scatwell, Hector  Mackenzie, and Colin Mackenzie,  his uncles, and George Mackenzie,  II. of Allangrange.  He appointed  Colin Mackenzie, then of Findon,  and afterwards of Davochpollo and  Mountgerald, as his tutor and factor at a salary of 200 merks Scots.  In  May, 1703, having apparently to  some extent recovered his health,  he appears in his place in  Parliament.  In September of the  same year he returned to Stankhouse, Gairloch, where he  executed two bonds of provision,  one for his second son George, and  the other for his younger daughters.

He married, in 1696, Margaret, youngest daughter, and, as is commonly said, co-heiress of Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Findon, but the  Barony of Findon went wholly to Lilias, the eldest daughter, who married  Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, 1st Baronet and IV. of Scatwell another of the  daughters, Isobel, married Simon Mackenzie, I. of Allangrange.  There  was a fourth daughter, unmarried at the date of Margaret's contract of  marriage and the four took a fourth part each of Sir Roderick's moveables and of certain lands not included in the Barony.  At the date of his  marriage Kenneth had not made up titles to his estates; but by his marriage  contract he is taken bound to do so as soon as he can.  His retour of  service was taken out in the following year.

By Margaret Mackenzie of Findon Kenneth had issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  George, who became a merchant in Glasgow, and died  unmarried in 1739.

3.  Barbara, who, in 1729, married George Beattie, a merchant in Montrose, without issue.

4.  Margaret, who died young in 1704.

5.  Anne, who, in 1728, married, during his father's life-time, Murdo Mackenzie, VII. of Achilty, without issue.

6.  Katharine, who died young.

Sir Kenneth had also a  natural daughter, Margaret, who  married, in 1723, Donald  Macdonald, younger of Cuidreach.   Sir Kenneth's widow, about a year  after his decease, married Bayne of  Tulloch. Notwithstanding the  money that Sir Kenneth received  with her, he died deeply in debt,  and left his children insufficiently  provided for.  George and Barbara  were at first maintained by their mother, and afterwards by Colin of  Findon who had married their grandmother, widow of Sir  Roderick Mackenzie of Findon,  while Alexander and Anne were in  even a worse plight.

He died in December 1703, at the early age of 32; was buried in Gairloch, and succeeded by his eldest son,

IX.  SIR  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, the second Baronet,  a child only three and a half years  old.  His prospects were certainly  not enviable, he and his sister Anne  having had for a time, for actual want of means, to be "settled in   tenants' houses."  The rental of  Gairloch and Glasletter at his  father's death only amounted to 5954 merks, and his other estates in  the Low Country were settled on  his mother, Sir Kenneth's widow,  for life while he was left with debts  due amounting to 66,674 merks,  equal to eleven years rental of the  whole estates.  During his minority,  however, the large sum of 51,200  merks was paid off, in addition to  27,635 in name of interest on the  original debt; and consequently  very little was left for his  education.  In 1708 he, along with his brother and sisters, were taken  to the factor's house--Colin Mackenzie of Findon--where they  remained for four years, and received the rudiments of their  education from a young man,  Simon Urquhart.   In 1712 they  were all sent to school at Chanonry, under Urquhart's charge, where Sir  Alexander remained for six years,  after which, having arrived at 18  years of age, he went to complete  his education in Edinburgh.  He  afterwards made a tour of travel,  and returning home in  1730  married his cousin, Janet Mackenzie of Scatwell, on which  occasion a fine Gaelic poem was composed in her praise by John   Mackay, the famous blind piper and poet of Gairloch, whose  daughter became the mother of  William Ross, a Gaelic bard even  more celebrated than the blind  piper himself.  If we believe her  eulogist the lady possessed all the virtues of mind and body but in  spite of all these graces the marriage did not turn out a happy  one; for, in 1758, she separated from her husband on the grounds of  incompatibility of temper, after  which she lived alone at Kinkell.

When, in 1721, Sir Alexander came of age, he was obliged to find means to pay the provision payable to his brother George and to his  sisters, amounting altogether to 16,000 merks, while about the same  amount of his father's debts was still unpaid.  In 1729 he purchased  Cruive House and the Ferry of Skudale.  In 1735 he bought Bishop-Kinkell; in 1742 Loggie-Riach and, in  1743, Kenlochewe, which latter  property was considered equal in value to Glasletter of Kintail, sold about  the same time.  About 1730 he redeemed Davochcairn and Ardnagrask  from the widow of his uncle William, and Davochpollo from the widow  and son James of his grand-uncle, Colin, I. of Mountgerald.  In 1752 he  executed an entail of all his estates; but leaving debts at his death,  amounting to ?679 13s 10d more than his personal estate could meet,  Davochcairn, Davochpollo, and Ardnagrask, had eventually to be sold to  make up the deficiency.

In 1738 he pulled down the  old family residence of Stankhouse, or "Tigh Dige," at Gairloch, which  stood in a low, marshy, damp situation, surrounded by the moat  from which it derived its name, and  built the present house on an  elevated plateau, surrounded by  magnificent woods and towering  hills, with a southern front elevation--altogether one of the  most beautiful and best sheltered situations in the Highlands; and he  very appropriately called it Flowerdale.  He greatly improved  his property, and was in all respects  a careful and good man of business.

He kept out of the Rising of 1745,  and afterwards when John  Mackenzie of Meddat applied to  him for aid in favour of Lord  Macleod, son of the Earl of  Cromarty, who took so prominent a  part in it, and was afterwards in  very tightened circumstances, Sir  Alexander replied in a letter dated  at Gairloch, 17th  May, 1749, in the following somewhat unsympathetic  terms:--

Sir,--I am favoured with your letter, and am extreamly sory Lord Cromartie's circumstances should obliege him to sollicit the aide of small  gentlemen.  I much raither he hade dyed sword in hand even where he was  ingag'd then be necessitate to act such a pairt I have the honour to be nearly related to him, and to have been his companion, but will not supply  him at this time, for which I believe I can give you the best reason in the  world, and the only one possible for me to give, and that is that I cannot.  [Fraser's Earls of Cromartie, vol. ii., p. 230.]

The reason stated in this letter may possibly be the true one; but it  is more likely that Sir Alexander had no sympathy whatever with the  cause which brought his kinsman into such an unfortunate position, and  that he would not, on that account, lend him any assistance.

Some of his leases, preserved in the Gairloch charter chest, contain some very curious clauses, many of which would now be described as  tyrannical and cruel, but the Laird and his tenants understood each other,  and they got on remarkably well.  The tenants were bound to sell him all  their marketable cattle "at reasonable rates," and to deliver to him at  current prices all the cod and ling caught by them; and, in some cases,  were bound to keep one or more boats, with a sufficient number of men as  sub-tenants, for the prosecution of the cod and ling fishings.  He kept his  own curer, cured the fish, and sold it at 12s 6d per cwt. delivered in June  at Gairloch, with credit until the following Martinmas, to Mr Dunbar,  merchant, with whom he made a contract binding himself, for several  years, to deliver, at the price named, all the cod caught in Gairloch.  [See  copy of lease granted by him, in 1760, of the half of North Erradale, to  one of the author's ancestors, printed at length under the family of  "Alastair Cam."]

Sir Alexander married, in  1730, Janet, daughter of Sir  Roderick Mackenzie, second   Baronet and V. of Scatwell, with  issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who died in infancy.

3.  Roderick, a captain in the army, who was killed at Quebec before he attained majority.

4.  William, a writer, who died unmarried.

5.  James, who died in infancy.

6.  Kenneth of Millbank, factor and Tutor to Sir Hector, the fourth Baronet of Gairloch, during the last few years of his minority. He married  Anne, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of Tolly, with issue--(1) Alex-ander, County Clerk of Ross-shire, who married, and had issue--Alexander, in New Zealand; Kenneth, who married twice, in India, and  died in 1877; and Catherine, who married Murdo Cameron, Leanaig, with  surviving issue--one son, Alexander; (2) Janet, who married the Rev. Dr  John Macdonald, of Ferintosh, the famous "Apostle of the North," with  issue; (3) Catherine, who married Alexander Mackenzie, a merchant in  London, and grandson of Alexander Mackenzie of Tolly, with issue--an  only daughter, Catherine, who married Major Roderick Mackenzie, VII. of  Kincraig, with issue; (4) Jane, who, in 1808, married the Rev. Hector Bethune, minister of Dingwall, with issue--Colonel Bethune, who died without issue; the Rev. Angus Bethune, Rector of Seaham; Alexander Mackenzie Bethune, Secretary of the Peninsular and Oriental Navigation Company, married, without issue; and a daughter, Jane, who married the  late Francis Harper, Torgorm.  Mrs Bethune died in 1878, aged 91 years.

7 and 8.  Margaret and  Janet, both of whom died young.

9.  Janet, who married  Colin, eldest son of David, brother  of Murdo Mackenzie, VII. of  Achilty.  Murdo leaving no issue,  Colin ultimately succeeded to  Achilty, but he seems afterwards to  have parted with it, for in 1784, he  has a tack of Kinkell, and dies there, in 1813, with his affairs  seriously involved, leaving a son  John, who died without issue.

Sir Alexander had also a natural son, Charles Mackenzie, ancestor of the later Mackenzies of Sand, and two natural daughters, one of whom,  Annabella, by a daughter of Maolmuire, or Miles Macrae, of the family of  Inverinate, married John Ban Mackenzie, by whom she had a daughter,  Marsali or Marjory, who married John  Mor Og Mackenzie (Ian Mor  Aireach), son of John Mor Mackenzie, grandson of Alexander Cam Mac-kenzie, fourth son of Alexander, V. of Gairloch, in whose favour Sir  Alexander granted the lease of North Erradale, already referred to.  The  other daughter, known as "Kate Gairloch," who lived to a very old age,  unmarried, was provided for in comfortable lodgings and with a suitable  allowance by the heads of the family.

He died in 1766, in the 66th year of his age, was buried with his ancestors in Gairloch, [The old chapel and the burying place of the Lairds  of Gairloch appear to have been roofed almost up to this date; for in the Tutorial accounts of 1704 there is an item of 30 merks for "harling,  pinning, and thatching Gairloch's burial place."] and succeeded by his  eldest son,

X.  SIR  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, third Baronet, designated  "An Tighearna Ruadh,"  or the Red-haired Laird.  He built  Conon House between 1758 and  1760, during his father's lifetime.

Lady Mackenzie, who continued to  reside at Kinkell, where she lived separated from her husband, on Sir  Alexander's decease claimed the  new mansion at Conon built by her  son eight years before on the  ground that it was situated on her  jointure lands; but Sir Alexander  resisted her pretensions, and  ultimately the matter was arranged  by the award of John Forbes of  New, Government factor on the  forfeited estates of Lovat, who then  resided at Beaufort, and to whom  the question in dispute was  submitted as arbitrator. Forbes  compromised it by requiring Sir  Alexander to expend ?00 in  making Kinkell Castle more  comfortable, by taking off the top storey, re-rooting it, rebuilding an  addition at the side, and re-flooring,  plastering, and papering all the  rooms.

Sir Alexander, in addition to the debts of the entailed estates, contracted other liabilities on his own account, and finding himself much hampered in consequence, he tried, but failed, to break the entail,  although a flaw has been discovered in it since, and Sir Kenneth, the  present  Baronet, having called the attention of the Court to it, the entail  was judicially declared invalid.  Sir Alexander had entered into an  agreement to sell the Strathpeffer and Ardnagrask  lands, in  anticipation  of which Henry Davidson of Tulloch bought the greater part of the debts  of the entailed estates, with the view of securing the consent of the Court  to the sale of Davochcairn and Davochpollo afterwards to himself.  But on the 15th of April, 1770, before the transaction could be completed, Sir  Alexander died suddenly from the effects of a fall from his horse.  His  financial affairs were seriously involved, but having been placed in the  hands of an Edinburgh accountant, his creditors ultimately received  nineteen shillings in the pound.

He married, first, on the 29th of November, 1755, Margaret, eldest daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, VII. of Redcastle, with issue--

1.  Hector, his heir and successor.

She died on the 1st of December, 1759.

He married, secondly, in 1760, Jean, daughter of John Gorry of Balblair, and Commissary of Ross, with issue--

2. John, who raised a  company, almost wholly in  Gairloch, for the 78th Regiment of  Ross-shire Highlanders when first  embodied, of which he himself  obtained the Captaincy.  He rose  rapidly in rank. On the 3rd of May,  1794, he attained to his majority; in  the following year he is Lieutenant-Colonel of the Regiment Major-General in the army in 1813; and  full General in 1837.  He served  with distinction and without  cessation from 1779 to 1814.  So  marked was his daring and personal  valour that he was popularly known among his companions in arms as  "Fighting Jack."  He was at the Walcheren expedition; at the Cape;  in India; in Sicily; Malta; and the  Peninsula and though constantly  exhibiting numberless instances of  personal daring, he was only once  wounded, when on a certain  occasion he was struck with a spent  ball on the knee, which made any  walking somewhat troublesome to  him in after life. At Tarragona he  was so mortified with Sir John  Murray's conduct, that he almost  forgot that he himself was only  second in command, and charged  Sir John with incapacity and  cowardice, for which the latter was  tried by Court Martial--General  Mackenzie being one of the  principal witnesses against him.   Full of vigour of mind and body, he  took a lively interest in everything  in which he engaged, from fishing  and shooting to farming, gardening, politics, and fighting.  He never  forgot his Gaelic, which he spoke with fluency and read with ease.   Though a severe disciplinarian, his  men adored him.  He was in the  habit of saying that it gave him  more pleasure to meet a dog from  Gairloch than a gentleman from  any other place.  When the 78th returned from the Indian Mutiny the  officers and men were feted to a  grand banquet by the town of  Inverness, and as the regiment  marched through Academy Street,  where the General resided, they  halted opposite his residence, next  door above the Station Hotel; and  though so frail that he had to be  carried, he was taken out and his  chair placed on the steps at the  door, where the regiment saluted  and warmly cheered their old and  distinguished veteran commander,  who had so often led their  predecessors to victory; and at the  time the oldest officer in and  "father" of the British army.  He  was much affected, and wept with  joy at again meeting his beloved 78th--the only tears he was known  to have shed since the days of his  childhood.  He married Lilias,  youngest daughter of Alexander Chisholm, XXII. of Chisholm, with  issue--(1) Alastair, an officer in the  90th Light Infantry, who afterwards  settled down and became a  magistrate in the Bahamas, where,  in 1839, he married an American  lady, Wade Ellen, daughter of  George Huyler, Consul General of  the United States, and French  Consul in the Bahama Islands, with  issue--a son, the Rev. George  William Russel Mackenzie, an  Episcopalian minister, who on the  2nd of August, 1876, married  Annie Constance, second daughter  of Richard, son of William  Congreve of Congreve and Burton,  with issue--Dorothy Lilias; (2) a  daughter, Lilias Mary Chisholm,  unmarried.  Alastair subsequently  left the Bahamas, went to  Melbourne, and became Treasurer  for the Government of Victoria,  where he died in 1852. General  Mackenzie died on the 14th of  June, 1860, aged 96 years, and was  buried in the Gairloch aisle in  Beauly Priory.

3.  Kenneth, who was born  on the 14th of February, 1765, was  a Captain in the army, and served  in India, where he was at the siege  of Seringapatam.  He soon after  retired from the service, and settled  down as a gentleman farmer at  Kerrisdale, Gairloch. He married  Flora, daughter of Farquhar Macrae  of Inverinate, with issue, three sons  and four daughters--(1) Alexander,  a Captain in the 58th Regiment,  who married a daughter of William  Beibly, M.D., Edinburgh, with  issue; (2) Hector, a merchant in  Java, where he died, unmarried; (3)  Farquhar, a settler in Victoria,  where he married and left issue--Hector, John, Violet, Mary, and  Flora; (4) Jean, who married  William H. Garrett, of the Indian  Civil Service, with issue--two sons,  Edward and William, and four daughters, Eleanor (now Mrs  Gourlay, The Gows, Dundee);  Flora, Emily, and Elizabeth; (5)  Mary, who married, first, Dr  Macleod, Dingwall, without issue  and, secondly, Murdo Mackenzie, a  Calcutta merchant, also without  issue; (6) Christian Henderson,  who married John Mackenzie,  solicitor, Tam, a son of George  Mackenzie, III. of Pitlundie, with  issue--two sons, both dead, one of  whom left a son, Charles; (7)  Jessie, who married Dr Kenneth  Mackinnon, of the Corry family,  H.E.I.C.S., Calcutta.

4.  Jean, who died young.

5.  Margaret, who married Roderick Mackenzie, II. of Glack, with issue.

6.  Janet, who married Captain John Mackenzie Woodlands, son of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, without issue.  Sir Alexander had also a natural daughter, Janet, who married John  Macpherson, Gairloch, with issue.

The second Lady Mackenzie of Gairloch, Jean Gorry, died in 1766, probably at the birth of her last daughter, Janet, who was born on the 14th  of October in that year, and Sir Alexander himself died on the 15th of  April, 1770.  He was buried in Gairloch, and was succeeded by his eldest  son,

XI.  SIR  HECTOR MACKENZIE, the fourth  Baronet,  generally spoken of among  Highlanders as "An Tighearna  Storach," or the Buck-toothed Laird.  Being a minor, only twelve  years of age when he succeeded, his affairs were managed by the  following trustees appointed by his father--John Gorry; Provost  Mackenzie of Dingwall, and  Alexander Mackenzie, W.S., son  and grandson respectively of  Charles Mackenzie, I. of Letterewe;  and Alexander Mackenzie, of the  Stamp Office, London, son of  William Mackenzie of  Davochcairn.  These gentlemen did not get on so harmoniously as  could be wished in the  management of the estate.  The  first three opposed the last-named,  who was supported by Sir Hector  and by his grandfather and his  uncle of Redcastle.  In the month of  March, 1772, in a petition in which  Sir Hector craves the Court for  authority to appoint his own factor, he is described as "being now  arrived at the age of fourteen  years." The differences which  existed between the trustees finally  landed them in Court, the question  specially in dispute being whether the agreement of the late Sir  Alexander to sell the Ardnagrask and Strathpeffer lands should be  carried out?  In opposition to the  majority, the Court decided in  favour of Sir Hector that they should not be sold until he arrived  at an age to judge for himself.

Having secured this decision, Sir  Hector, thinking that Mr Gorry had been acting too much in the interest  of his own grandchildren--Sir Alexander's children by the second  marriage--now appointed a factor of his own, Kenneth Mackenzie,  his half uncle, the first "Millbank."

In 1789 he obtained authority from the Court to sell the lands which his father had previously arranged to dispose of to enable him to  pay the debts of the entailed estates.  He sold the lands of Davochcairn  and Davochpollo to Henry Davidson of Tulloch, and Ardnagrask to  Captain Rose, Beauly, who afterwards sold it to Mackenzie of Ord, In 1815 he was appointed  Lord-Lieutenant of his native  county.  He lived generally at home  among a devoted tenantry; and only  visited London once during his life.

He regularly dispensed justice  among his Gairloch retainers  without any expense to the county,  and to their entire satisfaction.  He was adored  by the people, to  whom he acted as a father and  friend, and his memory is still  green among the older inhabitants,  who never speak of him but in the  warmest terms for his generosity, urbanity, and frankness, and for the  kind and free manner in which he  always mixed with and addressed  his tenants.  He was considered by  all who knew him the most  sagacious and intelligent man in the county.  He employed no factor  after he came of age, but dealt directly and entirely with his  people, ultimately knowing every man on his estates, so that he knew  from personal knowledge how to  treat each case of hardship and  inability to pay that came before  him, and to distinguish feigned  from real poverty.  When he grew  frail from old age he employed a  clerk to assist him in the  management, but he wisely  continued landlord and factor himself to his dying day.  When Sir  Francis, his eldest son, reached a  suitable age, instead of adopting  the usual folly of sending elder  sons to the army that they might  afterwards succeed to the property  entirely ignorant of everything  connected with it, he gave him,  instead of a yearly allowance,  several of the farms, with a rental  of about ?00 a year, over which he  acted as landlord or tenant, until his  father's death, telling him "if you  can make more of them, all the  better for you." Sir Francis thus  grew up interested in and  thoroughly acquainted with all property and county business, and  with his future tenants, very much  to his own ultimate advantage and  those who afterwards depended  upon him.

Sir Hector also patronised the Gaelic poets, and appointed one of them, Alexander Campbell, better known as "Alastair Buidhe Mac Iomhair," to be his ground-officer and family bard, and allowed him to  hold his land in Strath all his life rent free. [The late Dr John Mackenzie  of Eileanach, Sir Hector's youngest son, makes the following reference,  under date of August 30, 1878, to the old bard:--"I see honest Alastair  Buidhe, with his broad bonnet and blue great coat (summer and winter)  clearly before me now, sitting in the dining room at Flowerdale quite  `raised'-like while reciting Ossian's poems, such as `The Brown Boar of  Diarmad,' and others (though he had never heard of Macpherson's  collection) to very interested visitors, though as unacquainted with Gaelic  as Alastair was with English.  This must have been as early as 1812 or so,  when I used to come into the room after dinner about nine years old."

Alastair Buidhe, the bard, was the author's great-grandfather on the maternal side, and he was himself, on his mother's side, descended from  the Mackenzies of Shieldaig.]  He gave a great impetus to the Gairloch  cod fishing, which he continued to encourage as long as he lived.

Sir Hector married, in  August, 1778, Cochrane, daughter  of James Chalmers of Fingland,  without issue; and the marriage was  dissolved by arrangement between  the parties on the 22nd of April,  1796. In the same year, the  marriage contract being dated the  "9th May, 1796," within a month of  his separation from his first wife,  Sir Hector married, secondly,  Christian, daughter and only child  of William Henderson, Inverness, a  lady who became very popular with  the Gairloch people, and is still  affectionately remembered amongst them as "A Bhantighearna  Ruadh," [Dr John, late of Eileanach, writes of her and her  father as follows:--His second wife  was only child of William  Henderson, from Aberdeen-shire (cousin of Mr Coutts, the London  banker, with whom, in  consequence of the relationship,  my elder brothers, Francis and  William, were on intimate terms in  Stratton Street, Piccadilly, where  Lady Burdett Coutts now lives),  who set up a Bleachfield at the  Bught, Inverness, by a daughter of  Fraser of Bught. Henderson  followed his daughter to Conon, as  tenant of Riverford, where, till very  old, he lived, and then moved to  Conon House, till he died about  1816, loved by all, aged 97.  I think  he is buried in the Chapel-Yard, Inverness."] with issue--

1.  Francis Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  William, a merchant in lava, and afterwards in Australia.  He died, unmarried, in 1860, at St. Omer France.

3.  Hector, who married  Lydia, eldest daughter of General Sir Hugh Fraser of Braelangwell; was Captain in H.E.I.C.S., and died in India,  without surviving issue.

4.  Dr John, of Eileanach.  He studied for the medical profession, and took his degree of M.D.  He was factor for the trustees of Sir Kenneth,  the present Baronet, during his minority, and afterwards for several years,  Provost of Inverness.  He married, on the 28th of September, 1826, Mary  Jane, only daughter of the Rev. Dr Inglis of Logan Bank and old  Greyfriars, Edinburgh, Dean of the Chapel Royal, and sister of the late  distinguished Lord Justice-General Inglis, President of the Court of  Session, with issue--(1) Colonel Hector, who was born on the 24th of  August, 1828, and went to India in his twentieth year, fought at  Chilianwallah and Goojerat, and was afterwards, until he retired in 1877, in the Civil Service, chiefly as Judicial Commissioner for Central India at  Nagpore. He married on the 9th of May, 1855, Eliza Ann Theophila,  eldest daughter of General Jamieson, of the H.E.I.C.S., without issue; (2)  John Inglis, who died in 1843, in the 6th year of his age; (3) Harry  Maxwell, who was born on the 16th of May, 1839, a Colonel in the Royal  Artillery.  He married on the 7th of September, 1872, Caroline Georgina,  eldest daughter of Captain Ponsonby, Indian Staff Corps, Deputy Quarter-Master-General in Scinde, with issue, six sons and four daughters--Hector  Ian Maxwell, born on the 14th of June, 1875; Harry Ponsonby, born on the  30th of March, 1877; Kenneth Gordon, born on the 6th of July, 1878 Allan  Stewart, born on the 27th of October, 1881, and died in infancy; Colin  Ray, born on the 7th of May, 1887 Alastair Ponsonby, born on the 25th of  June, 1889 Margaret; Mary; Lillian Kythe; Kythe; and Gladys Georgina.   Colonel Mackenzie, after retiring from the Service, resided at Auld  Castlehill, Inverness, was Inspector for the Science and Art Department in  the North, and died suddenly, at Wick, on the  13th of July, 1891; (4)  Mary, who as his fourth  wife, married Duncan Davidson of Tulloch, with  issue--Eoin Duncan Reginald, a settler in Queensland; Hector Francis, in New Zealand Alastair Norman, in Queensland; Lucy Eleonora, who, in   1873, married Sir Allan R. Mackenzie, Baronet of Glenmuick, with issue,  four sons and a daughter--Allan James Reginald, born in 1880; Victor  Audley Falconer, born in 1882; Allan Keith, born in 1887; Eric Dighton, born in 1891; and Mary Lucy Victoria.  Tulloch's other daughters were  Mary Macpherson and Victoria Geraldine.  His wife died on the 27th of  October, 1867.  (5) Christina Isabella, who, on the 23rd of November,  1853, married Charles Addington Hanbury of Strathgarve, Ross-shire, and  Belmont, Herts, with issue, four sons and  four daughters--Harold Charles,  of the  Carabineers;  John Mackenzie; Basil; David Theophilus; Florence  Mary; Kithe Agatha, who on the 10th of April, 1877, married Horace  William  Kemble, Hon. Major 2nd Cameron Highlanders, of Oakmere,  Herts, at present tenant of Knock, Isle of Skye, with issue--Horace  Leonard, born on the 22nd of April, 1882, Dorothea Lucinda, Hilda Olive,  and Kythe Louisa Elaine; Isabel, who married Major O. F. Annesley, R.A.,  with issue--two daughters, Daphne and Myrtle; and Marie Frances Lisette (6) Kithe Caroline who on the 12th of April, 1865, married Francis Mackenzie, third son of Thomas Ogilvie of Corriemony, with issue, seven  children; (7) Lisette, who on the 28th of June, 1878, married Frederick  Louis Kindermann, son of Mr Kindermann, founder of the house of Keith  & Co., London and Liverpool, without issue; (8) Georgina Elizabeth, who  on the 26th of January, 1860, married the late Duncan Henry Caithness  Reay Davidson of Tulloch (who died on the 29th of March, 1889), with  issue--Duncan, now of Tulloch, who on the 15th of November, 1887,  married Mary Gwendoline, eldest daughter of William Dalziel Mackenzie  of Fawley Court, Bucks, and of Farr, County of Inverness; John Francis  Barnard Mary; Elizabeth Diana; Adelaide Lucy; Georgianna Veronnica;  and Christina Isabella. Dr John of Eileanach died on the 18th of  December, 1886.  His widow still survives.

5.  Roderick, a Captain in the army, who sold out and became a settler in Australia, where he died.  He married an Irish lady, Meta Day, sister of the Bishop of Cashel, without issue, and died in 1849.

Sir Hector had also, by his housekeeper, Jean Urquhart, three natural children, which caused his separation from his first wife. He made  provision for them all.  The first, Catherine, married John Clark, leather  merchant, Inverness, and left issue.  Another daughter married Mr  Murrison, contractor for the Bridge of Conon, who afterwards settled  down, after the death of the last of the Mackenzies of Achilty, on the farm  of Kinkell, with issue, from whom the Stewarts, late Windmill, Inverness.    A son, Kenneth who was for some time in the British Linen Bank,  Inverness, afterwards died in India, in the army, unmarried.

Sir Hector's widow  survived him for about twelve  years, first living with her eldest  son Sir Francis, and after his  marriage at Ballifeary, now  Dunachton, on the banks of the  Ness.  Though he succeeded to the  property under such unfavourable  conditions though his annual rental  was under ?000 per annum; and  though he kept open house  throughout the year both at Conon  and Gairloch, he was able to leave  or pay during his life to each of his  younger sons the handsome sum of  ?000. When pressed, as he often  was, to go to Parliament he  invariably asked, "Who will then  look after my people?"

He died on the 26th of April, 1826; was buried in the Priory of Beauly, and succeeded by his eldest son,

XII.  SIR  FRANCIS  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth Baronet,  who, benefitting by his father's example, and his kindly treatment of his tenants, grew up interested in all county affairs.  He was passionately fond  of all manly sports, shooting, fishing, and hunting.  He resided during the  summer in Gairloch, and for the rest of the year kept open house at Conon.

During the famine of 1836-37 he sent cargoes of meal and seed potatoes  to the Gairloch tenantry, which, with some heavy bill transactions he had entered into to aid an old friend, William Grant of Redcastle, at the time  carrying on the Haugh Brewery, Inverness, involved him in financial  difficulties.  This induced him, in 1841, to get his brother, Dr John  Mackenzie of Eileanach, to take charge of his affairs, going himself along  with his second wife for a few years to Brittany, where his youngest son, Osgood Hanbury Mackenzie, now of Inverewe, was born.  To get clear of  the liability incurred with Grant, Dr John had ultimately to pay down ?000.

In 1836 Sir Francis  published a work on agriculture,  entitled Hints for the use of  Highland Tenants and Cottagers,  extending to 273 pages, with  English and Gaelic on opposite  pages, which shows  his  intimate  knowledge of the subject, as well  as the great interest which he took  in the welfare of his tenantry--for whose special benefit the book was  written.  It deals first, with the  proper kind of food and how to  cook it; with diseases and  medicine, clothing, houses,  furniture, boats, fishing and agricultural implements; cattle,  horses, pigs, and  their diseases; gardens, seeds, fruits, vegetables,  education, morals, etc., etc., with  illustrations and plans of suitable  cottages, barns, outhouses, and  farm implements.

He married, first, in the 31st year of his age, on the 10th of August,  1829, Kythe Caroline, eldest daughter of Smith-Wright of Rempstone  Hall, Nottinghamshire, with issue--

1.  Kenneth Smith, the present Baronet.

2.  Francis, Harford, born in 1833, unmarried.

He married, secondly, on the 25th of October, 1836, Mary,  daughter of Osgood Hanbury of Holfield Grange, Essex, the present  Dowager Lady Mackenzie, residing at Letterewe, with issue--

3.  Osgood Hanbury, born on the 13th of May, 1842.  In 1862 he bought Kernsary from his brother Sir Kenneth, and in 1863 Inverewe and  Tournaig from Sir William Mackenzie, IX. of Coul.  On the 26th of June,  1877, he married Mina Amy, daughter of Sir Thomas Edwards-Moss,  Baronet of Otterspool, Lancashire, with issue, a daughter, Mary Thyra.

Sir Francis died on the 2nd of June, 1843, from inflammation of  the arm, produced by bleeding--then a common practice for all manner of  complaints--by his intimate personal friend, Robert Liston, the celebrated  surgeon.  He was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIII.  SIR  KENNETH SMITH  MACKENZIE, sixth and  present Baronet, who was born on  the 25th of May, 1832, and has  long been considered one of the  best and most enlightened  landlords in the Highlands.

Following the example of his father  and grandfather he for many years  dealt directly with his people,  without any factor, or other  intermediary, except an estate  manager at Gairloch, and, like his  ancestors, took a personal interest  in every man on his property.  He  takes an active and intelligent part  in all county matters; is Convener  of the Commissioners of Supply  and of the County Council, and is  Lord-Lieutenant for Ross and  Cromarty. In 1854 he was  appointed Attache to Her Majesty's  Legation at Washington, which,  however, he never joined.  In 1855  he received a commission as  Captain in the Highland Rifle  (Ross-shire) Militia, afterwards  attained the rank of Major, and  ultimately retired. In 1880 he  contested the county of Inverness  as a Liberal against Donald  Cameron of Lochiel, the Tory  candidate, but was defeated by a  majority of 28.  In 1883-84 he was  a member of the Royal (Napier)  Commission to enquire into the  condition and grievances of the  Highland crofters.  In 1885 he  again contested the county of  Inverness as the official Liberal  candidate against Reginald Macleod in the Tory interest and  Charles Fraser-Mackintosh as the Independent Land Law Reform  candidate, when he was again  defeated. On the 11th of  December, 1860, he married Eila  Frederica, daughter of Walter  Frederic Campbell of Islay, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth John, Younger of Gairloch, who was born on the 6th  of October, 1861, late Captain in the Rifle Brigade.  On the 8th of April,  1891, he married the Hon. Marjory Lousia Murray, eldest daughter of the  late William David Viscount Stormont (who died in  1893), eldest son of  the present and fourth Earl of Mansfield, K.T., by Emily Louisa, daughter of the late Sir John Atholl Macgregor of Macgregor, Baronet, with issue--Hector David, who was born on the 6th of June, 1893; and Marjory Kythe.

2.  Francis Granville, who was born on the 31st of August, 1865; and

3.  Muriel Katharine.

Arms--Quarterly: 1st and 4th, azure, a buck's bead cabossed or; 2nd and 3rd, asure, three frasers argent.  Crest--A Highlander wielding a  sword, proper.  Mottoes--Over crest, "Virtute et valore;" under, "Non sine  periculo."


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  LOCHEND.

I.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, first of Lochend, was the third son of Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of Gairloch, by his  second wife, Janet, daughter of  William Mackenzie, I. of  Belmaduthy.  He purchased the  lands of Lochend and married  Annabella, second daughter and  nineteenth child of George  Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, by his  first wife, Margaret, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, II. of  Ballone with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  George, an officer in Murray Keith's Highland Regiment,  afterwards successively Major and Lieutenant-Colonel of the 78th or  Seaforth Highlanders, and of whose family and descendants presently.

3.  Lilias, who married William Mackenzie, IV. of Gruinard  (sasine 1742), with issue--four sons and three daughters.

4.  Christina, who married William Mac Iver of Tournaig, with issue.

John Mackenzie of Lochend was Guardian or Tutor to his nephew,  Sir Alexander Mackenzie, IX. and second Baronet of Gairloch, in 1728. He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who married, first, Anne,  second daughter of Colin Mackenzie, I. of Mountgerald, with issue--

1.  Lewis, who died before his father, unmarried.

2.  John, who succeeded to the estate of Lochend.

3.  Alexander, who was married, but of whom nothing further is known.

4.  James, of whom there is no trace.

5.  Annabella, who married John Mac Iver, Stornoway, with issue.

6.  Lilias, who married Iver Mac Iver, Gress, Lewis, with issue.

He married secondly,  Annabella, daughter of Sutherland  of Little Torboll, with issue--

7.  Lewis, of whom nothing is known.

8.  Elizabeth, who married a Mr Mackenzie, with issue.

Alexander was succeeded  by his eldest surviving son,

III.  CAPTAIN  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Lochend, who  married first, a daughter of Mr Morrison, in the Lewis, with issue--

1.  Anne, who married Kenneth Gardiner, Leith.

He married, secondly, a  daughter of Roderick Morrison,  Island of Tanera, with issue--

2.  Annabella, who married Neil Morrison, Sailing Master, Royal Navy, with issue.

3.  Sybella, who married Lieutenant William Ryrie, of the Royal Marines, with issue.

4.  Ellen, who married John Mackenzie, Ullapool, of the Sand  family, who resided in Tanera, without issue.

Captain John married, thirdly, a daughter of Collector John Reid, Stornoway, with issue--

5.  Anne, who married Alexander Stewart, Chamberlain of the  Lewis, and afterwards factor for the Duke of Sutherland at Scourie.

6.  Alexander, who died before his father, unmarried.

7.  John Reid, who succeeded to Lochend.

8.  Daniel Lewis, who married Helen Mackay, widow of his  cousin, Donald Macdonald, master mariner, with issue--Aeneas,  unmarried, and Agnes Ann, who married Murdoch Mac Iver, a London  merchant, with issue--a son, Kenneth, and three daughters, one of whom,  Helen Isabella, married Donald MacIver, merchant, Currachee, India.

9.  James Reid, M.D., who married his cousin, a daughter of  Captain Donald Reid, of Eilean Riach, without issue.

10.  Margaret, alive as late as August, 1881, unmarried.

He was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

IV.  JOHN  REID  MACKENZIE, fourth of Lochend, who married  Miss Mackenzie Morrison, daughter of Captain John Morrison, RN., and sister of Mrs Stewart, wife of the Rev. Alexander Stewart, LL.D., "Nether-Lochaber."  He died in New Zealand in 1879, and his wife died in the  following year, leaving issue--

1.  John Alexander, his heir.

2.  Daniel Lewis.

3.  Agnes.

4.  Kennethina.

5.  Christina Mary.

He was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

V.  JOHN  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Lochend, now  at the head of a large Insurance Company, in the City of New York.

COLONEL  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, second son of John  Mackenzie, I. of Lochend, served first as an officer in Murray Keith's   Highland Regiment, and  was subsequently, in September 1780,  appointed Major in the 78th or Seaforth Highlanders.  He was on Sir  David Baird's Staff in India, and was present at the storming of Seringapatam. In 1783 he was promoted to the rank of Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel. In 1791 he was killed near Inverness, by the upsetting of a coach in which he was a passenger.  He married Christina, daughter of Captain  Hector Munro of Braemore, with issue--

1.  John, a Captain in the army, who married Miss Fraser, with issue--George, a Lieutenant in the 2nd or Queen's Regiment, who died,  unmarried, in Madras; and Poyntz, Lieutenant 79th Cameron Highlanders,  who died, unmarried, in North America, in 1843.

2.  Poyntz, Paymaster 72nd  Highlanders, who died unmarried, at Antigua, in the West Indies.

3.  Alexander, who joined  the army on the 9th of September,  1795, as Ensign in the 39th  Regiment.  He obtained his  Lieutenancy on the 27th of  February, 1796, was in June 1802  exchanged to the 60th Rifles, and  on the 27th of April, 1809,  promoted to a Captaincy in the 81st  Regiment.  During this period he  saw much service in the Peninsula,  and was subsequently engaged in  the expedition to Flushing, for  which he received the war medal  with four clasps. On the 31st of  October, 1811, he exchanged to the  York Light Infantry, then serving in  Jamaica; was placed on half-pay on  the reduction of that regiment on  the 19th of March, 1817; appointed to the Royal Newfoundland  Companies on the formation of that  corps on the 25th of July, 1824, and  promoted to the rank of Major in July, 1830.  He retired from the  Army in 1836 and died in Canada in 1852.  He married, first, Eliza,  daughter of Captain John Sutherland, of Shiberscross,  Sutherlandshire, with issue--(1) Mary Maxwell, who married  Garland Crawford Gordon, St.  John's, Newfoundland with issue.   She (Mary Maxwell) died in 1852.   Major Alexander married,  secondly, Eliza Frances, daughter  of William Brown, of Lucea,  Jamaica, with issue--(2)  ALEXANDER  WILLIAM MACKENZIE, Lieutenant-Colonel,  who joined the 1st West India Regiment as Ensign, on the 3rd of  February, 1839, and obtained his  Captaincy on the 1st of January,  1847.  He retired from this regiment in January, 1850, but was  re-appointed to the Service as Regimental Paymaster in  December 1854--a  position  in   which he subsequently served in  the 48th, 54th, 3rd West India and  the 21st and 18th Regiments, until  he was transferred to the Army Pay  Department on the 1st of April,  1878.  He was promoted to the rank  of Major on the 6th of February,  1862, and to that of Lieutenant-Colonel on the 1st of October,  1882.  He married, first, Selina  Martha, fourth daughter of Captain  William Webster late of the 1st  West India and 76th Regiments, by  his wife, Marie Gabrielle, daughter  of Charles Parseille, M.D., of  Brittany, and grand-daughter of the  Countess De Mariset, with issue--(a) Alexander William Webster  Mackenzie, Lieutenant in the 100th Regiment, who married Jessie Glen  Rae, daughter of Captain Hector Munro, 2nd Queen's and Royal  Canadian Rifles, son of Captain John Munro of the Sutherland  Militia, without Issue.  He died in Canada on the 16th of October,  1867, and his wife was lost at sea in September, 1870, on the passage  from Canada to Britain; (b) Rowland Poyntz Mackenzie, who  married Rosalie MacEwen,  daughter of William Wainwright,  of Trinidad, with issue--Alexander  William, who went to Columbus,  Ohio, United States of America, on  the 5th of May, 1892, and is in the  Commercial National Bank there.   The daughters were Selina  Margaret, who married Henneage  Goldie Pasea of Strathearn Lodge,  Trinidad; and Rosalie Miriam  Gray.  He died in Trinidad on the  22nd of May, 1877; (c) Charles  William Beverley Mackenzie, late  of the 71st Highland Light Infantry,  Assistant Commissary General.  He  married Selina Janet, daughter of  Alexander Gray, of Lanark, for  many years a resident proprietor in  Trinidad, and a member of the  Legislative Council of that island,  without issue.  His wife died in  Ireland on the 18th of October,  1880, and he died at Gibraltar on  the 12th of August, 1884; (d)  George Ker Mackenzie, of the Agra  Bank, India, now residing in  Bedford, England.  He married  Jamesina Greig, daughter of Hugh  Fraser, a native of Kingussie, for  many years a resident proprietor in Calcutta, with issue--George  Fraser, who died in infancy; Hugh Fraser; Charles Fraser Alexander  Fraser, who died in childhood; and  Selina Fraser; (e) Evelina Gray,  who married Colonel Charles Hill  Jones, of the 54th Regiment, who  died, without issue, on the 3rd of  September, 1876, while in command of the 13th and 14th Sub-Districts at Liverpool. Lieutenant  Colonel Alexander William Mackenzie's first wife died at  Folkstone, on the 13th of  December, 1890, and he married,  secondly, Mary Jane, daughter of  Thomas Crawford, coal-owner,  Little Town House, Durham.  (3)  George John Poyntz Mackenzie, a  resident proprietor, and for several  years a member of the Legislative  Council of Trinidad.  He married  Emily, daughter of a Mr Williams,  of that island, with issue; (4) Innes Munro Mackenzie, who died in  infancy; (5) Innes Munro  Mackenzie, who married Sarah  Nicholson, Lewes, Sussex, and  latterly of Toronto, Canada, with  issue; (6) Wemyss Erskine  Sutherland Mackenzie, who married Eliza Marache, Trinidad,  with issue.  He died in 1872 at La Guyra, Spanish Main, South  America; (7) Norman Leslie  Mackenzie, who married Catherine  Forsyth, Trinidad, with issue.  He  was drowned in the Gulf of Paria,  in 1858, by the upsetting of a  sailing-boat in which he was  proceeding from Port of Spain to  San Fernando; (8) the Rev. Garland  Crawford Mackenzie, Rural Dean  of Brant, Ontario, Canada, who  married Helen, daughter of the  Rev. Michael Boomer, Dean of  Ontaria, with issue; (9) Eliza  Francis Cressy, who married Henry  Lord, M.D., Canada, with issue.   She died in 1851; (10) Lydia, who  married Henry Rowland Hanning,  Danville, Canada, without issue.   She died in 1857.

4.  Eliza (eldest daughter of Colonel George Mackenzie), married her cousin, the distinguished Colonel Alexander Mackenzie, fourth son of  William Mackenzie, IV. of Gruinard, with issue--Captain George, who  was killed in action, unmarried, and Alexanderina, who married  Alexander Grove, M.D., R.N., Greenwich Hospital, with issue.

5.  Lilias, who married Captain Macgregor of the 18th Regiment, without issue.

6.  Georgina, who married a Mr Euracht, without issue.

7.  Christina, who  married  Angus  Macleod, Banff, with issue.

8.  Annabella, who married Captain John Munro of Kirkton, with issue.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  LETTERWE.

I.  CHARLES  MACKENZIE, first of Letterewe, was the eldest son by his  third wife, Janet, daughter of John  Cuthbert of Castle Hill, Inverness  (marriage contract, 17th December,  1658), of Alexander Mackenzie,  VI. of Gairloch.  He is originally  designed of Mellan Charles, no  doubt so called after himself, but  by his father's marriage contract he  got Loggie-Wester, now Conon,  which he afterwards, in 1696,  exchanged with his half brother,  Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of  Gairloch, for the lands of  Letterewe.  He married, in 1684,  Anne, third daughter of John  Mackenzie, II. of Applecross  (sasine 1687), with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and  successor.

2.  The Rev. Hector,  minister of Fodderty, and previous  to his appointment there, Librarian  to the University of Aberdeen.  He married a Miss Baillie, with issue--a daughter, who married  Mackenzie of Park.

3.  Alexander of Tolly,  Provost of Dingwall, who married in 1740, Annabella, daughter of Sir Donald Bayne of Tulloch, with issue, among  others--Alexander, from whom the Mackenzies of Portmore, and by his  second wife, Katharine, daughter of Bayne of Delny, Bailie Hector  Mackenzie of Dingwall, on whose death Alexander Campbell, the  Gairloch Bard, composed one of the finest elegies in the Gaelic language.

4.  Anna, who married Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Kernsary  (marriage contract in 1708), with issue.

5.  A daughter, who married  her cousin, Roderick Mackenzie, II. of Sanachan, son of Colin, second  son of Roderick Mackenzie, I. of  Applecross.

6.  Annabella, who married  John Maciver of Tournaig, and  afterwards tacksman of Gress, in  the Lewis, with issue.

Charles was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  MURDOCH MACKENZIE, second of  Letterewe.  He fought at the battle  of Sheriffmuir in 1715, and at  Glenshiel in 1719.  When a very  old man he was determined to be  out again in 1745, but according to  a family tradition his wife  prevented him by pouring hot water  on his feet, as if by accident, and  scalded him so much that he was  unable to walk.  He married his  cousin, Catharine, daughter of  Simon Mackenzie, I. of Torridon  and Lentran, widow of John  Mackenzie, Dalmartin, who was  killed at Sheriffmuir, and, it is also  said, of Roderick Mackenzie of  Auldeny, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and  successor.

2.  Janet, who married  Alexander Mackenzie of Sand.   (Sasine to her in 1744).

3.  Anne, who married the  Rev. James Robertson, the famous  "Ministear Laidir" of Lochbroom,  with issue--six sons and two  daughters, one of whom was James  Robertson, Collector of Customs at  Stornoway.  He married his cousin,  Annabella, eldest daughter of John  Mackenzie, III. of Letterewe, with  issue--three sons--(1) Captain  James Robertson-Walker, R.N.,  late of Gilgarran, Cumberland, who  married his cousin, Katherine,  daughter of John  Mackenzie, Sheriff-Substitute of the Lewis,  without issue.  He died in 1858. (2)  Murdoch, who married, with issue--James Robertson, who, like his  uncle, took in addition the name of  Walker on his succession as  proprietor to the estate of  Gilgarran, on the death of his aunt in 1892.  He is married, with issue--James Austin, Murdo, and two daughters; (3) John, a noted  Captain in the Merchant Service, celebrated for his quick passages  with racing tea clippers between China and this country.  He was  also married with issue--a son, Francis Shand Robertson, residing  at Richmond, Surrey, who married his cousin,  Mary, daughter of  Evander MacIver, factor for the Duke of Sutherland at Scourie and  another great-grandson of the Strong Minister, with issue, and a  daughter Annie, who married W. Napier.

Murdoch, who died at a very old age, was succeeded by his only son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE,  third  of  Letterewe, who married his  cousin, Katherine, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of Tolly, Provost of Dingwall, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded his brother Murdoch.

3.  John, for many years the popular Sheriff-Substitute of the Lewis district of Ross-shire, and subsequently tacks-man of Shieldaig, Gairloch.

He married Johanna, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of Badachro, by  his wife, a daughter of the Rev. James Robertson of Lochbroom, with  issue--(1) the late John Mackenzie of Auchenstewart, Wishaw, and  subsequently of Ardlair, Edinburgh, who married in Australia, Anna  Baird, who died at Wishaw on the 7th of November, 1885, with issue--an  only son, John Alexander Mackenzie, now of Ardlair, Edinburgh.  He  married  Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Sinclair, Newark, U.S.A.,  formerly of Glasgow, with issue--John Baird; Alexander Livingston  Munro; Elizabeth Margaret, who died young; Anna Louisa; Elizabeth  Louttit; and Katharine May.  John of Auchenstewart died at Ardlair,  Edinburgh, on the 25th of December, 1890.

Sheriff Mackenzie married,  secondly, Christina, daughter of the Rev. Hugh Munro, minister of Uig,  Lewis (representative of the Munroes of Erribol,  Sutherlandshire), with issue--(2)  John Munro Mackenzie of  Mornish, Mull, who, born in 1819,  married in 1846, Eliza, eldest  daughter of the late Patrick  Chalmers, Wishaw, brother of the  celebrated Dr Thomas Chalmers of  the  Disruption, with issue--(a)  John Hugh Munro, who, on the  23rd of June, 1875, married Jeanie  Helen, second daughter of Thomas  Chalmers, Longcroft,  Linlithgowshire, with issue--John  Munro; Thomas Chalmers; Hugh  Munro; Kenneth; Jean Elizabeth;  Christina Marion; and Kathlene  Harriet.  (b) Patrick Chalmers, who  was born on the 4th of May, 1862,  and on the 31st of October, 1882,  married Mary Kathlene, third  daughter of Thomas Chalmers, of  Longcroft, Linlithgowshire, with  issue--Patrick Harry, born on the  15th of March, 1889; Isabel Grace  and Mary Mona.  (c) Harriet, who  on the 5th of July, 1870, married  James Scott, of Garrion Tower, Lanarkshire, with issue--Munro  Mackenzie, born on the 2nd of  March, 1872  James Harry, born on  the 27th of September, 1873;  William Patrick, born on the 18th  of March, 1880; Elizabeth; and  Harriet Carige, who died in her  twelfth year on the 17th of April,  1889. (d) Christina Marion, who  died unmarried at Cannes in  January, 1881; and (e) Helen Mary,  who, in April, 1883, married Dr  John Aymers Macdougall of Ann,  Berwickshire, and Villa Letterewe, Cannes, France, with issue--Christina Marion  Mackenzie;   Helen Mary Mackenzie; and  Sheila Aymers.  John Munro of  Mornish died at Garrion Tower,  Wishaw, on the 26th of November,  1893.  (3) Hugh Munro Mackenzie,  of Distington, Cumberland, who  married Alexa, daughter of the late  Captain Martin Macleod, of  Drynoch, Ontario, Canada, with  issue--Martin Edward; Hugh  Munro; Christina; Jeanie; and Kate.  Hugh Munro, of Distington, died  on the 25th of January, 1885.  (4)  Katharine, who married her cousin,  Captain James Robertson-Walker,   R.N., of Gilgarran, Cumberland.   She died on the 21st of December,  1892, without issue.

4.  Annabella, who married her cousin, James Robertson, Collector of Customs at Stornoway, son of the "Ministear Laidir" of Lochbroom, with issue, among others--Katharine, who married Lewis Mac Iver, of Gress, representative of the Mac Ivers of Tournaig and Leckmelm, with issue--(1) Evander MacIver, now factor for the Duke of Sutherland at  Scourie, who married  Mary, daughter of Donald Macdonald, then of  Skeabost, Isle of Skye, with issue--(a) James Robertson, M.D., who died  in India, unmarried; (b) Donald, factor for Lord Falmouth, who died  unmarried; (c) Duncan Davidson, a settler at Ellisdale, Victoria, who  married Florence Eastwood, Ballarat, with issue--Evander and Mary; (d)  Lewis, formerly in the Bank of Madras, and now of Blackburn,  Lancashire, who married Margaret MacAll there; (e) Evander, who died  young; (f) Murdo Robertson, who married, with issue--two sons, John,  Evander, and two daughters, who, with their mother survive him; (g) John  Macdonald, a settler in the Cape of Good Hope, married, without issue;  and (h) Mary, who married her cousin, Francis Shand Robertson, residing  at Chiswick, with issue--Evander Shand, Duncan, and two daughters; (2)  James Robertson MacIver, merchant, Stornoway, married, but died  without male issue; (3) John MacIver, banker at Dingwall, afterwards  Secretary of the Bank of Madras, in India, and now residing at Dover.  He married Eliza Doherty of Coleraine, Ireland, with issue--(a) Lewis, late of  the Indian Civil Service, Barrister-at-law, and M.P. for Torquay during the  short Parliament of 1885-86.  He was born on the 6th of March, 1846, and  married on the 11th of September, 1884, Charlotte Rosalind, daughter of  Nathaniel  Montefiore, F.R.S., of Coldeast, Hants, a grand-niece of the  late Sir Moses Montefiore, with issue, two daughters--Marjorie Barabel  Ruth and Nathalie Esther; (b) Iver Ian, a squatter in Queensland, who  married a daughter of George Dill, one of the founders of the Melbourne Argus, with issue--four children, the eldest of whom is a boy named Ian; (4) Lewis Maciver, a Liverpool merchant, who married, with issue--(a)  James Walker, a Civil Engineer, and (b) another son; (5) William Walker  MacIver, who died at Hong Kong, unmarried; (6) Murdo Robertson  MacIver, who also died unmarried; (7) Alexander MacIver, Agent for the  Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company, first at Madras and  afterwards at Hong Kong, who married Marjory, daughter of Captain  Hector Gunn, of the Black Watch, with issue--(a) Alister, in the London  office of the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company; (b) Colin, and  several daughters.  Alexander died in 1892.  (8) Lilias, who married  Roderick Macleod, merchant, Liverpool, with issue--one daughter.

5.  Catherine, who married her cousin, Charles, a younger son of the Rev. James Robertson, and brother of her sister's husband, Collector  James Robertson, of Stornoway, with issue.

6.  Anne, who married John Macintyre, tacksman of Letterewe,  with issue.

John was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  MURDO  MACKENZIE, fourth of Letterewe, a Captain in the  78th Highlanders.  He died in India, unmarried, and was succeeded by his  next brother,

V.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Letterewe, who married  Catherine, daughter of James Macdonald of Skeabost, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  James, a midshipman, H.E.I.C.S., who died unmarried.

3.  Murdo, a doctor, H.E.I.C.S., who also died unmarried.

4.  Hector, who was an  Officer of Customs at the Cape of Good Hope, and afterwards succeeded his brother in the estate of Letterewe.

5.  Donald Alexander, who in early life emigrated to the United States, and of whom presently.

6.  Jessie, who married Donald Macdonald, Lochinver, who  afterwards went to the Cape of Good Hope and died at Southsea in 1888, leaving issue--(1) Donald, C.E., at the Cape, who married, and has issue--two sons and a daughter.  (2) Alexander James, of Milland, Hants, who, in 1866, married Caroline, daughter of John Heugh, of Port Elizabeth, South  Africa, with issue--Ione and Thyra.  (3) Murdo, who, in 1869, married  Laura, daughter of J. Foley, sculptor, London, with issue--Flora;  Alexander; Charles; Somerled; and Ronald.  (4) Katherine, who in 1849  married the late James Somers Kirkwood, merchant at Port Elizabeth,  Cape of Good Hope, with issue--(1) Donald, who married first, in 1866,  Helen, daughter of Thomas Read, of Trouse, Norwich, with issue--Donald  He married, secondly, Cornelia, daughter of R. Restall, of Uitenhague,  South Africa, with issue--Hector and Hellen (2) Charles; (3) Alexander; (4) Reginald; (5) Annie, who married Archibald Merilees, Moscow; and (6) Jessie, who married Walter Somerville Lockhart, of Clydesdale, with  issue--Lawrence.

7.  Katherine, who died unmarried.

8.  Emily, who resided in London, unmarried.

Alexander was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, a Writer to the Signet, in Edinburgh,  where he died unmarried, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving  brother,

VII.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE seventh of Letterewe.  In 1835 he  sold the estate to Meyrick Bankes of Winstanley Hall, Lancashire.  He died, unmarried, in 1860 at Algoa Bay, Cape of Good Hope, when he was  succeeded, as representative of the family, by his youngest and only  surviving brother,

VIII.  DONALD  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, a merchant at  Dubuque, Iowa, United States of America, who married, with issue--

1.  Charles, who succeeded as representative of the family.

2.  Alexander, a Captain of Engineers in the United States Army, who married in 1872, with issue--a son Donald.

Donald Alexander died in 1872, leaving a widow, who  subsequently resided at Dubuque, when he was succeeded as  representative of the family, by his eldest son,

IX.  CHARLES  MACKENZIE, a lawyer, now in good practice in  the United States

The representative of the Mackenzies of Letterewe in this country is John Alexander Mackenzie, of Ardlair, Edinburgh, only son of the late  John Mackenzie of Auchenstewart, who died in 1890.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  PORTMORE.

THIS family is descended from Alexander Mackenzie of Tolly, grandson of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, and third son of Charles Mackenzie of Loggie-Wester, and subsequently I. of Letterewe, by Anne,  daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Applecross.  He married, first,  Annabella, daughter and co-heiress of Sir Donald Bayne of Tulloch; and  their descendants, as representatives of that ancient family, bear its  cognisance on the centre of their shield, a wolf's head proper.  He was a Bailie and afterwards Provost of Dingwall, exercised considerable local  and political  influence, and greatly aided Lord Macleod, son of George  Earl of Cromarty, in his candidature for the county of Ross, as may be  seen from the Cromarty Papers. During an  election riot which occurred  in Dingwall in 1751, Mrs Mackenzie, whilst looking out of a window of  her own house, was accidentally shot.  By her Provost Mackenzie had  issue--

1.  Alexander, I. of Portmore.

2.  Katharine, who married her cousin, John Mackenzie, III. of Letterewe, with issue.

3.  Charlotte, who married the Rev. John Downie, minister of Gairloch, subsequently of Urray, with issue.

He married, secondly, Katharine, daughter of Bayne of Delny, with issue--

4.  Ronald, a Captain in the Army, who died in Ireland, without issue.

5.  Hector, a well-known   and highly-popular Bailie of  Dingwall, who married, first, Anne,  daughter of the Rev. Colin  Mackenzie, minister of Fodderty,  and I. of Glack, with issue--(1)  Alexander, a merchant in London,  who married his cousin, Catherine,  daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, of  Millbank, with issue--two  daughters, Catherine, who married  Major Roderick Mackenzie, VII. of  Kincraig and Ann, who married the  Rev. John Macdonald of Calcutta,  an eminent divine; (2) Colin,  Lieutenant in the Royal Navy, who  died without issue; (3) Henry, who  died unmarried; (4) Hectorina, who died at Dingwall, unmarried, in  1850.  Bailie Mackenzie married secondly, a daughter of Mackenzie,  Ussie, with issue--(5) Jane, who  married John Mackenzie; (6)  Annabella, who married William Kemp, of Comrie; (7) Anne, who  married Kenneth Mackenzie, of Millbank.

Alexander of Tolly died in 1774 and, along with his wife,  Annabella, is interred in the family burying-place at Dingwall.

I.  ALEXANDER   MACKENZIE, his eldest son and  heir, who was born on the 5th of  February, 1740, and afterwards  became first of Portmore, settled as  a W.S. in Edinburgh; but all his life  he kept up a close connection with  his native county, having intimate business relations with all its  principal landowners.  He was a man of undoubted ability, and the  personal friend of many noted literary men of his day.  He  purchased the estate of Seaton, in East Lothian, but afterwards sold it  to the Earl of Wemyss, after which  he purchased the estate of  Portmore, Peebleshire, from the Conyears Earls of Portmore.  He  married on the 25th of February, 1766, Anne, eldest daughter of  Colin Mackenzie, VI. of Kilcoy, by  Martha, eldest daughter of Charles  Fraser of Inverallochy and Castle  Fraser, whose mother was Lady  Marjory Erskine, eldest daughter of  James, seventh Earl of Buchan.

Lady Marjory married secondly,  Charles, last Lord Fraser of Castle Fraser, who, dying without issue,  left his estate to his step-son, Simon Fraser of Inverallochy.  On  the death, without issue, of Martha's three brothers, she and  her sister  Elizabeth  became co-heiresses of Inverallochy and  Castle Fraser, and on Elizabeth's death Martha became sole heiress.   She left the estates to her distinguished son, Lieutenant-General Alexander Mackenzie,  who assumed the additional name  of Fraser.  Thus the families of  Kilcoy and Portmore deduce  descent from the Royal Houses of  Stuart and Plantaganet, as also  from the Dukes of Burgundy, and  Raymond Count of Provence.  Alexander had issue--

1.  Alexander, who died in infancy in 1767.

2.  Alexander, Lieutenant-Colonel Commanding  the 21st  Dragoons. He died before his father at Cape Malo, St. Domingo, West  Indies, in July 1796, aged 27, unmarried.

3.  Colin, who succeeded his father at Portmore.

4.  John, who was born in 1771, and died young.

5.  George Udny, born in 1773, and died young.

6.  Charles, born in 1779, and died in 1783.

7.  WILLIAM   MACKENZIE, I. of Muirton, Ross-shire, W.S. in Edinburgh, Deputy-Lieutenant for Ross, Sutherland,  and Cromarty. He was born on the  1st of October, 1780, and married  first, on the 6th of July, 1805,  Mary, daughter of James Mansfield  of Midmar, Aberdeenshire, by  Marion, daughter of Dalrymple  Horn-Elphinstone of Horn and  Logie-Elphinstone, eldest surviving  son  of Viscount (now Earl of)  Stair, with issue--(1)  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, II.  of Muirton, and of Meikle  Scatwell; a W.S., Edinburgh.   Alexander, who was born on the  28th of February, 1812, married his  cousin, Maria, second daughter and  co-heiress with her three sisters of John Mansfield of Midmar, with  issue--William Garloch, who died unmarried at Gibraltar, on the 22nd  of May, 1876; John Mansfield, W.S., Edinburgh, who died  unmarried--the last of six sons--in  1892; Alexander James, who died  in Natal in 1887, unmarried;  Douglas Hay, who succeeded to the  estate of Meikle Scatwell by the  will of his aunt, Mrs Douglas  (Jemima Mansfield), and, dying  unmarried at Clifton on the 9th of  June, 1873, bequeathed it to his  father; George Vansittart, a  merchant in Leith, who died  unmarried in 1891; and James  Dalrymple, who died in New  Zealand, unmarried, in 1887.   Alexander Mackenzie, II. of  Muirton, sold that estate to Colonel  Ainslie, and Meikle Scatwell to Sir  William James Bell, LL.D., now of  Scatwell.  (2) James Mansfield,  who died unmarried in 1838, aged  25.  (3) William, M.A., in Holy  Orders, who married Isabella  Trotter, Natal, with issue--George  Charles, born in 1857, heir of his  uncle, John Mansfield; Alexander  Frederick, born in 1859 Harry  James Mansfield, born in 1863;  John, born in 1866; Mary Marion;  Thomas Mansfield, born in 1866;  and Grace Isabella. The Rev  William died in Natal in 1887.  (4)  Marion, who married Captain  Frederick H. De Lisle, R.N.,  Guernsey, and died without issue in  1879.  William Mackenzie, I. of  Muirton, married secondly, Alice,  daughter of Andrew Wauchope of  Niddry Marischal, County of  Midlothian, without issue.  He died  in 1856, and was succeeded in the  lands of Muirton by his eldest son,  Alexander, II. of Muirton, as above.

8.  Sutherland, manager of the Scottish Union Insurance Company, who was born on the 31st of January, 1785, and died unmarried on the  26th of March, 1853.

9.  John, who was born on  the 13th of October, 1787, died in  1854, and is interred in the family  burying place at Dingwall.  He was a banker in Inverness and  Commissioner for many years for  the Redcastle and Flowerburn  estates.  He was a man of great  ability, lavish hospitality and  generosity, and a keen sportsman.   He exercised very considerable  social and political influence, and  the Burgh of Inverness presented  him with a valuable service of plate in recognition of his services  during Earl Grey's administration on the passing of the Municipal  Reform Bill in 1833.  He was unanimously elected the first  Provost of Inverness after the Act came into force, and was  repeatedly pressed to become a  candidate for Inverness as its  representative in Parliament.  He  was offered the Governorship of  Ceylon and of the Mauritius, but he  declined to accept either.  He  married, on the 4th December,  1817, Mary Charlotte, only child of  Robert Pierson, a merchant prince  in Riga, son of James Pierson of  Balmadies, Forfarshire, a very old Scottish family of Scandinavian  origin, recorded as landowners in Berwickshire in 1296, and  described in 1634 as "very  ancient." She was a most beautiful  and accomplished woman, could  converse in Russ, German, French,  and Italian, and was an admirable  musician and artist.  She died in  1883 and is buried in Dingwall,  leaving issue--(1) Alexander, like  his father a banker in Inverness,  who was born on the 18th of  March, 1820, and died, unmarried,  on the 20th of March, 1860; (2)  JOHN  ROBERT  MACKENZIE, a  Major-General in Her Majesty's  Forces, late Colonel of the 2nd  Battalion King's Own Yorkshire  Light Infantry.  He was in  command in 1873 of a successful  expeditionary force in Arabia.  He  was born on the 5th of June, 1822,  and on the 28th of August,  1851,  married Amelia  Robertson,  daughter of James Wilson, banker,  Inverness, by his cousin, Isabella,  daughter of Thomas Fraser of  Newton, with issue--(a) Amelia  Isabella Margery, who died, aged  17, and is buried at Inverness (b)  John William Sutherland, who was  born on the 17th of July, 1855, and  on the 19th of July, 1881, married Matilda Henrietta, daughter of  Colonel Brown-Constable of Wallace-Craigie, Forfarshire, Lord  Lieutenant of the County, by Mary  Christina, daughter of Colonel  Francis Kenneth Mackenzie, fourth  son of Captain John Mackenzie,  VI. of Kincraig, with issue--John  Fraser, Donald Constable Travers,  Mary Amelia, and Norah  Constance (c) Mary Charlotte  Pierson, who, on the 13th of May,  1880, married Alfred Woodhouse,  F.RG.S., with issue--Margery Amelia Fraser, Coventry William,  John Alick Edward, Alfred Frederick Bell, Hector Roy  Mackenzie, and Muriel Mary; (d)  Alice Marion Fraser, who died  young in Madras; (e) Elizabeth  Margaret Cumming, who, on the  8th of April, 1885, married Henry  Gibbs, with issue--Ella Margaret;  (f) Louisa Constance Harris, who  died young, and is buried at  Dingwall; (g) Ella Fraser  Magdalene; (h) James Wilson  Alexander, in Holy Orders, MA. of  Pembroke College, Cambridge.  He  was born on the 18th of May, 1867,  and married Amy Adela Magee,  daughter of the Rev. John N. B.  Woodroffe, M.A., with issue--John  William Wilson; and (i) Hector  Colin Udney, who died young; (3)  COLIN  MACKENZIE, a Major-General, Madras Staff Corps, who  was born on the 18th of October,  1833, and on the 16th of January,  1861, married, first, Victoria  Henrietta, eldest daughter of  Charles Mackinnon, M.D., of the  Corry family, Isle of Skye, with  issue--(a) Colin John, Brevet  Major, 78th Highlanders, 2nd  Battalion Seaforth Highlanders  (Ross-shire Buffs), Adjutant of his  Regiment, Aide-de-Camp to Lord  Frederick Roberts, Commander-in-Chief in India, and Deputy  Assistant Adjutant General at Quetta.  He was born on the 26th of  November, 1861, and served in the  Egyptian Campaign, medal and  clasp, Tel-el-Kebir, the Burmese Campaign, the Black Mountain  Expedition, and the Hunga Nagar Campaign, in Cashmere, for which  he received the Brevet rank of Major.  He has two medals and four  clasps and the Khedive Star. (b)  Charles Alexander, born on the  21st December, 1862, an indigo planter in Thiroot; (c) Ronald  Pierson, M.D., born on the 12th of January, 1863; (d) Mary Charlotte;  (e) Henrietta Studd, who died young; (f) Victor Herbert, born on  the 17th of September, 1867, of the  British East Africa Company.  He  died in 1892, aged 25. (g) Kenneth  Lascelles, born on the 27th of Nov-ember, 1869, an indigo planter; (h)  Frederick William, R.N., born on  the 19th of May, 1870; (i) Henry  Studd, who died young; (j) Morna;  and (k) Annie Stuart.  Major-General Colin married, secondly,  Stella Adela Newbigging, with  issue--(l) Isobel.  (4) Charlotte,  who married, first, John Alexander  Fraser, Captain 93rd Sutherland  Highlanders, with issue--(a) John  Alexander Mackenzie, D.S.O.,  Commander, R.N., who married  Euphemia Ritchie, daughter of  Peacock-Edwards; (b) William  Forbes Mackenzie, Captain 18th  Bengal Infantry, formerly of the  88th Connaught Rangers; (c)  Charlotte Amelia Rose, who  married Ernest Duncombe, R.N.,  with issue--Dorothy and Estelle  Amy, twins, and Beryl; and (d)  Mary Eliza Alexia. Charlotte  married, secondly, the Rev.  William Duncombe, M.A., with  issue--(e) Francis Hay.  (5) Mary  Ann, who married first, George  Grogan of Sutton, Dublin, Captain  6th Dragoon Guards (the Carabineers) with issue--(a)  Edward George, Major 42nd  Highlanders (Black Watch), who  married, first, Meta, daughter of Sir  William King Hall, K.C.B.,  Admiral Commanding off the  Nore, with issue--George William  St. George and Edward  Harry  John; (b)  Meta Aileen Odetta.   Mary Ann married, secondly,  Colonel St. George Herbert  Stepney, C.B., Commanding 2nd  Battalion Coldstream Guards, without issue.  (6) Elizabeth, who,  in 1856, married Colonel George Harkness, Madras Army, with issue  --(a) Henry George; Alexander Charles, M.D.; (b) George Bacon  (c) Mary Kate; and (d) Charlotte Esmi, who married Captain Carlton  Cuthbert Collingwood, with issue--Ronald George; (7) Catherine, who  married Capta

Paragraph 1389 is too large. in Charles Harkness,  Madras Army, and died in 1857,  without issue.

10.  Martha; 11.  Annabella; 12.  Jean; 13.  Elizabeth; and 14. Catherine, five daughters of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Portmore, all of  whom died unmarried.

Alexander died on the 4th of September, 1805, was buried in the  Greyfriars, Edinburgh, and succeeded by his third and eldest surviving  son,

II.  COLIN  MACKENZIE,  second of Portmore, W.S.,  Edinburgh, Principal Clerk of  Session and Keeper of the Signet,  who was born on the 11th of  January, 1770.  He was a very  popular man, and one of the oldest  friends of Sir Walter Scott, who  alludes to him in his poems.  He  married on the 13th of May, 1803,  Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William  Forbes, sixth Baronet of Pitsligo, by Elizabeth, daughter of Sir James  Hay of Hayston, Baronet.  Sir William was a banker of great  eminence in Edinburgh.  He  succeeded Coutts Brothers, the  Scotch firm of Coutts & Co., and  founded the bank of Sir William  Forbes, Baronet, and Sir William  Hunter, Baronet, & Co., now the  National Bank of Scotland.  He  died on the 16th of September,  1830, leaving issue--

1.  Alexander, who died in infancy.

2.  Alexander, who died in 1822, at the age of 17.

3.  William Forbes, who succeeded to Portmore.

4.  Colin, Bengal Civil Service, who was born in June, 1808, and died, unmarried, on the 14th of January, 1870.

5.  James Hay, W.S., Edinburgh, who married Isabella, daughter of James Wedderburn,  Solicitor-General for Scotland, with issue--(1) Colin,  W.S. in Edinburgh, a man of great ability, who had a very large business  connection with many of the most influential families in Scotland.  Colin was born on the 24th of April, 1841, and died, unmarried, at sea, on a  return voyage from America in 1883; (2) James Wedderburn, who died  young in 1844; (3) George Wedderburn, who was born on the 9th of April,  1851, now in Ceylon; (4) Isabella Elizabeth, who married Major-General  Kirkland of Wester Fordel, Perthshire, with issue--one daughter, Isabella  Sybella; (5) Alice, who died young; (6) Louisa Helen; (7) Ann Christina,  who married Edward Bannerman, with issue--Kenneth Mordaunt,  D'Arcy, and Eric Edward; and (8) Jean Charlotte.  James Hay died on the 16th of February, 1865.

6.  John, Treasurer of the  Bank of Scotland and Manager of  the Scottish Widows Fund, who  was born on the 1st of April, 1812,  and on the 29th of May, 1844,  married his cousin, Christina  Garioch, third daughter and co-heiress with her three sisters of  John Mansfield of Midmar, with  issue--(9) Colin, Captain in the  78th Highlanders (Ross-shire  Buffs), and Major, 3rd Battalion  Seaforth Highlanders (Highland  Rifle Militia), F.R.G.S., and a  gentleman of considerable literary  ability and taste.  He was author of the History of the 78th Highlanders  in Keltie's History of the Highland  Clans and Highland Regiments,  and of a series of articles in  the  Celtic Magazine on  "The  Sculptured Stones of Ross and  Cromarty."  He also prepared a  most elaborate and complete Genealogical Table, showing the  origin and descent of his own family of Portmore--and  necessarily all the Mackenzies who  can trace connection with any of  the leading families of the Clan--from the earliest times to the  present day, printed by his relative, Major-General John Robert  Mackenzie, after Major Colin's  death. He was born on the 10th of  June, 1843, and died of a decline at St. Moritz, Switzerland, in March,  1890.  He married Jeannette Sophia, eldest daughter of Baron  Gerhard  Knut A. Falkenberg of Trystorp, His Swedish and  Norwegian Majesty's Consul-General in British North America,  with issue--Ian Duncan, born on  the 15th of July, 1870; Ulric Knut,  born on the 6th of December, 1872; Colin Mansfield, born on the 3rd of  November, 1876; and Christina Frederica Augusta; (2) Christina  Garioch, who died young.

7.  Sutherland, Lieutenant Royal Navy, born on the 15th of  January, 1818, and lost on board H.M.S. "Victor," in the Gulf of Mexico, in 1844, unmarried.

8.  George, Lieutenant in the Indian Army, born on the 23rd of February, 1819.  He was killed in action on the 14th of October, 1844,  unmarried.

9.  Charles Frederick Fraser,  a Fellow of Caius and Gonville College, Cambridge, second  Wrangler of his year.  He entered  Holy Orders and was appointed  Archdeacon of Natal, in which  colony he laboured successfully for  some years among the Zulus.   Coming home, he was selected as  the leader of the Universities  Mission to Central Africa and was  afterwards consecrated at Cape  Town as the first Bishop of Central  Africa.  He subsequently proceeded to the Zambesi River, where, acting  in concert with Dr Livingstone, he  succeeded in liberating a large  number of slaves from the hands of  the drivers who were conducting  them to the coast, and some of  these liberated slaves formed the  nucleus of the Bishop's first settlement at Magomero.  While  descending the River Ruo to meet  Dr Livingstone, Bishop  Mackenzie's canoe was overturned  and his quinine lost.  A short  sojourn on a swampy island  brought on a fever, to which he  succumbed on the 31st of January,  1862, without issue.  His Life has  been written by his friend, Dr Goodwin, Bishop of Carlisle.

10.  Elizabeth, who married George Dundas of Ochtertyre,  Advocate, a Judge of the Scottish Bench by the title of Lord Manor, with issue--(1) James, V.C., Captain in the Royal Engineers.  He obtained the Victoria Cross for conspicuous gallantry during the expedition to Bhotan, and died at Cabul, in 1879, unmarried; (2) Colin Mackenzie of Ochtertyre, Commander Royal  Navy,  twin brother of James.  He married Agnes,  daughter of Samuel Wauchope, C.B., and sister of Mrs Mackenzie,  Portmore, with issue--James Colin, and  David  John Wauchope; (3)  George Ralph, who died unmarried; (4) William John, a W.S. in  Edinburgh; (5) David, Advocate in Edinburgh, who married Helen,  daughter of David Wauchope; (6) Elizabeth Christian; (7) Mary Frances;  (8) Helen Anne; and (9) Katharine.

11.  Anne, who accompanied her brother Charles to Natal, where  she remained with him during the whole period of his ministry there. She afterwards followed him to Central Africa, but hearing of his death whilst  ascending the Zambezi River, she returned to England, when she started  and edited a monthly missionary periodical, entitled "The Net."  By this, and through her own unaided efforts, she was the means of inaugurating  the Memorial Mission to Zululand (in memory of her brother) of which  the Bishop of Zululand is the head.  She was the author of a Life of  Henrietta Robertson, wife of the Chaplain of the garrison of Fort-Etchowe;  and other works. She died in 1877, unmarried.

12.  Katharine, who died unmarried on the 20th of March, 1832.

13.  Jane, died unmarried on the 13th of February, 1820.

14.  Louisa, who married William Wilson, C.A., and died on the 20th of January, 1866, without issue.

15.  Alice, who married the  Venerable C. S. Grubb, late  Archdeacon of Natal and now  Vicar of Mentmore, with issue--Sarah Louisa and Constance Ann.  Colin died on the 16th of September, 1830, and was succeeded by  his eldest surviving son, III.  WILLIAM  FORBES MACKENZIE, who, born on the 18th of  April, 1807, was for many years M.P. for the County of Peebles, and  afterwards for Liverpool. He was a Lord of the Treasury in Lord Derby's  Government, and is chiefly known as the author of the Forbes Mackenzie  Act."  He married, on the 16th of March, 1830, Anne, daughter of Sir  James Montgomery of Stanhope, Baronet, by Lady Elizabeth Douglas, daughter of Dunbar, fourth Earl of Selkirk, with issue--1.  Colin James, his heir and successor.  2.  Elizabeth Helen, who died in her ninth year.

William died on the 24th of December, 1862, and was succeeded  by his only son,

IV.  COLIN  JAMES  MACKENZIE, late of the Bengal Civil  Service, now of Portmore, and Lord-Lieutenant of the County of Peebles. He was born on the 19th of February, 1835, and married, in 1870, Katharine Alice, daughter of Samuel Wauchope, C.B., Niddry Marischal, Midlothian, late of the Bengal Civil Service, with issue--

1.  A son who died young, 26th of September, 1871.

2.  Colin Charles Forbes, born 7th of December, 1879.

3.  John Montalien Hay, born 17th of August, 1885.

4.  Francis Victor Hamilton.

5.  Helen Alice, who died in her 6th year.

6.  Evelyn Mary Hay.

7.  Katharine Maud.

8.  Dorothy Anne Lucy.

9.  Cecil Louise.

10.  Esme Valentine.

11.  Ruth Eleonara, died young.

12.  Rachael Octavia.

13.  Winifred Kersey.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  MOUNTGERALD.

I.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, first of Mountgerald, was the second surviving son  of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of  Gairloch, by his third wife, Janet,  daughter of John Cuthbert of  Castlehill, Inverness.  He was a  Lieutenant in the Scotch Fusilier  Guards, and fought at the battle of  Stenkirk, after which he retired  from the army, purchased the estate  of Mountgerald and, in 1726, built  Woodlands House.  He married,  first, Margaret, widow of Roderick  Mackenzie of Findon, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, I. of  Ballone, without issue.  He  married, secondly, Katharine,  daughter of James Fraser of  Achnagairn (marriage contract  1721), with issue--

1.  James, his heir and  successor.

2.  Alexander, who died, without issue, in 1725.

3.  Kenneth, who died in 1727, without issue.

4.  Colin, who succeeded his brother James.

5.  Isabel, who married Sir Lewis Mackenzie, VI. and third Baronet of Scatwell, with issue.

6.  Anne, who married Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Lochend, with issue.

Colin died in 1727, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  JAMES  MACKENZIE, second of Mountgerald, who has a  sasine as eldest son dated 15th of April, 1732.  He died without issue, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving brother,

III.  MAJOR COLIN  MACKENZIE, third of Mountgerald, who in  1759, married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Roderick Mackenzie, V. and second Baronet of Scatwell, with issue, an only son,

IV.  MAJOR COLIN   MACKENZIE, fourth of  Mountgerald, who, in 1795, married Emilia, daughter of  Colonel James Fraser of Belladrum with issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded his brother Colin.

3.  Simon  Fraser, who succeeded his brother Alexander.

4.  Hannah, who died unmarried.

5.  Mary, who died unmarried.

6.  Eliza, who married, first, David Dick, of Glenshiel.

7.  Isabella, who married Archibald Dick, with issue.

8.  Sarah, who died unmarried.

9.  Jemima, who died unmarried.

Major Colin died in 1824, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, fifth of Mountgerald, who died, in  Jamaica without issue, when he was succeeded by his next brother,

VI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, sixth of Mountgerald, who  also died without issue, and was succeeded by his next brother,

VII.  SIMON  FRASER  MACKENZIE, seventh of Mountgerald, a  Lieutenant-Colonel in the Madras Cavalry.  He married, first, a daughter  of Colonel Pendergast, with issue--an only daughter, Mary.  He married,  secondly, Margaret, daughter of General Stewart without issue.  In 1855,  he sold Mountgerald to Lewis Mark Mackenzie of Findon, who died  unmarried in 1856.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  DAILUAINE.

THIS family is descended from Hector Mackenzie, Portioner of Mellan,  third son of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, by his first wife,  Margaret, daughter of Roderick Mor Mackenzie, I. of Redcastle, by  Florence, daughter of Robert Munro, XV of Fowlis. Hector, who was a  Cornet in Sir George Munro's Regiment, married a daughter of Donald  Maciver, of whose issue "a small tribe in Gairloch." [Gairloch MS.   Hector, his three sons--John, Murdoch, and Duncan--and a grandson,  Kenneth, are referred to by name in the Records of the Presbytery of  Dingwall under date of 6th August, 1678.]  That Mellan Charles was not a  permanent possession of any member of the Gairloch family is obvious  from the fact that another Hector, the second son, by the second marriage,  of John Roy Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch, and uncle of Hector, third son of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, of whose descendants we now treat, occupied it in the preceding generation, and from the further fact that Charles Mackenzie, I. of Letterewe, eldest son by his third marriage of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, who would come of age about  1670, is described as "of Mellan," which he possessed along with Loggie-Wester, until he exchanged both places with his eldest half-brother,  Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of Gairloch, in 1696.

The sons of Hector,  Portioner of Mellan, joined in the  Rising of 1715, and on that account  found it necessary to leave their native county, crossing in an open  boat from the Black Isle to the town of Nairn, from which they  naturally found their way to the neighbourhood of their kinsmen in  the upper districts of Morayshire and Inverness-shire, a place in  which several of their relatives held  influential positions in the  Episcopal Church, and in other situations.  The Rev. Murdoch  Mackenzie, Hector's second  cousin, descended from John  Glassich Mackenzie, II. of  Gairloch, and Episcopal minister  successively of Contin, Inverness,  and Elgin, had only very recently,  in 1677, been transferred from the  Bishopric of Moray to that of  Orkney, while several of his near  relations were still in the district,  among them the Rev. Hector  Mackenzie, the Bishop's nephew,  and third cousin of Hector's son  John, who was minister of  Kingussie from 1670 until he was  translated to Inverness in 1688.

There were also several  intermarriages between them and  the families of Grant of Freuchy  and Grant of Easter Elchies and  Edenvillie. Some of Hector's sons  are found not many years after in  the Strathspey district, John, the  eldest, having two farms on the  estate of Edenvillie, in the parish of  Aberlour.  Hector of Mellan's  descendants continued  Episcopalians for some time after settling there.

I.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE, Portioner of Mellan, son of  Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, married a daughter of Donald  MacIver, Lochbroom, with issue--

1.  John, who engaged in the Rising of 1715.

2.  Murdoch, married, and had a son Kenneth.

3.  Duncan, of whom there is no further trace.

4.  Mary, who married her cousin, Alastair Mor, son of Alexander Cam Mackenzie, fourth son of Alexander, V. of Gairloch, with issue.

Hector was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

II  JOHN  MACKENZIE, the first of the family who settled in Aberlour.  He married  Margaret Mackenzie, a relative of his own, died on the 9th of August, 1772, and was buried at Aberlour, leaving issue--an  only son,

III.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE, who, on the 5th of May, 1721,  married Elspet Stronach, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  John, born 7th April, 1728, and died without issue.

3.  Alexander, who was born on the 28th of February, 1731, and died without issue.

4.  Margaret, who died without issue.

On the 3rd of June, 1723, it is recorded in the Session Records of  the parish of Aberlour, that "Hector Mackenzie, in Netherton of  Edenvillie, gave in a boll of meal, which his deceased father had  appointed to be distributed among the poor of the parish."

Hector died on the 9th of March, 1732, was buried at Aberlour,  and succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

IV.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, who was  born on the 26th of  March, 1725. He left Edenvillie, and settled at Lyne of Carron, and in  1763 married Grizzel Dean, Knockando, with issue--

1.  John, who was born on the 28th of February, 1764, and died without issue, in 1838.

2.  William, born on the 2nd of March, 1769, and married, with issue--one daughter, Grace.

3.  James, born 26th of May, 1771, and died in 1783.

4.  Alexander, born on the 7th of January, 1774, and died in  France, without issue.

5.  Thomas, who on the death of his eldest brother, John, in 1838, became the representative of the family.

6.  Hector, born on the 8th of May, 1778, and died in 1814, without issue.

7.  James, a clergyman, born on the 26th of September, 1785, and died without issue, in 1811.

8.  Elspet, who married John MacConnachie, Tombain, with issue.

9.  Margaret, who died without issue, in 1812.

William died in June, 1813, at Lyne of Carron, was buried at  Aberlour, and succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

V.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, who died without issue in 1838, when  he was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest surviving brother,

VI.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, who was born on the 12th of April,  1776, and married on the 26th of July, 1821, Ann Grant, great-grand-daughter of Ludovick Grant, grandson of Sir John Grant of Freuchy, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  John, born on the 18th of November, 1823.  He is unmarried.

3.  Grace, married John Shand, Rinnachat, without issue.

4.  Penuel, who married Patrick Shaw, Benstaak, with issue--several sons and daughters.

5.  Margaret, unmarried.

Thomas died at Lyne of Carron, on the 5th of February, 1861, aged 85, when he was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest  son,

VII.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, who was born on the 3rd of May,  1822. He founded the Distillery of Dailuaine in  1851, one of the most extensive malt distilleries in Scotland.  He married on the 5th of October,  1844, Jean, daughter of William Thomson, Knockando, with issue--

1.  John, born on the 28th of July, 1845.  He was drowned at sea, without issue.

2.  William, born on the 9th of October, 1846.  He went to the  West Indies and died there unmarried, on the 10th of December, 1893, at Paramaribo, Surinam.

3.  Thomas, who succeeded his father in Dailuaine.

4.  Alexander, who was born on the 11th of July, 1851.  He is in South Africa, and still unmarried.

5.  William Grant, born on the 21st of June, 1859, and still unmarried.

6.  Lewis Grant, born on the 10th of January, 1862.  He went to California, and is still unmarried.

7.  Ann.

8.  Jane.

9.  Margaret.

10.  Grace Penuel, who married Dr Robert Cochrane Buist,  Dundee, with issue--a son and daughter.

11.  Mary Forbes.

William died at Dailuaine, on the 17th of May, 1865, and was succeeded there by his son,

VIII.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, now of Dailuaine, and since the  death of his elder brother William in December, 1893, heir-male of the family.  Born on the 18th of March, 1848, he on the 30th of October, 1877, married Emily, daughter of Edwin Holt of Rosehill, Worcestershire.


SLIOCHD  ALASTAIR  CHAIM.

THE progenitor of this family, not one of whom so far as known ever owned an acre of land until now, was

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth  son  of Alexander  Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, by his wife Margaret, daughter of Roderick  Mor Mackenzie, I. of Redcastle, by his wife Florence, daughter of Robert Munro, XVth Baron of Fowlis.  Alexander, like his brother Hector, was a  Cornet in Sir George Munro's Regiment, and according to one of the  Gairloch manuscript Histories was "an officer under Cromwell, whom he  afterwards left, and was wounded on the King's side at the battle of  Worcester, leaving a succession in Gairloch by his wife Janet, daughter of  Mackenzie of Ord."  He lost an eye at Worcester, and was consequently  ever after known Alastair Cam. His descendants are still numerous in  Gairloch, where, having had no land to be designated of, they were always known as "Sliochd Alastair Chaim" or "The descendants of Alexander the  One-Eyed." He married, in 1652, Janet, third daughter of John  Mackenzie, I. of Ord, [The marriage contract is dated "at Chanonrie, the  21st of July and 26th of August, 1652," the year after the Battle of Worcester, and is in the Ord charter chest.] by his wife Isobel, daughter of  Alexander Cuthbert of Drakies, Inverness, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir.

2.  Alexander, commonly  called "Alastair Mor Mac Alastair  Chaim," from whom are  descended, among several others in  Gairloch, the late John Mackenzie  of the Beauties of Gaelic Poetry,  and Alexander Mackenzie, the  author of this History.   ALEXANDER married his cousin,  Mary, daughter of Hector  Mackenzie, "Portioner of Mellan," with issue--John Mackenzie,  locally known as "Ian Mor Mac  Alastair Mhic Alastair Chaim."   JOHN  MOR married Barbara,  daughter of John Roy Mackenzie,  of Sand.  He had a tack from Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, second  Baronet and IX. of Gairloch, of the  half of North Erradale, in 1760, for  twenty years, to begin at Whit-sunday, 1765, and he is described  in the lease as then in possession (see pp. 483-84).  By his wife he  had issue--seven sons, known as "Clann Ian Mhoir," said to have  been the biggest and most powerful men in Gairloch in their day--(1)  JOHN, "Ian Mor Aireach," who succeeded his father in a portion of  North Erradale, and married Marsali, or Marjory, daughter of  John Ban Mackenzie, Isle of Ewe,  by his wife, Annabella, natural  daughter of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, second Baronet and IX.  of Gairloch.  By Marsali  Mackenzie, "Ian Mor Aireach had  issue--four sons, Duncan,  Murdoch, John Mor Og, and  William, and two daughters--Annabella, who married her cousin   four times removed, Alexander  Mackenzie, Melvaig, the male  representative of Alastair Cam,  with issue  and Margaret, who  married John Mackenzie, also in  Melvaig, with issue--several sons  and daughters.  The sons were also  married and left numerous descendants in Gairloch.  Ian Mor Mac  Alastair's other sons were (2)  Alexander, who died unmarried;  (3) Roderick, who married, with  issue; (4) Colin, married, with  issue; (5) Roderick Ban, unmarried;  (6) John Og; and (7) Kenneth,  married, with issue.  JOHN OG,  who was tacksman of Loch-a-Druing, married Jessie, daughter of  Miles Macrae, with issue, among  others--Alastair Og Mackenzie, tacksman of Mellan Charles, who  married Margaret, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, of  Badachro, with issue--James  Mackenzie, who died unmarried a  few years ago, at Poolewe; John  Mackenzie, of the Beauties of  Gaelic Poetry and several other  works, who died, unmarried in his  father's house at Kirkton, in 1848,  and to whose memory a monument  was erected in 1878, by a few of  his Celtic admirers on a projecting  rock overlooking his grave in the "Sliochd Alastair Chaim burying  ground, within the ancient Chapel in the Gairloch Churchyard.   Alastair Og had also several  daughters, married and unmarried,  of whom three are still alive.

We shall now revert to  Alastair Cam's eldest son, by Janet  Mackenzie of Ord--

I.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, who married Isabella, daughter of  William Mackenzie of Sand, with issue, among others,--

II.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE, Melvaig, who married Mary,  daughter of William Mackenzie, of the same place, with issue, along with  a younger son Murdoch,--

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, also in Melvaig, who married  Mary, daughter of Hugh Morrison, Sand, with issue--

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, designated, Highland fashion,  as "Alastair Mac Alastair, Mhic Eachainn, `ic Alastair, `ic Ruairidh, Mhic  Alastair Chaim Mac an Tighearna."  He married his third cousin,  Annabella, eldest daughter of John Mor Mackenzie, "Ian Mor Aireach,"  great grandson of "Alastair Cam Mac an Tighearna," with issue, an only  son--

V.  HECTOR   MACKENZIE, born in April, 1810.   His father died before Hector was a  year old, and the widow soon after  married, as her second husband,  Alexander, son of Alexander Grant,  "Bard mor an t-Slagain," with issue  --three sons, Roderick, John,  Duncan, and Margaret, who  subsequently emigrated with their  father and mother to Cape Breton,  where they settled, married, and  have large families, and another  daughter, Janet, who married and  remained in Gairloch.  His father  left Hector what was considered a substantial sum of money for those  day's, in the hands of Murdo Mackenzie, tacksman of Melvaig,  one of the original Sand family, and a near relative of Gairloch, but  he never received a penny of it.  He  was thus left a penniless orphan  and was obliged to fight his way in  the world as best he could as an  honest, industrious, and respected  crofter and fisherman.  He married  on the 17th of February, 1838,  Catherine, daughter of Roderick,  eldest son of Alexander Campbell,  "Alastair Buidhe Mac Iomhair," the  well-known Gairloch Gaelic Bard,  by his wife Catherine, daughter of  Roderick, son of William  Mackenzie of Shieldaig, a cadet of  the Gairloch family.  By his wife  Catherine Campbell (who died at  Inverness on the 20th of January,  1882, and was buried at Gairloch),  or more correctly MacIver (the  family having only discarded the  older and better name and adopted  the new within living memory),  Hector Mackenzie, who is still  alive in his 84th year, had issue--

1.  Alexander, of Park  House, Inverness, who was born on  Christmas Day, 1838.  He was for  seventeen years an active member  of the Town Council and a Police  Commissioner of Inverness  four  years Dean of Guild and a  Magistrate of the Burgh, as well as  a Commissioner of Supply and  Justice of Peace for the County.  He was also a member of the first  Inverness County Council, and took a prominent part in its proceedings.   In 1875 he founded the Celtic  Magazine, which he owned and  conducted for thirteen years until it  was incorporated with the Scottish  Highlander newspaper in 1888.  In  1885 he started the Scottish  Highlander, which he has managed  and edited since, and which now,  though still nominally carried on as  a Limited Liability Company, is  practically his own property.  He is  the author of several Clan histories  --that of the Mackenzies, the first  edition of which appeared in 1879;  of the Macdonalds, in 1881; of the  Mathesons, in 1882; of the  Camerons, in 1884; of the  Macleods, in 1889; and of the  Chisholms, in 1891. He is also the  author of The History of the  Highland Clearances, which  created quite a sensation when it  appeared; of the Social State of the  Isle of Skye; the Prophecies of the  Brahan Seer; and of several other  minor works.  He married, on the  3rd of August, 1865, Emma Sarah  Rose (author of Tales of the  Heather) only surviving daughter  of Thomas Whittaker Rose,  Henrietta Park Villas, Bath (still  living in his eighty-sixth year), by  his first wife Sarah Cole, with issue  --Hector Rose Mackenzie, solicitor,  Inverness, who was born in  Ipswich, on the 25th of February,  1867, and married on the 19th of  July, 1892, Barbara Sutherland,  elder surviving daughter of John  Anderson, late of the 71st  Regiment of Foot (The Highland  Light Infantry); Thomas William,  born in Inverness on the 4th of  August, 1875; Alastair Ian, born on  the 30th of December, 1880;  Kenneth John, born on the 17th of  October, 1885; Catharine Anne,  born on the 24th of February, 1868,  died on the 1st of August in the  same year, and buried in Ipswich  Cemetery; Annie Emma;  Catharine, who died in infancy in  1873; Mary Rose; and Emma  Barabel.

2.  Roderick, born on the 13th of July, 1844, a member of the firm  of William Cumming & Co., wholesale woollen warehousemen, Huddersfield, but residing in London.  He married, first, on the 18th of  January, 1871, Julia Catherine, eldest daughter of Thomas Lewis  shipowner, Sunderland, with issue--William Frank, who was born on the  6th of October, 1874; Hector Dundas, born on the 22nd of July, 1876;  Catherine Louisa, who died in her thirteenth year, on the 11th of July,  1884, while on a holiday visit, at Inverness; Ellen Maria; and Mary  Josephine.  His first wife having died on the 14th of June, 1881, Roderick  married, secondly, on the 18th of December, 1889, Mary Lang, daughter  of John Sandford, Cambuslang.

3.  William, clothier,  Inverness, born on the 12th of  November, 1846, and married on  the 16th of July, 1873, Annabella  Bertrude, daughter of Alexander  Grant, tacks-man of Easter  Gallovie, Strathspey, with issue--Alexander Roderick, C.E., born on  the 17th of May, 1874; Hector  Donald Grant, born on the 20th of  June, 1875; William John  Macintyre, born on the 18th of  January, 1877; James Grant, born  on the 20th of June, 1878, died on  the 23rd of September, 1889;  Arthur Henderson, born on the 9th  of February, 1880; Allan Campbell,  born on the 19th of April, 1881;  Eneas Kenneth, born on the 9th of  March, 1883; Andrew Duncan,  born on the 7th of January, 1885,  died on the 2nd of May, 1888;  Harry Macpherson, born on the  28th of October, 1887; Douglas  Mitchell, born on the 19th of  February, 1890; and Ella May, born  on the 21st of June, 1886, and died  on the 24th, three days after.

4.  Another Alexander, who served for twelve years in the 2nd Dragoons (Royal Scots Greys) in which he was Troop Sergeant-Major, and subsequently went abroad.

5.  Catherine, who married John Fraser, shipowner, Inverness, without issue.

6.  Mary, who married Alexander Fraser, and resides in  Cheltenham, with issue--Hector Alexander John, born on the 4th of May,  1883; Catherine Campbell; and Lily Mary.

7.  Annabella, who married George Mackenzie, draper, Ipswich, afterwards at Nairn and Inverness with issue--William Hector, born on the  9th of January, 1877 Alastair, born on the 5th of March, 1878; George  John, born on the 14th of April, 1884; Marion; and Catherine Campbell,  who died in infancy.  Annabella died at Edinburgh on the 9th of May,  1888, and is buried there.

This is the lease, with its miscellaneous rent, curious and antiquated conditions, referred to at page 479--

I, Sir Alexander Mackenzie  of Gairloch, Baronet, heritable  proprietor of the lands and others  under-written with the pertinents,  do hereby set and in tack and  assedation for the full space of  twenty years, lets to John  Mackenzie, tacksman of the equal  half of the quarter lands of  Erradale-a-phris, or North Erradale,  all and whole the said possession as  presently occupied by him, with all the shielings, mosses, moors,  biggings and universal pertinents thereof, all lying within the parish  of Gairloch and Sheriffdom of  Ross.  To him and his lawful heirs  whatsoever, to he occupied and  "brooked" by them during the  foresaid space of twenty years,  without any hindrance or breach of  tack whatever; and it is hereby  provided, nothwithstanding the  date hereof, that this tack  commences directly at the term of  Whitsunday in the year of our Lord  one thousand seven hundred and  sixty-five years, and to continue  thereafter, aye and until the number  of twenty years complete be  expired, and I, the above-named Sir  Alexander, do hereby bind and  oblige me, my heirs, and  successors, to make this tack good,  valid, and sufficient to the effect  foresaid at all hands and against all  deadly, as law will,--For the which  cause, and on the other part, the  said John Mackenzie by his  acceptance hereof binds himself,  his heirs, and successors, to pay to  me, the above Sir Alexander, and  my successors, or our factors  having proper powers thereanent,  as a yearly rent furth of the said  equal half of the quarter lands of  Erradale foresaid all and whole the sum of one hundred and thirty-one  marks and a half Scots money two marks three shillings and fourpence  money foresaid, crown rent; ten  marks ten shillings and eight pence  in lieu of peats, or as the same shall  reasonably be from time to time  regulated by the proprietor a mark  of cruive money, twenty marks  money foresaid of stipend, or as the  same shall happen to be settled  `twixt the landlord and minister;  two long carriages, two custom  wedders, a fed kid, a stone of  cheese, and half a stone weight of  butter; eight hens, or as usual eight  men yearly at their own expense to shear corn or cut hay a davoch of  ploughing, and four horses for mucking.   The above John also  obliges himself and his foresaids to  attend road duty yearly four days,  with all his servants and sub-tenants, or pay a yearly capitation  optional to the landlord during this  lease under breach of tack, and to  sell all the cod and ling that shall  be caught by him and his foresaids  at the current prices to our order  and to dispose of all his marketable cattle to our drover at reasonable  rates, also under breach of tack and  further the above John and his  successors are, by their acceptance  hereof, become bound to pay to  me, the above Sir Alexander  Mackenzie and my foresaids, in the  way of a grassum at the term of  Whitsunday, one thousand seven  hundred and sixty-five years  foresaid, all and whole the sum of  two hundred and fifty marks Scots  money, and the like sum at the end  of every five years of this tack,  making in all the sum of one  thousand marks Scots money; and  both parties become hereby bound  to fulfil the premises to one another  hinc inde under the failure or  penalty of ten pounds sterling to be  paid by the party failing to the party performing, or willing to perform,  his or their part and for the more  security I consent that these  presents be registered for conservation in the Books of  Council and Session, that letters of  horning and all needful executions  may pass hereon in form as effeirs  and thereto constitute our  procurators.  In testimony of which  these presents, consisting of this  and the former two pages of  stamped paper are written and duly  signed by me, Sir Alexander  Mackenzie of Gairloch, at  Flowerdale, this fifth day of  September in the year of our Lord  one thousand seven hundred and  sixty years.

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  BELMADUTHY.

I.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, first of Belmaduthy, was the eldest son of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of  Gairloch, by his second wife,  Isabel, eldest daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, natural son  of Colin Cam, XI. of Kintail, and  progenitor of the families of  Applecross and Coul.  He married  Mary, daughter of James Cuthbert  of Alterlies and Easter Drakies,  Inverness (sasine of the lands to  them in 1657) with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Isabel, who married John Munro of Fayres.

3.  Catherine, who, as his second wife, married Alexander  Mackenzie, IV. of Loggie and Inchcoulter, without issue.

4.  Janet, who in 1679, as his second wife, married her cousin, Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of Gairloch, with issue.

5.  Jean, who married Hugh Baillie of Kinmylies, Sheriff-Clerk of Ross.

6.  Mary, who married Murdoch Mackenzie of Sand.

William and  his wife died in the same week at Belmaduthy, in 1658, and were buried at Chanonry, when he was succeeded by his only son,

II.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, second of Belmaduthy, who  married Catherine, eldest daughter by the second marriage of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, Baronet, I. of Coul (sasine 1693), with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who became first of Pitlundie.

3.  George, who got Culbo  (sasine to him in 1721), and  married Mary, daughter of  Alexander Forrester of Cullenauld,  with issue--Isabel, who married  Fraser of Achnagairn; Anne, who  married Dr John Mackenzie and  Catherine, who, in 1713, married,  as his first wife, John Mackenzie,  III. of Gruinard, with issue--his heir and successor.  George, who  died in 1765, having left no male issue, his nephew, William  Mackenzie, II. of Pitlundie,  succeeded to Culbo.

4.  Anna, who married Alexander Mackenzie, M.D., eldest son of Bernard Mackenzie of Sandylands, on record in 1707.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, third of Belmaduthy, who married  first, Margaret, daughter of Alexander Rose of Clava (sasine to her in 1717), with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  George, M.D. in the Queen's Dragoons, who died unmarried.

3.  Hugh, a merchant in Fortrose, who died unmarried.

4.  Alexander, who commanded a ship in the Guinea trade, and  died unmarried.

5.  Catharine, who married William Tolmie, merchant, Fortrose.

6.  Elizabeth, who married John Matheson of Bennetsfield.

7.  Jean, who married Simon Mackenzie, first of Scotsburn, with issue.

8.  Isabel, who married Lieutenant William Mackenzie, of the 77th Regiment (Montgomery's Highlanders.)  He was killed at Fort du Quesne  in 1759.

William  married, secondly, Elizabeth (who died in 1772),  daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, first Baronet and IV. of Scatwell,  with issue--

9.  Kenneth, M.D., who practised at Reading.

10.  Roderick, first of Flowerburn, of whom presently.

11.  Lilias, who married Roderick Macleod, II. of Cadboll, with issue--his heir and successor.

12.  A daughter, who married Fraser of Culduthel.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, fourth of Belmaduthy, who married  Rebecca, daughter of John Mackenzie, I. of Delvine, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who died young.

3.  Kenneth, a merchant at Patna, who married a Miss Mackenzie, in the East Indies.

4.  Margaret, who died unmarried.

5.  Rebecca, who married John Aird, merchant, London.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, fifth of Belmaduthy, Advocate.  He  married Maria, daughter of John  Lancaster, of Cambridge, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  William, who married Miss Hay, Huntingdon, without issue.

3.  George, who married Miss Lynch, without issue.

4.  Cecilia;  5.  Maria;  6.  Rebecca, all unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, sixth of Belmaduthy, who married  Margaret Hay, Huntingdon, with issue--

1.  John Kenneth;  2.  Anna Maria;  and 3.  Catherine.  The present representation of the family is unknown.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  PITLUNDIE  AND  CULBO.

I.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, first of Pitlundie, was the second son of Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Belmaduthy, by his wife, Catherine, daughter  of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, Baronet, I. of Coul.  He married Anne,  daughter of Hector Mackenzie of Bishop-Kinkell, second son of Alex-ander Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, by his wife, Ann, daughter of Sir John  Grant of Grant by Ann Ogilvy, daughter of the Earl of Findlater, with  issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Margaret, who, on the 9th of September, 1728, as his second wife, married John Matheson, first of Attadale, ancestor of Sir Kenneth  James Matheson, Baronet of Lochalsh and Ardross.

Kenneth was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  WILLIAM MACKENZIE, second of Pitlundie  and first of Culbo, succeeding to  the latter as heir-male of his uncle  George.  He married a daughter of  George Mackenzie of Inchcoulter,  with issue--

1.  George, his heir and successor.

2.  William, of whom there is no trace.

3.  A daughter, who married Alexander Mackenzie of Cleanwaters.

4.  Anne, who married Roderick Mackenzie of Achvannie, with  issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, third  of  Pitlundie and second of  Culbo, Sheriff-Substitute of Ross.  He married Anne, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of Davochmaluag, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, who died unmarried.

3.  Captain Kenneth, of the H.E.I.C.S., who was killed at Java, in 1811, unmarried.

4.  Major Duncan Henry of the Madras Horse Artillery, who  married Mary, daughter of Lachlan Mackinnon of Corry, Isle of Skye,  with issue--George William Mackinnon, who died unmarried, and Lieutenant-Colonel Lachlan Mackinnon of the Madras Army, who died unmarried. Major Duncan died in 1834.

5.  George of Drynie, a solicitor in Dingwall.  He married  Catherine, daughter of John Macrae, Sheriff of Dingwall, with issue--John, a surgeon in the Madras Army, who died unmarried in 1872; the  Rev. George William, English Chaplain at Frankfort, who married Fanny Taylor; Charles, who died unmarried; Duncan Anne, who married Thomas Ballantine, with issue--a daughter; Elizabeth Proby, who married the Rev.  W. Hutchins, Vicar of Louth, Lincolnshire, with issue; Isabella, who  married the Rev. William Baden Powell, Vicar of Newick, Sussex; and  Margaret, unmarried.  The last-named three daughters are now dead and  their father, George of Drynie, died in 1865.

6.  John, a solicitor in Tam.   He married Christian, daughter of Captain Kenneth Mackenzie, of  Kerrisdale, third son of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, third  Baronet and N. of Gairloch, with  issue--George, who died young;  and Kenneth, who died unmarried.   John died in 1852.

7.  Mary Proby, who married James Macdonell, W.S., without  issue.

8.  Elizabeth, who married Thomas Simpson, son of the minister of Avoch, with issue--two sons and two daughters, all dead.

9.  Anne, who died unmarried.

George died in  1802 (his wife dying in 1832), and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, M.D., of the H.E.I.C.S., fourth of Pitlundie and  third of Culbo.  He married Margaret (who died in 1841),  daughter of Thomas Allan, with issue--

1.  George Kenneth, who died young.

2.  William Ord, M.D., Deputy-Inspector-General of Army  Hospitals, who became his father's heir.

3.  Thomas Allan, Major 3d Light Cavalry, Bombay, who married Clara, daughter of J  Birdwood, judge, Bombay Civil Service, with issue--William, who died unmarried; and Allan Stanley, who died young.   He  died in 1856.

4.  Duncan Proby, who married Cecilia Margaret, daughter of  William Dudgeon, Edinburgh, with issue--three sons and four daughters.   He died in 1884.

5.  George Richard, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Scott, W.S., Edinburgh.

6.  Robert Cleghorn, who married Ellen Maria, daughter of  Colonel Flexman, Tasmania with issue--two daughters. He died in 1866.

7.  Agnes Helen, who  married Charles Garstin, of the  Bengal Civil Service with issue--William Edmund, Under Secretary  for State at Cairo, who married  Mary Isabel North, London; Alfred  Allan, Lieutenant-Colonel 77th  Regiment; Helen Julia; Alice  Margaret; and Mary Annette, who  married the Rev. Gordon Crowdy,  Sherfield Rectory, Basingstoke.   Agnes Helen died in 1871.

8.  Margaret Anne, who died young.

William sold the estate of Pitlundie in 1805 to Graham of Drynie.

He died in 1866, and was succeeded in Culbo by his eldest surviving son,

V.  WILLIAM  ORD  MACKENZIE, now of Culbo, M.D., Deputy-Inspector-General of Army Hospitals.  He married Mary Susan, daughter  of the late Henry Holmes, London, with issue--

1.  Montague Allan-Ord, who married Frances Gordon, daughter of the Rev. James Rennie, Glasgow.

2.  William Henry Allan-Ord, who married Constance Jane,  daughter of Thomas Llewellyn, Shelton, Staffordshire.

3.  Stuart Allan-Ord, who married Isabel, daughter of Edward B. Cargill, of the Cliffs, Dunedin, New Zealand.

4.  Edith Allan-Holmes.

5.  Gertrude Helen Allan-Holmes, who married Edwin Claud  Porter Scott, of Hampstead.

6.  Margaret Douglas Allan- Holmes.

7.  Mary Susan Allan-Holmes, who died young.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  FLOWERBURN.


I.  RODERICK MACKENZIE, first of Flowerburn, was second son of William, III. of Belmaduthy, by his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir  Kenneth Mackenzie, IV. of Scatwell, Bart.  He married Grace, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie of Inchcoulter, with issue--

II.  An only daughter, second of Flowerburn, who married a Mr Kilgour.  She succeeded to the estate, and may be called second of Flowerburn.  She had issue--

1.  Roderick Kilgour, her heir.

2.  Elizabeth Townsend.

She was succeeded by her only son,

III.  RODEEICK KILGOUR-MACKENZIE, third of  Flowerburn.  He assumed the name  of Mackenzie.  He married Anne,  second daughter of John Grant of  Glenmoriston, and died in 1812,  leaving an only son,

IV.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fourth of Flowerburn, who  married Harriet, daughter of Colonel Grogan of Seafield, County of  Dublin, with issue--

1.  Roderick Grogan, his heir and successor.

2.  Elma, who married Major John Macdonald Smith, Madras Staff Corps, with issue.

3.  Georgina Adelaide, who married Major Roderick Mackenzie,  VIII. of Kincraig, and died in 1889.

He was succeeded on his death in 1848, by his only son,

V.  RODERICK  GROGAN  MACKENZIE, fifth of Flowerburn.

He was born in 1844, was a Cornet in the 16th Lancers, and for many years afterwards an officer in the Highland Rifle (Ross-shire) Militia, in  which, at his death he held the rank of Colonel.  He married on the 22nd  of February, 1872, Eva Mary Marjory Erskine, third daughter of Sir Evan  Mackenzie of Kilcoy, Baronet, with issue--Eva Georgina Lillie, and Alice Maude Harriet.  He died on the 13th of October, 1892, and was succeeded  as representative of the family by his eldest daughter,

VI.  EVA  GEORGINA  LILLIE  MACKENZIE, who came of age  in 1893.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  GROUNDWATER.

THIS family is descended from Alastair Roy Mackenzie, a natural son of  John Glassich Mackenzie, II. of Gairloch.

ALEXANDER  ROY  MACKENZIE married a daughter of John  Roy MacRory, with issue, among several others, a son, John Mackenzie,  who resided at Coirre-Mhic-Cromaill in Torridon, and a daughter Anne, called in Gaelic "Anna bheag nam mac mora," who married John Matheson of Fernaig, with issue--John Mor Matheson, who succeeded who succeeded his father there and afterwards purchased Bennetsfield in  the Black Isle, County of Ross.

JOHN  MACKENZIE, son of Alastair Roy, married first, a  daughter of Hector Cam, natural son of Hector Roy, I. of Gairloch, with  issue--

1.  Duncan "Mac Ean Mhic Allister," who married Helen, daughter of Hector, son of Kenneth of Meikle Allan, son of Hector Roy, apparently  without issue.

2.  Murdoch, progenitor of this family.

3.  Alexander, who settled  in Strathnaver, Sutherlandshire,  with issue--one son, the Rev.  Hector Mackenzie, A.M., who was  ordained minister of Kingussie on  the 30th of November, 1670, and  remained there until 1688, when he  was translated to Inverness, and is said to have been the last  Episcopalian minister who  officiated as parish minister there.   He was married and had issue--four sons, the Rev. James and  Alexander, both ministers in  Edinburgh; James of Drumshiuch,  M.D., and Fellow of the College of  Physicians of Edinburgh.  He  practised in Worcester for many  years with great reputation and  success.  He was elected Physician  to the Infirmary of that town in  1745, which once he held until he  retired from his profession in 1750.   He then settled in Kidderminster, where he was living in 1751.  He  was author of a medical work of  high repute in its day--The History  of Health and the Art of Preserving  It, first published in Edinburgh in  1758, followed by new editions in  1759 and 1760.  He also wrote a  volume  of Devout Meditations  issued shortly before his death, in  Scotland, so far as known, without  issue, and probably unmarried; also  William, who was a schoolmaster  in Cromarty, afterwards lost on the  Coast of Guinea.

4.  Roderick "Mac Ean Mhic Allister," who lived in Lochbroom  and married a daughter of John Maciver there, with issue--one son.

5.  Donald "Mor Mac Ean Mhic Allister," who died without issue.

6.  John "Gearr Mac Ean Mhic Allister," unmarried at the date of the Applecross manuscript in 1669.  John married, secondly, his first cousin, a daughter of Hector  Mackenzie, by an Assynt lady, eldest son of Kenneth Mackenzie, first of  Meikle Allan, now Allangrange, second lawful son of Hector Roy  Mackenzie, progenitor of the family of Gairloch, with issue--

7.  Hector "Mac Ean Mhic Allister."  He married a daughter of  Hector Mackenzie of Mellan, with issue--one son.  He married, thirdly, a daughter of William Mackenzie of  Shieldaig, with issue--

8.  Donald "Og Mac Ean Mhic Allister," who was killed in the  Scots Army in England in 1645.

John was succeeded as representative of the family by his second son,

I.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, who was born in 1600, and  educated for the ministry.  Referring to this Murdoch's cousin, John Mor  Matheson of Fernaig and subsequently of Bennetsfield, the author of the "Iomaire" manuscript says, that John "was taken up" by the Bishop of  Moray, who resided at Kinkell (hence no doubt Bishop-Kinkell, the name  by which the place has since been known).  The Bishop "kept him for  some time at school and gave him 500 merks Scots to traffic therewith.   After following the mercantile line for some time, in which he was very  successful, he began cattle dealing, by which he became master of a good  deal of money."  John, in consequence cut out a career for himself.  His  cousin, the Bishop, pointed out to him the great source of wealth which  might open to him if he succeeded in driving some of the superfluous  herds of black cattle which at that time abounded in the Highlands to the southern markets, and  which were then of scarcely any value among his  own countrymen, but on the other hand often served as a strong temptation to spoliations from their southern enemies, and deadly feuds  among themselves.  John Mor had the good sense to act on his Rev.  cousin's advice, and he soon amassed a sufficient fortune to buy the estate  of Bennetsfield and other lands, including Easter Suddie, in the Black Isle,  County of Ross. [Mackenzie's History of the Mathesons, pp. 17-18.]

The Rev. Murdoch was Chaplain of Lord Reay's Regiment, in the  army of Gustavus Adolphus during the Bohemian and Swedish wars, and subsequently minister of Contin and Inverness in succession.  He was  transferred from Inverness to Elgin, and while there was, in 1662,  appointed Bishop of Moray, and afterwards of Orkney, arriving at  Kirkwall on the 28th of August, 1677, where he was the last to occupy  Earl Patrick Stewart's Palace, in which he died.  He married Margaret,  only daughter and heiress of Donald MacLey, Bailie of Fortrose.  She died in 1676, and is buried in Elgin Cathedral.  He died in 1688, and was  interred in the Session House of St. Magnus Cathedral, which bad been  given to him as a burial place for himself and his descendants, and used by  them as such, until any further interments in it were, some years ago,  prohibited.  He left issue by his wife--

1.  Sir Alexander  Mackenzie of Broomhill (sasine in  1686), and Pitarrow, in Kincardine.   He was Commissary of Inverness  and Sheriff of the Bishopric of  Orkney, his father when appointing  him to the latter office describing  him as "Mr Alexander Mackenzie, Commissary of Inverness, my  eldest lawful son."  In 1706 he  appears among the heritors of  Caithness for the Nethertoun of  Stroma in the parish of Canisbay.    He is again on record in 1713, in  which year he disponed the  Nethertoun of Stroma to his  nephew, Murdoch Kennedy, son of  his sister Jane, and her husband,  John Kennedy of Carmunks. Sir  Alexander of Broomhill had an  only son, Colonel Alexander  Mackenzie of Hampton, Virginia,  who left his English estates to his  nephew, Andrew Young of  Castleyards.

2.  George of Pitarrow, of whom nothing is known.

3.  William Mackenzie, Commissary of Orkney, who, in 1679,  married Margaret Stewart of Newark, with issue--Murdoch, born in 1680, who was invited to become minister of the Episcopal Meeting House of  Kirkwall, but emigrated to New England in 1714, and a daughter Margaret, who married Andrew Young of Castleyards, Kirkwall also with  issue--a daughter who married Riddoch of Cairston, Provost of Kirkwall.

4.  The Rev. Thomas Mackenzie, minister of Shapinshay, Orkney. He was born about 1652, and was appointed minister of Shapinshay on the  5th of May, 1678.  On the 1st of May, 1679 he married Elspet, daughter of James Blaikie of Burness with issue--Murdoch, who succeeded his  grandfather, the Bishop, as representative of the family; James, N.P., who  seems to have succeeded his brother Murdoch; Alexander, of whom there  is no trace; Thomas, of whom also nothing is known; Sibella, who married  William, second son of George Traill of Quendale, with issue--Anna,  who, in 1716, married the Rev. James, Nisbet, Stromness; Margaret; and  Anna.  The Rev. Thomas Mackenzie died, aged 36 years, on the 7th of  February, 1688, a few days before his father.

5.  Captain James, of the Dragoons, who married the Hon. Frances, daughter of Andrew, eighth Lord Gray, with issue--a daughter, Frances,  who married a clergyman in England.

6.  David, who died young, before 1676, and is buried in Elgin Cathedral.

7.  Jane, who, on the 15th of  May, 1678, married her cousin,  John Kennedy of Carmunks, with  issue--Murdoch, already referred to  as afterwards of Stroma.

8.  Mary, who, on the 4th of April, 1678, married George Balfour of Faray.

9.  Jacobina, who settled in Dundee.

The male representation of  Bishop Murdoch's three eldest sons --Sir Alexander of  Broomhill,  George Mackenzie of Pitarrow, and  William Mackenzie, Commissary  of Orkney--having failed, the representation of the family  devolved upon

II.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, eldest son of the Rev. Thomas  Mackenzie, minister of Shapinshay.  Murdoch was master of the Grammar  School of Kirkwall, and was alive in November, 1739, a receipt given by  him in that month being still extant. He appears to have died unmarried  when the representation of the family fell to his next brother,

III.  JAMES  MACKENZIE, N.P., who, on the 14th of March,  1709, married Marion, third daughter of Thomas Traill of Tirlet, with issue--

1.  Thomas, merchant in Kirkwall, afterwards of Groundwater.

2.  Murdoch Mackenzie, of Minehead, Somersetshire,  Hydropapher to the Navy, and described in one of the Gairloch MSS.,  written by James Mackenzie, a member of this family, as "Navigator to  His Majesty, known by his accurate surveys of the western coast of Great Britain and Ireland, and whose abilities will render him famous to posterity."  He went round the world with Captain Cook's second expedition in 1772, died unmarried in London, and is buried at Oxford.

3.  James, S.S.C., described in one of the Gairloch MSS. as "once in the service of the Earl of Morton," in the Orkneys, author of a treatise  on "The General Grievances and Oppressions of the Isles of Orkney and  Shetland," and of another on Security.  He was himself the author of this Gairloch MS.  He died unmarried in London about 1733.

IV.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE of Groundwater, who married  Elizabeth, daughter of the Rev. William Blaw, Westray, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who succeeded his brother Murdoch.

3.  Mary, married Thomas Balfour of Huip, with issue.

Thomas died before 1781, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE of Groundwater, who married  Miss Cox, and died without issue, when he was succeeded by his brother,

VI.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, who married Anne Wolf, with  issue--

1.  Thomas, who succeeded his father.

2.  Elizabeth, who married Louis Lavencie, London.

3.  Barbara, who, as his  first wife, married Robert Hodson,  London, with issue.

4.  Mary, who married Richard Bray, London.

5.  Jane, who married John Cramer, London.

6.  Nancy, who died, unmarried, at Kirkwall, May, 1848.

Kenneth was succeeded by his only son,

VII.  CAPTAIN  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, of the H E I C S, who  married Elizabeth Ayton, London, with issue--

1.  Thomas, his heir and successor.

2.  Elizabeth Anne, who  married, in 1831, Alexander  Russell Duguid, M.D., son of the  Rev. John Duguid, minister of  Evie, Orkney, with issue--(1) John,  who was born on the 25th of  March, 1838, and died unmarried,  at Falmouth, on the 7th of October, 1865; (2) Alexander, born on the  26th of November, 1840, and died, unmarried, at Peckham, London, on  the 3rd of January, 1884; (3) Thomas, born on the 4th of  September, 1843, and died in  London, unmarried, on the 19th of  May, 1874; (4) Elizabeth, who died  in childhood; (5) Jane, who  married, first, on the 11th of  September, 1855, Robert Heddle,  second son of Robert Heddle of  Melsetter, with issue--Elizabeth,  who died in infancy, in Toronto,  Canada; and James Alexander, who  was born on the 21st of July, 1856,  and died at Kirkwall, unmarried, on  the 25th of September, 1876.  Her first husband, Robert Heddle, died  on the 28th of August, 1860, and  she married, secondly, on the 30th  of November, 1874, John Armit  Bruce, Sheriff-Clerk of Orkney,  with issue--an only daughter, Alexandra Esther Heddle.  (6)  Mary Hamilton, who on the 5th of April, 1859 married John Guthrie  Iverach, Kirkwall, a cadet of the Macivers Buidhe of Quoycrook,  Caithness, eldest son of William Iverach of Wideford, Orkney, with  issue--Alexander William, who was born in 1860 and died in  infancy; William, born on the 21st of June, 1865; Mary Elizabeth; and  Margaret Guthrie.  Her husband, John Guthrie Iverach, died at  Wideford, on the 31st of October, 1875.  (7) Sarah Anne, who, in   May,  1864, married John  Thomson, Codnor, Derbyshire, son  of Thomson, Alnwick,  Northumberland, with issue--Alexander Russell Duguid, who  died in infancy Jessie Elizabeth,  who married Percy Clarke,  Nottingham, with issue--Mary Hamilton Iverach, who married  Frederick Grimsly, Birmingham,  with issue--Florence Mackenzie  Henrietta; Louisa Sarah, who died  in infancy; and Gwendoline  Averill.

Captain Thomas, H.E.I.C.S., died in Jamaica, early in the present century, and was succeeded by his only son,

VIII.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE of Groundwater, who died  unmarried, at Kirkwall, in November, 1847, when the property was sold to  the Earl of Orkney, and the lineal representation of the family went into the female line, the nearest male relative at present being the son of his  niece, Mary Hamilton Iverach, who died 3rd May, 1867,

IX.  WILLIAM  IVERACH, Wideford, Orkney, who was born on  the 21st of June, 1865, and is still unmarried.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  DAVOCHMALUAG.

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was the second son of Kenneth Mackenzie, VII. of Kintail by his second wife, Agnes, daughter of Hugh, VIth Lord Lovat.  He married Margaret, daughter of Sir  William Munro of Fowlis, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, who was married three times, and had numerous issue, many of whose descendants are well-known and in good positions at the  present day.  From his second son Roderick, by his father's second wife, a  daughter of Urquhart, Sheriff of Cromarty, were descended the late Rev  John Mackenzie, minister of Resolis; the late Hector Mackenzie, of  Taagan, Kenlochewe  the late Rev. Peter Mackenzie, D.D., minister of  Ferintosh, ex-Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of  Scotland; the Rev. Colin Mackenzie, minister of Contin; the Rev Kenneth  Alexander Mackenzie, LL. D., present minister of Kingussie; Thomas  Mackenzie, Sheriff-Substitute of Sutherlandshire; the late Major-General  Alexander Mackenzie, C.B., Colonel of the 78th Highlanders; the Rev.  John Gibson, ex-minister of Avoch; Mrs Alexander, Bedford, and several  others, all of whom are shown in Sheet 4 of Sir James Dixon Mackenzie's Genealogical Tables.

3.  A daughter, who married Fraser of Belladrum.

4.  A daughter, married William Ross of Invercharron.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, second of Davochmaluag, who  married Anne, daughter of Donald Macdonald of Sleat, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  John Dubh, of whom no trace.

3.  Mary, who had a natural  son, Alexander, progenitor of the  family of Applecross and Coul, by  Colin Cam Mackenzie, XI. of  Kintail. She afterwards married,  first, John Mor Grant, with issue;  and, secondly, Cameron of Glen-Nevis.

Four other daughters married, respectively, Mackenzie of Kildun; Murdoch Mackenzie, III. of Achilty; Iver MacIver, Lochbroom, and Donald MacChoinnich Mhic Mhurchaidh.

Roderick was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, third of Davochmaluag, who  married a daughter of Ross of Balnagown, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  John, minister of Lochbroom, who married  his cousin, a  daughter of Hector, son of Alexander, I. of Davochmaluag, with issue--William and Kenneth.

3.  Kenneth, of whom nothing is known.

He had also a natural son, Murdo, Chamberlain of the Lewis, who married a daughter of George Munro of Katewell, with issue--several sons.

Kenneth was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth of Davochmaluag,  served heir to his father on the 30th of December, 1611.  He married  Margaret, daughter of Hector Munro of Fowlis, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, who married Mary, daughter of the Rev. Mr Mackenzie, minister of Sleat, with issue.

3.  The eldest daughter married Robert Gray.

4.  Another married Alexander MacRae of Inverinate.

5.  A third married Murdo Matheson, of Balmacarra.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fifth of Davochmaluag, who was  a strong Loyalist.  His estates were confiscated, a garrison was placed in  his house by Oliver Cromwell, and he suffered great hardships during the  Commonwealth.  His friends took the officer who commanded the  garrison in Davochmaluag house by surprise, and, in exchange for the  officer's release, Mackenzie secured his peace.  A sasine to him is dated 1640.  He married Janet, daughter of Fraser of Belladrum, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  John, a Captain in Colonel Hill's Regiment.

3.  George, who married Annabella, daughter of Kenneth  Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, with issue.

4.  Roderick, who married a daughter of Mackenzie of Fairburn, with issue.

5.  Hector, merchant in Edinburgh, who died unmarried.

6.  Margaret, who married Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Tarvie,  with issue.

7.  A daughter, who married Bain of Knockbain.

8.  Another, who married the Rev. John Mackenzie, minister of Lochbroom.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, sixth of Davochmaluag, who  married, first, Mary, daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, first Baronet of Coul, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Roderick, who married a daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie of Dundonnel, with issue.

3.  Kenneth, who married a daughter of the Rev. John Mackenzie, minister of Fodderty and Archdeacon of Ross, with issue.

4.  A daughter, who, in 1689, married Alexander Forrester of Cullenauld.

5.  A daughter, who married Roderick, a brother of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Coul.

6.  A third, who married Donald, son of Roderick Mackenzie, V. of Fairburn all three with issue.

He married, secondly, the widow of Mackenzie of Gairloch,  without issue.

Kenneth was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, seventh of Davoch-maluag.  He was appointed Sheriff-Substitute of Ross in 1698.  He  married first, Janet, daughter of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Coul,  with issue--an only daughter, Janet,  who married Aeneas Macleod of Camuscurry, with issue; marriage  contract 28th April, 1715; tocher, 3000 merks.  She married,  secondly, John MacKenzie,  chirurgeon, Fortrose.

He married, secondly, Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Rose of Clava (marriage contract 1695), with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who married a Miss Gordon, with issue--two sons.   He died in Jamaica.

3.  John, who married his  cousin Mary, daughter of his uncle Roderick, with issue--(1)  Alexander, who went to  Melbourne, Australia. and married,  with issue, Alexander, now in  Brisbane, Queensland.  (2) Captain  John Mackenzie, who married  abroad, with issue--a daughter,  Elizabeth, who died at Brighton, in  1856, without issue.  (3) Elizabeth  Mackenzie, who married, first, Richard Ord, of the Merkinch,  Inverness, with issue--(a) William Ord, M.D. in the H.E.I.C.S., who  died without issue; (b) John Ord, a  merchant in London, who married  with issue; (c) Richard, who died  young; (d) Mary, who married  Donald Fraser, solicitor, Inverness,  with issue among others--the late  John Fraser of Bunchrew, who  married Hester Mary Mostyn,  daughter of Edmund Lomax of  Netley Park, Surrey, with issue,  four sons and five daughters--Lieutenant-Colonel Edmund  Lomax, late of the 60th Rifles, now  of Bunchrew, unmarried; William  Francis Mostyn, who died,  unmarried, in 1881; Robert  Scarlett, who married Beatrice Anna, daughter of Captain  Alexander Watson Mackenzie, now  of Ord, with issue; and Richard  Agnew, late of the 78th  Highlanders (Ross-shire Buffs),  now Major 1st V. B. Cameron  Highlanders, and Brigade Major  Highland Volunteer Brigade,  unmarried.  John Fraser of  Bunchrew's daughters were--Hester Mary, who, on the 4th of  May, 1875, married Sir Archibald  Douglas Drummond Stewart,  Baronet, of Murthly and  Grandtully, who died in 1891,  without issue; Eliza, who died at  Cairo, unmarried, in 1889; Frances  Cecil Catherine; Laura, who  married Sir Francis William Grant,  Baronet of Monymusk, who died in  1887, without issue; and Georgina  Arbuthnot.  John Fraser of  Bunchrew died in 1876.  (e)  Prudence, Richard Ord's second  daughter, married Bailie John  Mackenzie, Inverness, son of John   Mackenzie of Ardnagrask, eldest  son of Hector Mackenzie of Sand,  Gairloch, and of Ardnagrask, with  issue (for which see Gairloch  Genealogy, pp. 416-418).   Elizabeth, on the death of her first  husband, Richard Ord, married,  secondly, as his second wife,  Farquhar Macrae of Inverinate,  without issue.

4.  Roderick, who died unmarried.

5.  Mary, who married  William Mackenzie of Achilty and  Kinnahaird, brother of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie V. of Coul,  with issue.

6.  Margaret, who married Captain Joseph Avery.  They afterwards went to Carolina, and left issue.

7.  Frances, who married John Macleod of Bay, Isle of Skye, with issue--one daughter.

8.  Christian, who married  William Tolmie, first a merchant at  Fortrose, and subsequently factor  for Macleod of Macleod at Dunvegan, Isle of Skye, with issue,  among others--John, tacksman of Uiginish, Skye, who married Jean,  daughter of Murdoch Mackenzie, merchant, Stornoway, son of  Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Avoch, with issue--John, who succeeded  his father at Uiginish and married a  daughter of Hugh MacCaskill,  tacksman of Tallisker, with issue--the Rev. John Tolmie, M.A.; Jean,  who married Laurence Skene,  banker, Portree, with issue  Normana, who married Donald MacLellan, tacksman of Vatersay,  Barra, with issue; and several other  sons and daughters, who emigrated  to Australia and New Zealand.  The  first-named John Tolmie had also  two daughters, one of whom,  Barbara, married John Macdonald,  tacksman of Scolpaig, North Uist,  with issue--the late John  Macdonald, Newton, one of the  finest men and best factors that  ever lived and Margaret, who married William MacNeil,  tacksman of Newton, North Uist,  and died in 1893 without issue.   The other daughter, Annabella,  married her cousin Hector, second  son of Captain John Mackenzie,  VI. of Ballone, with issue--John  Tolmie Mackenzie, now residing at Dunvegan, Isle of Skye.

Alexander was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, eighth and last Baron of  Davochmaluag. He also was Sheriff-Substitute of Ross and was Captain  of an Independent Company in 1746.  He married, first, Magdalene,  daughter of Hugh Rose, XV. of Kilravock (marriage contract 1723), with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, who died before his father, of consumption, in  1753, at Cowes, Isle of Wight, while serving an apprenticeship with George Mackenzie, merchant there.

2.  Jean, who married, first, William Mackenzie, son of Donald Mackenzie, V. of Kilcoy, without issue  and secondly, Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of Fairburn, with issue--Roderick, who succeeded as IX.  of Fairburn, and Kenneth, Lieutenant in the 21st Regiment, who served  under General Burgoyne in America, where he was killed, unmarried, at  Saratoga, in September, 1777.

3.  Beatrice, who married John Mackenzie, II. of Brae, with issue.

4.  Mary, who married Farquhar MacRae of Inverinate, with issue.

5.  Magdalene, who married the Rev. Alexander Mackay, minister  of Barvas, Lewis, without issue.

Alexander married, secondly, Anne, daughter of Roderick  Mackenzie, IV. of Applecross, and widow of Alexander Mackenzie of  Lentran, with issue--Anne, who married George Mackenzie, III. of  Pitlundie, Sheriff-Substitute of Ross, with issue.  He died without male  issue in 1776, and was succeeded by his grandson,

IX.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, ninth of Davochmaluag, son of  his eldest daughter, Jean, a Lieutenant in the army, killed, as already  stated, without issue, at Saratoga in 1777 and having survived his cousin, Roderick Mackenzie, eldest son of John Mackenzie, II. of Brae, the lineal representation of the family devolved upon Alexander Mackenzie, XI. of  Hilton.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  ACHILTY.

THE first of this family was the third son of Kenneth Mackenzie, VII. of  Kintail, by Agnes Fraser of Lovat.  He was originally designated of Achaghluineachan, but afterwards as

I.  RORY  MOR  MACKENZIE, first of Achilty.  He was a most  powerful man, and numerous instances of his prowess are still related  among his countrymen, the most noted of which was his defeat of the  famous Italian champion before King James V. (described pp. 104-107).   He married, first, a daughter of Farquhar MacEachainn Maclean, with issue--

1.  Alastair Roy, his heir and successor.

2.  Alastair Dubh, who died without issue.

3.  John Roy, who married, with issue.

He married, secondly, a lady of the name of Grant, widow of Ross of Balnagown, also with issue.

By a daughter of William Dubh Macleod he had four natural sons, the eldest of whom, Murdoch, legitimatised by James V. in 1539, was progenitor of the family of Fairburn.  The other three--Alexander, John, and Roderick--were also legitimatised by the same King in 1541.

Rory Mor died on the 17th of March, 1533, was buried at Beauly, and succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  ALASTAIR  ROY  MACKENZIE, second of Achilty, who  married a daughter of John Chisholm, XIII. of Chisholm. with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  Rory, who married, with issue--a daughter, who married  Duncan Fraser of Munlochy, and Donald, who was also married, with  issue.

3.  John, who married Tullochgorm's daughter, with issue--a son Alexander, who lived at Struy.

He died at Lochbroom in 1578, was buried there, and succeeded by his eldest son

III.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, third  of Achilty, who married a  daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, II. of Davochmaluag, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Murdoch, I. of Ardross and Pitglassie, progenitor of the present Mackenzies of Dundonnel.

3.  Kenneth, of whom nothing is known.

4.  Rory, who married, first, a daughter of Alastair MacAllan, by whom he had Murdo Mackenzie, afterwards Bishop of Raufoe in Ireland. He married, secondly, a daughter of Hector Mackenzie, son of Murdoch  Mackenzie, I. of Fairburn, with issue, two sons--Alexander and Hector,  and four daughters who married respectively Allan Mackenzie of Loggie;  Dougal Mac Ian Oig; Rory Clark; and Lachlan Mac Mhurchaidh Mhic  Eachainn, of Gairloch.

5.  Isobel, who married Alexander Mackenzie of Inchcoulter, with issue.

He died on the 14th of March, 1609, was buried in Lochbroom,  and succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth of Achilty, who married  a daughter of David Chambers, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who married a daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of the old family of Davochcairn.

3.  Thomas, who married a daughter of Duncan Mackenzie, I. of  Sand; and several daughters, who married respectively James Macleod, Assynt; Ranald MacGillespick; Angus Mac Dhomhnuill Mhic Dhomhnuill Hector Mackenzie, Mellan, Gairloch, second son of John Roy Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch, by his second marriage Kenneth Buidhe Mackenzie, natural son of John Roy, IV. of Gairloch; and Duncan Mackenzie, Mhic  Ian.

He died at Kildin in 1642, was buried at Dingwall, and succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  MURDOCH MACKENZIE, fifth of Achilty,  who married, first, a daughter of  Hector Mackenzie, son of  Alexander Roy, son of Hector Cam,  natural son of Hector Roy  Mackenzie, I. of Gairloch, without issue.  He married, secondly, a  daughter of Hector Mackenzie, IV. of Fairburn, relict of Kenneth   Mackenzie, I. of Davochcairn, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Isobel, who, in 1701, married Kenneth, son of John MacIver of Tournaig.

He married, thirdly, Isabel, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, relict successively of John Mackenzie of Lochslinn, and Colin  Mackenzie, I. of Tarvie, without issue.

He was succeeded by his only son,

VI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, sixth of Achilty, Chamberlain  of the Lewis and Assynt in 1735.  He married Christian Mackenzie, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  David, who married, with issue--Colin, who succeeded his  uncle Murdoch.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, seventh of Achilty, who, in  1728, married Anne, third daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, first  Baronet and VIII. of Gairloch, without issue.  He was succeeded by his  nephew, a son of his brother David,

VIII.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, eighth of Achilty, an Officer in the 78th Regiment, who married Janet, third daughter of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, second Baronet and IX. of Gairloch.   He was the last who  possessed the property.  In 1784 he has a tack of the farm of Kinkell,  where he died in 1813, with his affairs involved.  He left one son, John, who died without issue, whereupon the property passed to the Mackenzies  of Applecross.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  ARDROSS,  NOW  OF  DUNDONNEL.

THE progenitor of this family was Murdoch, second son of Murdoch Mackenzie, III. of Achilty.  He purchased the lands of Pitglassie and  Kildin, and married Catharine, daughter of John Mackenzie of Tolly, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, who, in 1699, married Agnes Fraser, and died before his father, without issue.

2.  Alexander, who succeeded his father.

3.  John "Rapach"  who married Anne, daughter of Colin  Mackenzie, III. of Kincraig, without issue.

4.  William, Episcopal minister of Rosskeen, who married a  daughter of Fraser of Belladrum.  He was admitted minister of Rosskeen before the 9th of August, 1665, and he died on the 14th of March, 1714.   He had a son described in 1709 as "John, his eldest son." He also had a  son called "Black Colin," who had the farm of Achintoul in Rosskeen, and  who married, with issue--(1) Alexander, who married Lilias Mackenzie,  daughter of Colin Mackenzie, II. of Kincraig, with issue--a daughter, who  married, first, Alexander Ellison, and secondly, Alexander Aird; (2)  George, who married a daughter of Gordon of Embo, with issue--Colin;  John; and three daughters, Mary,  Nelly, and  Margaret, who died at  Invergordon 45 to 50 years ago, and "were as primitive in their appearance  and dress as if they had come out of Noah's ark."  The Rev. William had  also three daughters, who married respectively the Rev. Allan Clark,  minister of Glenelg; the Rev. Duncan MacCulloch, minister of Urquhart,  and Andrew Fraser, Chamberlain of Ferrintosh.

Murdoch died in 1655, was buried at Dingwall, and succeeded by  his second and eldest surviving son,

I.  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, first of Dundonnel.   He bought the lands of Ardross  during his father's lifetime, in  1644, formerly the property of Ross  of Tolly, and sold the lands of  Pitglassie and Kildin.  He was  served heir in 1662.  He married  Janet, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, in Ulladale, who had a son Alexander, retoured as heir general in 1715.

3.  Hector, apprenticed to learn chirurgery in 1682.

4.  William, who in 1681, married Christian, daughter of Colin Mackenzie, II. of Kincraig.

5.  Alexander.

6.  Roderick, of whom nothing is known.

7.  Isobella, who in 1678 married, as his second wife, Alexander Mackenzie of Inchcoulter, brother-german to Sir George Mackenzie of  Rosehaugh.

He died in 1674, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, second of Dundonnel, who  married a daughter of Grant of Elchies, Strathspey, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Another son, who died in 1761.

3.  Murdoch, tacksman of Clynes in 1745.

4.  Rory.

5.  Anne.

6.  Margaret, who in 1709 married Gregor, heir of Robert Grant of Gartenmor.

He was buried at Rosskeen, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Dundonnel, who married  Helen, daughter of T. Erskine of Pittoderie, celebrated for her beauty, with  issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Murdoch, who succeeded as V. of Ardross.

3.  Margaret, who married James Muir of Stonywood, with issue.

4.  Rachael, or Barbara, who married George Paton, of Grandholm, with issue.

5.  Jean, and several others--in all a family of fifteen. He was buried at Rosskeen, and succeeded  by his eldest son,

IV.  RODERICK MACKENZIE, fourth of  Dundonnel, who died without issue, and was succeeded by his  eldest brother,

V.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, fifth of Dundonnel, who in 1743,  married Bathia, daughter of John Paton of Grandholm.  In his time was concluded before Lord Mansfield in the House of Lords, a law-suit which  existed for four generations between his family and the Rosses of  Achnacloich or Tolly, regarding the validity of the sale of the property to  Alexander, second of the family, a litigation which ruined the Rosses and involved the Mackenzies of Ardross deeply in debt.  He died, and was  buried at Rosskeen, having had issue, an only daughter, who succeeded to  the property as sixth of Dundonnel,

VI.  MARGARET MACKENZIE, who in 1768  married James Munro of Teaninich, Captain R.N., with issue--

1.  Hugh Munro, Captain in the 78th Regiment, who succeeded to  the estate of Teaninich, and in 1846 died unmarried.

2.  Murdoch, who resumed the name of Mackenzie, and succeeded  his mother in Ardross and Dundonnel.

3.  Colonel Hector, who died unmarried in 1827.

4.  Major-General John Munro, H.E.I.C. S., who married Charlotte, daughter of Dr Blacker, with issue--(1) James St John, late Major 60th  Rifles, who died in 1818, was married, and left issue--Maxwell, Lieutenant 48th Regiment, and others; (2) John; (3) Stuart Caradoc Munro, now of Teaninich; (4) Maxwell William; and (5) Charlotte, who,  in 1834, married the Hon. George A. Spencer, with issue.

5.  Catherine, who married Thomas Warrand of Warrandfield,  Inverness, with issue -Robert, Major in the 6th Inniskilling Dragoons;  three other sons and a daughter, all of whom died young.

6.  Bathia; and 7. Alexina, both of whom died young.

Margaret, whose husband died in 1845, was buried at Ardross, and succeeded by her second son,

VII.  MURDO  MUNRO-MACKENZIE, seventh of Dundonnel,  retoured in 1795.  He sold Ardross to the Duke of Sutherland, and, in  1834, purchased Dundonnel from Thomas Mackenzie, VI. of the old  family of Dundonnel.  By the death of his elder brother, Hugh, without issue, Murdo became the head of the family of Munro of Teaninich. In  1838 he purchased the detached portions of the Cromarty estates, including the forest of Fannich.  He married Christina, daughter of Robert Ross, Strathcullanach, Balnagown, with issue--

1.  Hugh, who, in 1813, died young.

2.  John, who died before his father in 1815.

3.  Hugh, who succeeded his father.

4.  Kenneth, who succeeded his brother Hugh.

5.  Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel H.E.I.C.S., residing in Brisbane, Queensland, married, with issue.

6.  James, who died unmarried.

7.  Murdo, who died unmarried.

8.  Mary, who married Major-General Francis Archibald Reid,  C.B., with issue.

9.  Helen, who married Simon Mackenzie-Ross of Aldie, without issue.

Murdo died at Dundonnel, was buried there, and succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

VIII.  HUGH  MUNRO-MACKENZIE, who spent his whole time  in beautifying, improving, and increasing his estates, upon which he  constantly resided.  He died unmarried, on the 30th of July, 1869, leaving  his fee-simple estates of Mungasdale, Gruinard, and Strath-na-Sealg, to an  illegitimate daughter, who afterwards married Mr Catton.

He was buried at Dundonnel, and succeeded by his brother, IX. KENNETH  MUNRO-MACKENZIE, who was trained to  the medical profession, qualified in  Edinburgh, and afterwards  practised successively in Dublin,  London, France, and Italy, and  eventually emigrated to New South  Wales, from which he returned in  1870 after thirty-four years--having established the members of  his family in good positions there--to his native county, to take  possession of his late brother's  property.  But this he only  succeeded in doing after many  years of expensive litigation carried  on against him by his brother's  natural daughter, Mrs Catton, who  attempted to overthrow the family  settlements and obtain possession  of all the estates for herself.  She,  however, only succeeded in ruining her own property, which had to be  sold to pay the lawyers.

He married, in 1838, Julia Smith, relict of Captain Edmund  Harrison Cliffe, of Sydney, New South Wales, with issue--

1.  Murdo, his heir, who, born in 1843, accompanied his father from Australia and afterwards succeeded to the property.

2.  Hugh, of Bundanon, Shoulhaven, N.S.W., now of Dundonnel.

3.  Helen, who, in 1870, married John Robinson of Shoulhaven, N.S.W., with issue.

4.  Mary, who in 1860 married James Thomson of Burner,  Shoulhaven, N.S.W., with issue.

5.  Julia Anna, who married, in 1867, the Rev. Robert Spier Willis, M.A., of the Church of England, Incumbent of Manly Beach, Sydney, N.S.W., with issue.

Kenneth died in 1878, was buried at Dundonnel, and succeeded by his eldest son,

X.  MURDO  MUNRO-MACKENZIE, tenth of Dundonnel.  He  died unmarried and was succeeded by his only brother,

XI.  HUGH  MUNRO-MACKENZIE, eleventh of Dundonnel.  He  resides in New South Wales.  In 1876 he married Bella Mary, daughter of  T. T. Biddulph of Earie, Shoulhaven, N.S.W., with issue--Hugh, Bella, and Mary.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  FAIRBURN.

THIS family is also descended from Roderick Mor Mackenzie, I. of Achilty, by a daughter of William Dubh Macleod, VII. of Harris, by whom  he had a natural son,

I.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, first of Fairburn, who was granted  letters of legitimation by James V., dated 1st of July, 1539.  On the 16th of  March, 1541, there are also letters of legitimation in favour of "Alexandro  Mackenze seniori, Joanni juniori, et Roderico bastardis filus naturalibus,  quondam Roderici Mackenze."  Murdo for some time lived at Court and  was a Gentleman of the Bedchamber to James V.  He obtained a charter  for his lands, dated 1st of April, 1542, afterwards confirmed by Queen  Mary in  1343.  He married, first, Margaret, daughter of Urquhart, Sheriff  of Cromarty, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  John, I. of Tolly, minister of Dingwall, who married Margaret, daughter of Ballindalloch, with issue, among others--Murdoch, II. of  Tolly, who married Catherine, daughter of James Innes of Inverbreakie,  with issue.

3.  Annabella, who married, first, Thomas Mackenzie of  Lochluichart and Ord, with issue; and secondly, Alexander Mackenzie,  progenitor of Coul, also with issue.

4.  A daughter, who married Ross of Priesthill.  Murdoch married, secondly, a daughter of Rory MacFarquhar  Maclean, with issue--

5.  Roderick, of Knockbaxter, from whom the Mackenzies of  Kernsary, of whom presently.

6.  John, I. of Corry, who married a daughter of Donald Clark, with issue--three sons and four daughters.

7.  Hector, Chamberlain of Lochcarron.

8.  Isabel, who, as his second wife, married John Roy Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch, with issue.

9.  A daughter, who married  Donald Glas Macdonald.

10.  Mary, who married Wyland Chisholm, Kinkell, with issue--Agnes, who married her cousin, Hector Mackenzie, IV. of Fairburn, with issue.

Murdoch died in 1590, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, second of Fairburn, who  married a daughter of Walter Innes of Inverbreakie, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, who succeeded his brother John in Fairburn.

3.  Isobel, who married John Mackenzie, eldest son of John Roy, IV. of Gairloch, who died in 1601, before his father, without male issue.  She married, secondly, Bayne of Tulloch.

4.  A daughter, who married Murdo Mackenzie, II. of Kensary,  with issue--a daughter.

Alexander was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Fairburn, who married Janet, daughter of Torquil Macleod of Coigeach, without male issue, but by her  he had four daughters who married--the eldest, Murdo Mackenzie of  Sand; Agnes, first, Murdo MacCulloch of Park, and secondly, Roderick  Mackenzie, II. of Corry; Isobel, John Mackenzie of Pitlundie; and  Annabella, Roderick Mackenzie, Ardlair; the last three being heirs  portioners.  He has a sasine of Monar in 1620. He died in 1645, and was  succeeded by his next brother,

IV.  HECTOR  MACKENZIE, fourth of Fairburn, who married,  first, his cousin Agnes, daughter of Wyland Chisholm, Kinkell, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir, who  succeeded; and five daughters, who married respectively, Roderick, son  of Bayne of Tulloch, and secondly,  Angus, third son of Alexander  Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, by  Isobel Mackenzie of Coul another  married Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of  Davochcairn, and, secondly,  Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Achilty; the third married the Rev.  Alexander Mackenzie, minister of Lochcarron; the fourth, Roderick,  second son of Colin Mackenzie, I.  of Kincraig  the fifth, the Rev.  Alexander, third son of the Rev.  John Mackenzie of Tolly, by his  second marriage with a daughter of  Thomas Fraser of Struy.

Hector married, secondly, a natural daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Kilcoy, with issue--two sons and three daughters.

Hector was succeeded by his only son, by his first wife,

V.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fifth of Fairburn, who first  married a daughter of Patrick Grant of Glenmoriston, with issue--Mary,  who married as his second wife, Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Ballone, with issue.  He married, secondly, in 1663, Margaret, daughter of Donald  Mackenzie, III. of Loggie, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  John, of Bishop-Kinkell, who was married twice, with issue--three sons and two daughters.

3.  Colin, who died without issue.

4.  Donald, married, with issue--a son Murdoch.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, sixth of Fairburn, who in 1673  married Isobel, daughter of the Hon. Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who died unmarried in 1731.

3.  George; and 4. James, both unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, seventh of Fairburn, who in  1712 married Winniewood, daughter of William Mackintosh, Younger of  Borlum, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who married Ann MacRae, with issue.

3.  Colin, of whom nothing is known.

4.  Helen, who married John, eldest son of Colin, IX. of Hilton, who died before his father in 1751, without issue.

Roderick was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII.  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, eighth of Fairburn,  to whom the estates, which had  been forfeited in 1715, were  restored in 1731. He married Jean,  eldest daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, VIII. of  Davochmaluag, with issue--

1.   Roderick, his heir and  successor.

2.  Kenneth, Lieutenant 21st Regiment, who was killed under  General Burgoyne at Saratoga, unmarried, in September 1777.

Alexander was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, ninth of Fairburn, who in 1768  married Catharine, daughter of William Baillie of Rosehall, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  William, who died without issue.

3.  Mary, who married James Massey, without issue.  She married secondly, Colonel Robert Murray Macgrigor, with issue--Janetta Catharine, who married, first, Robert Sutherland, and secondly, Lieutenant  Hull  and Barbara, who married Richard Hort, Royal Horse Guards Blue,  with issue.

4.  Barbara, who married, first, Kenneth Murchison of Tarradale, with issue--the late Sir Roderick Impey Murchison, President of the Royal  Geographical Society, who married a daughter of General Hugonin,  without issue; and the Hon. Kenneth Murchison.

Roderick was succeeded by his eldest son,

X.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, tenth of Fairburn, Major-General in the Army.  He was created a Baronet.  He died unmarried, the  last direct heir male of the family, and was buried in the St. Clement's aisle of the old Church of Dingwall.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  KERNSARY.

THIS family is descended from the Mackenzies of Fair-burn, the last of the  male line of the original Kernsary  Mackenzies having, as already  shown, been killed at the battle of  Auldearn in 1645, when his sister  carried the lineal representation of  that family to the Mackenzies of  Sand.

The descent of the second family is as follows--Murdoch  Mackenzie, I. of Fairburn, married as his second wife Mary, daughter of Roderick MacFarquhar Maclean, with issue along with two other sons and  daughters--

RODERICK  MACKENZIE of Knockbaxter, in the vicinity of  Dingwall. He married Aegidia, daughter of Bayne of Tulloch (sasine  1636), with issue--(1) the Rev. Murdoch Mackenzie, who married a  daughter of MacCulloch of Park; (2) Kenneth, who married a daughter of  the Rev. John Mackenzie, Cromarty; and (3)--

I.  THE  REV.  RODERICK   MACKENZIE, who was minister  of Gairloch from 1649 to 1710.  Sir  James Dixon Mackenzie of Findon  says distinctly that Roderick was  "ancestor of Kernsary,"  [Genealogical Tables of the  Mackenzies, Sheet 5.] and there  appears to be no doubt about it.   But it is not at all clear whether he  or his brother Kenneth bought the  estate from the Mackenzies of  Coul, who then owned it.  Mr John  H. Dixon, in his interesting book on Gairloch, says that Roderick had a  son Kenneth, born about 1703, by a  sister of the Laird of Knockbain,  but if there was such a son, which  is highly improbable, he could not  have been the purchaser of any  property during his father's  lifetime, who died seven years after  Kenneth's alleged birth, when the  father must have been very  advanced in years--close upon  eighty.  The probability therefore is  that Roderick's brother Kenneth--who, like himself, during a portion  of his ministry was an Episcopalian  clergyman--was the purchaser and  that he died, without issue, before  his brother, and left the estate to  Roderick, who died in 1710, or  perhaps to his eldest son Murdoch,  who, in his marriage contract,  dated 1708, two years before his  father's death, is designated "of Kernsary."  Mr Dixon has several  references to these men, but being  traditional they are more or less  unreliable; and as yet no papers  have been discovered which throw  any light on the original purchase  by this family.

Writing about their immediate progenitor Mr Dixon says--"In  1649 the Rev. Roderick Mackenzie, third son of Roderick Mackenzie of Knockbackster, was admitted minister of Gairloch and continued so until  his death in March 1710, after an incumbency of sixty-one years.  He  seems to have been a man of quiet easy-going temperament. When he  came to Gairloch, Presbyterianism ruled; when Episcopacy was  established in 1660, he conformed; and when the Revolution put an end to  Episcopacy, he became a Presbyterian again."  But that he never was a  very enthusiastic one is clear from the Presbytery records during his  incumbency, for they show that he seldom attended its meetings, though  often specially cited by his brethren to do so.  His brother Kenneth, who appears to have continued an Episcopalian all his life, was of a very  different stamp.  He seems to have spent a considerable portion of his  early life in the Island of Bute, to which apparently he became very much attached, for when he left it and went to reside with his brother at  Kernsary, probably as purchaser and proprietor of the estate, he took a  smack load of Bute soil along with him in order that he might be buried in  it when he died.  A portion of this imported earth "was put into the  Inverewe Church, so that when Kenneth was buried there he might lie  beneath Bute soil  the overplus was deposited in the garden of Kirkton  house, where the heap is still preserved." [Dixon's Gairloch.]   The same writer states distinctly that Kenneth came from Bute, that he was the  actual purchaser of the estate, that he resided in the proprietor's house at  Kirkton, that he officiated in the old church there, some remains of which  are still to be seen, and, he adds--"a loose stone may be seen in the part of  the ruined church which was used as the burial place of the Kernsary  family; it is inscribed `K M K 1678' and is believed to have recorded the date when the Rev. Kenneth built or restored the little church."  But is it  not much more likely to record the date of Kenneth's own death?  Mr  Dixon may be correct in the assumption that Kenneth, who was a sincere  Episcopalian, had to leave Bute during the troubles of the Covenanting  period, and seek a safe refuge in his brother's parish, who very probably had no objection to preaching in his church according to the Episcopal form to which he had himself openly conformed not many years before.

Indeed, after the Revolution, in 1680, the Rev. Roderick, who had for  twenty years been the Episcopalian minister of the parish, was allowed to remain in his charge until his death thirty years after without submitting  himself to the Presbytery, and most amusing accounts are given of the  manner in which his Presbyterian successor was opposed on his induction  and afterwards persecuted by the Gairloch Episcopalians.

There appears to be no doubt that the Rev. Kenneth died before his  brother Roderick, minister of Gairloch, and left the estate of Kernsary  either to him or his eldest son, Murdoch, who, as already stated, is  described in 1708, two years before his father's death, as then of  Kernsary."  It has been shown that the  estate was purchased by this family  from the Mackenzies of Coul, and there is a sasine, dated the 27th of July,   1762, on a precept of clare constat, granted by Sir Alexander Mackenzie  of Coul in favour of Roderick Mackenzie, IV. of Kernsary, as nearest heir male to his grandfather.

The Rev. Roderick Mackenzie, minister of Gairloch married a  daughter of Bayne of Knockbain, his father's neighbour, with issue,  among several other sons,--

II.  MURDOCH   MACKENZIE, second of Kernsary,  who married, first, his cousin, a  daughter of Alexander Mackenzie,  II. of Fairburn, without male issue.

He married, secondly, Anna, eldest  daughter of Charles Mackenzie, I.  of Letterewe (marriage contract  1708), with issue--

III. RODERICK MACKENZIE, third of Kernsary,  who as her second husband married  Margaret, youngest daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, III. of  Ballone (sasine to her in 1742), by  his wife Barbara, daughter of  Kenneth Mor Mackenzie, I. of  Dundonnel, and niece of Sir  George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh,  with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, who died without issue.

3.  Ann, who married George Mackenzie of Kildonan, third son of James, brother of George Mackenzie, II. of Ardloch, with issue--a son  James.

4.  Mary, who married John Ross, Inverness.

Roderick was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fourth of Kernsary, who married  his cousin Mary, eldest daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of Ballone,  by his wife, Catherine, daughter of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard. She was celebrated for her great beauty, and was immortalised as "Mali  chruinn donn" in one of the best songs in the Gaelic language, composed  by William Mackenzie, a native of Gairloch, better known as "An Ceistear  Crubach," or the Lame Catechist.  By her Roderick had issue--

V.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Kernsary, who sold the  property, and leased the farm of Arcan, near Brahan.  He married Mary,  eldest daughter of the Rev. Roderick Morrison, minister of Kintail, by his  wife Jean, daughter of Fraser of Culduthel, with issue--

1.  Roderick, planter in Demerara, who died unmarried.

2.  Alexander, now residing at Lincoln.  He was twice married, and has issue--a son and daughter.

3.  The Rev. Hector, late minister of Moy, Inverness-shire.  He married Margaret, daughter of William Macleod, I. of Orbost, with issue--an only son William, who married, with issue, and emigrated to Canada.

4.  Davidson, a squatter in  Australia, married, with issue.

5.  Wilhelmina, who  married Alexander MacTavish,  Town Clerk of Inverness, with  issue--(1) Alastair, who went to  New Zealand and there married  Jeanie  Halse, of Wellington, with  issue--Alastair Henry; Hector; and  Elsie; (2) William Tavish  MacTavish, Procurator-Fiscal for  the Tam District of Ross and  Cromarty; (3) Mary who married  Ranald Macdonald of Morar, with  issue; and (4) Catharine, who died  unmarried.

6.  Maria, residing at  Inverness, unmarried.

7.  Jean Fraser, who in 1844  married William Murray, tacksman of Kilcoy, son of Francis Murray of  Ardconnon Old Meldrum, with issue--(1) Francis, an indigo  planter in Kurnoul, Tirhoot, who married, in 1875 Eliza Annabella,  daughter of John Mackenzie, Teetwarpore, Tirhoot, with issue--Francis Mackenzie, Walter William Macdonald, Jean Fraser, Gertrude  Mary, Florence Wilhelmina, and Lisette Julia; (2) William,  tacksman of Bellfield, North  Kessock; (3) Alexander, a fruit-grower in Australia, and editor of  the Mildewa Irrigationist.  He   marred Catherine, daughter of  William Mackenzie, C,E., New  South Wales; (4) Robert Davidson,  Surgeon-Major Bengal Army.  He  married Mary, daughter of  Surgeon-General Mackay, Madras  Army, of the family of Bighouse,  with issue.  (5) James, M.D.,  practising in Inverness.  He married  Cecil, daughter of John Scott,  S.S.C., Toronto, with issue--two  daughters, Violet Cecil, and  Janetta.  (6) Edward Mackenzie, an  indigo planter at Mungulghur  Tirhoot, who in 1893 married  Annie Isabel Kingsburgh, second  daughter of General John  Macdonald, Cheltenham, great-great-grandson of the famous Flora  Macdonald.  (7) Alfred Aberdein,  an indigo planter in Tirhoot.  He  married Kathleen, daughter of John  Fraser Mackenzie of Belsund,  Tirhoot, with issue--a son Colin.   (8) Mary Jane Elsie, who on the 5th  of December, 1883, married John  Hamilton Fasson, Bengal Civil  Service, with issue--Herbert, born  in 1885; Elsie Isabel and Hilda.  (9)  Isabella Leslie.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  KILLICHRIST,  SUDDIE,  AND  ORD.

KENNETH, VII. of Kintail, had a fourth son by his second marriage with  Agnes of Lovat, from whom descended the families of Suddie, Inverlael,  Little Findon, Ord, Langwell, Highfield, and several minor branches.  The three first named being long extinct in the male line, it is needless to enter  further into detail than is necessary to show their intermarriages with other  Mackenzie families.  The progenitor of these branches was known as

I.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, first of Killichrist.  He was Priest of Avoch, Chaunter of Ross, and perpetual Curate and Vicar of Coirbents, or  Conventh.  He resigned this vicarage into the hands of Pope Paulus in  favour of the Priory of Beauly.  There is a presentation by James, Bishop of Moray, to Mr Kenneth Mackenzie, of the vicarage of Conventh, dated  June 27, 1518. [Antiquarian Notes, p. 100]  He has a charter of the lands of Suddie from James V. in 1526.  He would not refrain from marriage,  notwithstanding the orders of the Roman Church promulgated some time  previously, and the Bishop attempted to depose him with the result  described  at pp. 107-108. He married Helen, daughter of Robert Loval of Balumbie, Forfarshire; his brother, John of Killin, IX. of Kintail, and his  wife's father being parties to the contract of marriage, dated 1539, by  which it was agreed that in case of his decease before her she is to have an  annuity of 600 merks Scots and other perquisites.  By her Kenneth had  issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Thomas, of Kinlochluichart, afterwards I. of Ord.

3.  John Caol, or Slender, who married, with issue.

4.  Roderick, who married,  with issue--Alexander and John,  and a daughter, who married, first,  a Mr Macdonald and secondly, the Rev. Kenneth Mackenzie, of the  Torridon family, minister of Sleat, Isle of Skye.

Kenneth was succeeded by  his eldest son,

II.  ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, second of  Killichrist, who, in 1571, obtained  a charter from James VI. of the  lands of Suddie, which had been  granted to his father in 1526 by  James V.  He married Agnes, only  child of Roderick Mackenzie, third  son of Allan, II. of Hilton, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and  successor.

2.  John, Archdean of Ross,  I. of Inverlael, who married  Margaret, daughter of William  Innes of Culrossie, and had a son,  Kenneth, II. of Inverlael, who  married Agnes, daughter of  William Fraser, V. of Culbokie  (sasine on marriage contract in  1629), without issue male, and the  Rev. Thomas, also Archdean of  Ross, III. of Inverlael.  Thomas  married Agnes, daughter of Hector  Douglas of Muldearg, with issue--John, who succeeded as IV. of  Inverlael, and Thomas, a W.S. in  Edinburgh, who died unmarried.   John, IV. of Inverlael, had three  sons who died without issue, and a  daughter, who married Alexander  Mackenzie of Towie. John, the  Archdean, I. of Inverlael, had a  third son, Alexander, a W.S., who  died unmarried; and a fourth, the  Rev. James Mackenzie, minister of Nigg, who married Mary, daughter  of John Rose of Broadley, with issue, from whom descended the  late Right Hon. John Holt  Mackenzie, who married without  issue; and the late Joshua Henry  Mackenzie of Belmont, Lord of  Justiciary, who married Helen Ann,  youngest daughter of Francis  Humberston-Mackenzie, last Lord  Seaforth, with issue--two  daughters, Frances Mary and  Penuel Augusta.

3.  Murdoch, I. of Little  Findon, who married Margaret,  daughter of Murdoch, second son  of John Mackenzie, I. of Loggie,  with issue--John, II. of Little  Findon.

4.  Kenneth, of whom  nothing is known.

5.  Alexander, a natural son,  Colonel in the army, and Governor of Tangiers.  He had also by a  German lady two sons in the  French army, and two daughters,  one of whom, Penelope, married  Allan Macdonald, XIX of  Clanranald, killed at Sheriffmuir in  1715, without issue.

Alexander died in 1575, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, third of Killichrist, who married, first, the widow of James Gray of Skibo, with issue--a daughter, who  married, first, John Dunbar of Avoch, and secondly, probably as his  second wife, Lachlan Mackintosh, VII. of Kyllachy.  Kenneth married,  secondly, in 1605, Catharine, daughter of Roderick Mor Mackenzie, I. of  Redcastle (sasine of Suddie in 1607) with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Margaret, who married Fraser, Tutor of Foyers.

He was succeeded by his only son, who became first of


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  SUDDIE.

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, first of Suddie.  He served under Gustavus  Adolphus, and married Mary,  daughter of Bruce of Airth, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, who married Janet, daughter of John Mackenzie,  Ardcharnach and Langwell, with issue--Alexander, an officer in the Horse Guards; Thomas, killed without issue, in the Scots Guards in Spain; John, a Lieutenant-Colonel in Collier's Regiment in Flanders; and Colin, in  Lauder's Regiment, killed in Flanders, without issue.

3.  Elizabeth, who married George Leslie, Sheriff-Clerk of  Inverness, with issue (sasine in 1653).

4.  Agnes, who about 1630 married Roderick, sixth son of  Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, without issue.

5.  Magdalen, who married Alexander Graham of Drynie, with  issue.

Alexander has a sasine of Suddie in 1650, and another in 1672.  He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  CAPTAIN  KENNETH   MACKENZIE, second of Suddie.   He served in Dumbarton's  Regiment in France in 1666, and as  a Royalist Captain in Scotland.  He  married Isobel, daughter of John  Paterson, Bishop of Ross, with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  George, killed with Lord Mungo Murray at Darien.

3.  Margaret, who married; William Macleod of Bernera.

4.  Elizabeth, married as his first wife, Colonel Alexander  Mackenzie of Conansbay, son of Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth,  without issue.

5.  Alice, who married, first, in 1698, as his second wife, John Macdonald of Balcony, son of Sir James Macdonald, IX. of Sleat; and  secondly, John Maclean, M.D., Inverness.

He was killed at the battle of Mulroy in Lochaber in 1688, [Scott gives the following account of Captain Mackenzie's death--"He was brave, and well-armed with carabine, pistols, and a halbert or half-pike.  This officer came in front of a cadet of Keppoch, called Macdonald of  Tullich, and by a shot aimed at him, killed one of his brothers, and then rushed on with his pike.  Notwithstanding his deep provocation, Tullich,  sensible of the pretext which the death of a Captain under Government  would give against his c'an, called Out more than once, `Avoid me, avoid  me.'  `The Macdonald was never born that I would shun,' replied Mac-kenzie, pressing on with his pike on which Tullich hurled at his head a  pistol, which he had before discharged.  The blow took effect, the skull  was fractured, and Mackenzie died shortly after, as his soldiers were carrying him to Inverness."- Tales of a Grandfather.] and was succeeded  by his eldest son,

III.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, third of Suddie, who, in 1706  married Katharine, daughter of John Shaw of Sornbeg, Ayrshire, with  issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  John, Lieutenant-Colonel in the army.

3.  Mary, who married General Norman Macleod, XXII. of  Macleod, with issue.

4.  Agnes, who married Lachlan Mackintosh of Kyllachy.

Kenneth has a sasine in 1695.  He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, fourth and last of Suddie, who  married Margaret, second daughter of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, Baronet,  and V. of Coul, with issue--

1.  Alexander, who died  before his father, without issue.

2.  John Randoll  Mackenzie, Major-General in the  army, killed at Talavera in 1809,  without issue.

3.  Janet; and 4. Katharine,  who both died without issue.

5.  Henrietta Wharton, who  in 1810 became her father's heir,  and married, as her second  husband, Sir James Wemyss, fifth  Baronet and VIII. of Scatwell,  M.P., Lord-Lieutenant for the  County of Ross, to whom she  carried the Suddie estates, and had  issue--Sir James John Randoll  Mackenzie, sixth Baronet and last  of Scatwell, who, about 1850 sold  or alienated the estates.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  ORD.

KENNETH, first of Killichrist  fourth son of Kenneth Mackenzie, VII. of  Kintail, had, as already shown, a second son, Thomas of Lochluichart,  who, in 1598, obtained from Kenneth, XII. and afterwards first Lord  Mackenzie of Kintail, a tack of the lands of Ord.  Thomas married, first, Isobel, a daughter of Roderick MacAllan Macleod of Gairloch, with issue--

1.  Murdoch Mackenzie of  Scatwell, who married Catherine,  daughter of Alastair Roy Mac  Eachainn, without issue.  In 1619,  he talzied the estate of Scatwell to  his foster-brother, Kenneth  Mackenzie, I. of Scatwell, son of  Sir Roderick Mackenzie of  Coigeach, Tutor of Kintail.

2.  Kenneth, progenitor of  the Mackenzies of Langwell, whose present representatives are in  Australia; and of Mackenzie-Ross of Aldie, who adopted the  additional name of Ross on  succeeding to that property.

Thomas of Lochluichart married, secondly, Annabella, daughter of Murdoch Mackenzie, I. of Fairburn, with issue--

3.  John, who afterwards  obtained a charter of Ord.

4.  Thomas, who married a  daughter of the Laird of Katewell,  with issue--two sons, John of  Wester Kessock, who married  Margaret Maclean, and another  son, who died unmarried, in 1642.   Thomas died before 1628.

5.  Murdoch, servitor to the Tutor of Kintail, who died unmarried, in 1628.  This Murdoch, by his last will, dated 13th January, 1628, left his  brother-german, John Mackenzie of Ord, executor and legatee, and  bequeathed 400 merks Scots and fiffteen boils victual or the value thereof  to the children of his late brother Thomas.  He also left three hundred and  twenty-one merks Scots to Thomas Graham, his sister's son, and the  annual rent of one thousand merks to Isobel Cuthbert, wife of his said  brother and executor, and discharged his sisters of all the monies they  borrowed from him.

Thomas of Lochluichart died before 1619.  His eldest son,

I.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, was the first of the family who possessed  Ord and was designed thereof, though it was previously held in tack by his  father.  John was locally called "Ian Dubh a Ghiuthais," or Black John of the Fir.  He obtained a charter from Kenneth, XIIth Baron and first Lord  Mackenzie of Kintail, of the lands and mill of Ord, and the half of  Corrievoulzie and Strathvaich, dated 23rd July, 1607, and on the 15th of  September, 1637, George second Earl of Seaforth granted him a regular  free charter of the whole.

John married Isobel, daughter of Alexander Cuthbert of Drakies, by his wife Christian Dunbar, who long survived him, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Thomas, from whom the Mackenzies of Highfield.

3.  James, who married a daughter of the Rev. Farquhar Clark.  He is cautioner, with his brother Kenneth of Ord, for Thomas Mackenzie, III.  of Inverlael, from which he is discharged on the 18th of May, 1659.  He is  witness to the registration of the marriage contract of his brother John, at  Inverness, on the 20th of February, 1666.

4.  George, who married, first, a natural daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, and secondly, Janet, daughter of the Rev. Mr  Linen, minister of Fairnly, with issue--one son, Alexander, who joined the  Darien expedition, and afterwards settled and married in Jamaica, where  his posterity still flourish.

5.  A daughter, who married Mackenzie of Tarradale.

6.  Annabella, who in 1650 married Alexander Mackenzie, VI. of Hilton.

7.  Janet, who, in 1652 married Alexander Cam, fourth son of  Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, with issue--Roderick and Alexander, Mic Alastair Chaim, the author's ancestors.  Two daughters married respectively a son of the Rev. John Clark,  minister of Lochalsh, and Murdo Mackenzie Mhic Mhurchaidh.

John witnessed the burning of the Church of Killichrist by the Macdonalds of Glengarry in 1602.  He died before the 1st of December, 1644, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  CAPTAIN  JOHN MACKENZIE, second of Ord.  He  fought under Montrose against the  Covenanters, and was in  consequence summoned to appear  before the Presbytery of Dingwall  on the 5th of March, 1650, as a  Malignant.  He confessed to have  been at the head of a Company at  Balvenny, professed his grief and  desired to be received to the  Covenant and public satisfaction.

He was ultimately ordained on the  19th of November, 1650, "to make  his repentance to James Graham's  unnatural rebellion, the unlawful  engagements, and the late  insurrection in the North, in the  kirk of Dingwall, in his own habits,  the next Sabbath, and to be  received, and to subscribe the  Declaration."  On the 13th of  October, 1653, he is appointed to  take charge of the Earl of Seaforth's forest of Fannich, for  which he is to receive a certain number of boils victual yearly.  On  the 22nd of April, 1655, he is tried  by Court Martial in Edinburgh, for  plundering the lands of Fowlis on  the 9th of November preceding,  found guilty, and sentenced to  repair the damage to the extent  proved, out of his lands of Ord, and  to be committed to prison until the  General's pleasure should be  known thereon.

He married Magdalen, daughter of William Fraser of Culbokie  (marriage contract 21st July, 1633; tocher 2500 merks Scots) with issue--

1.  Thomas, his heir and successor,

2.  Kenneth, who is witness to a bond, dated 27th of April, 1724, by Thomas Mackenzie of Ord, and his eldest son, Alexander, in favour of  John Mackenzie of Highfield.  He married, in 1702, Elizabeth, daughter of Assynt, with issue--one son, Kenneth.

3.  Annabella, who married on the 28th of April, 1698, Charles Maclean, Brae.

4.  Helen, who married on the 25th of April, 1700, James Murray, Culloden.

5.  Janet, who married Donald Macdonald, South Uist (marriage contract 1711).

6.  Florence, married Kenneth Mackenzie, Kenlochewe.

Captain John died before the 19th of February, 1686, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, third of Ord.  On the 6th and 8th of  March, 1697, he redeemed the wadset of Corrievoulzie, duly and lawfully premonishing and warning John Mackenzie, indweller in Wester Kessock,  and Margaret Maclean, his spouse, to repair to the Tolbooth of Fortrose,  commonly called the Charter house, on the 15th of May next, and there  any time betwixt the sun rising and the down passing of the same, to  receive from Thomas Mackenzie of Ord, or any other in his name, the sum  of fifty thousand merks Scots, whole and together in one sum, all copper  and lay-money excepted, and upon receipt thereof to deliver up the  Wadset of Corrievoulzie, etc., to him.  On the 23rd of August, 1716, he entered into an obligation with Kenneth Bayne of Tulloch and John Mackenzie of Highfield, by which, upon their satisfying Colin Graham of  Drynie for a debt contracted between that gentleman and Ord, the latter is  to make an ample disposition to them and their heirs, of all his lands lying  within the Sheriffdom of Ross, with reversion always, during all the days of his life, of the sum of one hundred and twenty merks Scots, five bolls of  bear, five bolls of malt, five bolls of oatmeal, five bolls of bear meal  yearly, out of the rents of said lands and it was specially provided that as  soon as the sum of four thousand merks Scots was paid by Kenneth Bayne  and John Mackenzie, they should be obliged to give the said Thomas  Mackenzie one chaldron of victual, or one hundred merks Scots yearly,  over and above the reservation above-mentioned.

He married Mary, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Applecross. with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Magdalen, who married William Mackenzie, son of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Coul (marriage contract 18th July 1716).

He was succeeded by his only son,

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE,  fourth  of Ord, who before the  29th of June, 1723, married Jean, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Highfield, with issue--

1.  Thomas, his heir and successor.

He died before the 10th of October, 1748, and was succeeded by  his only son,

V.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, fifth of Ord.  He was educated at  Fortrose, and married Ann, youngest daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie,  first Baronet and IV. of Scatwell (marriage contract 15th of June, 1730). She had a jointure, in case of her surviving him, of five chalders of victual  rent, and three hundred merks Scots yearly, namely, three chalders of  victual out of the lands of Broomhill, Ballavulaich, and Milltown of Ord, two chalders of the first and readiest of the rents of the Mill of Ord, and  three hundred merks out of the lands of Corrievoulzie, Strathvaich,  Stronchondrum, and Bruthachnam-Bo. By her he had issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Elizabeth, who married Alexander, only son of George  Gillanders of Highfield, Chamberlain to Kenneth, Earl of Seaforth  (marriage contract 17th April, 1777), with issue.

3.  Abigail, who married George Mackenzie, IV. of Dundonnel,  with issue.

Thomas died in 1803, and was succeeded by his only son,

VI.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, sixth of Ord, who, during his  father's lifetime, was, by deed of settlement of Katharine Bethune and  Alexander Macdonald, her husband, dated 3rd December, 1785, appointed  sole executor to Macdonald's only child Kenneth, whom failing, the said Alexander Mackenzie, younger of Ord, to be sole heir, "and this as a token  of gratitude to the worthy family of Ord."  Alexander married Helen,  daughter of Neil Macinnes, Collector of Taxes, Aberdeen, with issue--

1.  John, who died before his father, unmarried.

2.  Thomas, who became his heir and successor.

3.  Alexander, Captain in the 25th Regiment, Native Infantry, H.E.I.C.S., who married Hannah Fraser, daughter of James Fraser of  Belladrum, with issue--(1) Alexander, H.E.I.C.S., who married a daughter of Colonel Birch, with  issue--four sons and four daughters; (2) Charles-Archdale, in the Army, and three daughters, Helen, Emilia, and Anna.  He  died in India on the 15th of June, 1837.

4.  Anne, who married her cousin, Thomas Mackenzie, VI. and last of the Old Mackenzies of Dundonnel.

5.  Margaret, who married John Maclean, Granada, with issue--an only daughter, Helen.

6.  and 7.  Eliza and Helen, both of whom died unmarried.

Alexander died in 1820 and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

VII.  THOMAS MACKENZIE, seventh of Ord,  Vice-Lieutenant of the County of  Ross.  He was born in December  1797, and married, on the 27th of  April, 1825, Anna Watson, second  daughter of James Fowler of  Raddery, and Grange in Jamaica,  with issue--an only son, who in  1880, succeeded his father as

VIII.  ALEXANDER  WATSON  MACKENZIE, eighth of Ord.   He was born on the 31st of August, 1827, and was a Captain in the 91st  Regiment. He married on the 10th of June, 1857, Angel-Babington,  daughter of the Rev. Benjamin Peile, of Hatfield, Herts, with issue--

1.  Thomas Arthur, born on the 17th of September, 1859, Captain 79th Cameron Highlanders.  He first joined the 42nd Regiment but was  transferred in 1880 to the 79th Cameron Highlanders.  He served in the  Egyptian War and was present at the battle of Tel-el-Kebir, for which he  has a medal and clasp and the Khedive Star.  He obtained his Captaincy  on the 16th of January, 1885.  He was for several years Adjutant of the  79th and is one of the editors of "The Historical Records" of that  Regiment, published in 1887.

2.  Alexander Francis, who was born on the 18th of April, 1861, Captain 93rd Highlanders.

3.  Beatrice Anna, who in 1887 married Robert Scarlett, son of the  late John Fraser of Bunchrew, with issue--John Ord Alastair; Gladys  Frances; and Evelyn Robert Leopold.

4.  Anna Watson.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  HIGHFIELD.

I.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was the second son of  John Mackenzie, I. of Ord, by Isobel, daughter of Alexander Cuthbert of  Drakies.  He married Agnes, daughter of Murdoch Matheson of  Balmacarra, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Lachlan, who married Mary Macdonald of Tighchruic, with  issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, second of Highfield (sasine in 1730),  who married Margaret, daughter of James Maclean, a Bailie of Inverness, with issue--

1.  Thomas, who died before his father, without issue.

2.  James, who became his heir and successor.

3.  Colin, of Meikle-Scatwell, who married Catharine, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie of Lentran, without issue.

4.  William of Strathgarve, who married Janet, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie of Lentran (sasine of lands in 1747), with issue--John, II of Strathgarve, and Alexander, who died without issue.  John married and had issue--William, III. of Strathgarve, and three daughters.   William married a daughter of Dr Mackenzie, practising as a surgeon in  Edinburgh, with issue--a son John, whose issue, if any, are unknown; and William, who died in India without issue.

5.  Elizabeth, who in 1716, married Donald Mackenzie, V. of  Kilcoy, with issue.

6.  Jean, who married Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of Ord, with  issue.

7.  Catharine, who in 1747, married Robert Ross of Achnacloich.

He was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

III.  JAMES MACKENZIE, third of Highfield,  who married Mary, daughter of  Roderick Mackenzie, IV. of  Applecross, with issue--

1.  Thomas, his heir and successor.

2.  William, who died unmarried.

3.  Alexander, who died young.

4.  John, who died unmarried.

5.  Alexander, of Breda,  Aberdeenshire, who married Maria  Rebecca, daughter of Colonel  William Humberston Mackenzie of  Conansbay, and sister of the last  Lord Seaforth, with issue--(1)  William, a Lieutenant in the 78th  Regiment, died at Breda in Holland  of a wound he had received the  previous day at the taking of  Merxem, in 1814; (2) Thomas, a  midshipman, R.N., drowned at sea;  (3) Frederick, R.N., murdered at  Calcutta, in 1820; (4) Francis, R.N., drowned at sea in  1828; (5) John,  all without issue; and (6) Alexander, Captain, 25th  Regiment, and Adjutant of the  Ross-shire Militia, who took a great  interest in the history of his Clan and collected a large amount of  information and valuable MSS.  He married Lilias Dunbar, daughter of  James Fowler of Raddery, with issue--(1) James Evan Fowler, who  died unmarried; (2) Alexander,  now at Fortrose  and three  daughters, who died unmarried.   Alexander of Breda, who died in  1872, had also four daughters, two  of whom, Louisa and Gertrude  Elizabeth, died unmarried;  Margaret, who married the Rev.  Charles Grant, minister of the  Scottish Episcopal Church at  Meikle Folla, with issue--nine  children.  She died in 1871.  The  youngest, Mary Gibbs, married on  the 25th of March, 1827, George  Skues, Lieutenant Royal Marines,  Aberdeen, with issue--(1) William  Mackenzie, M.D., Surgeon-Major  in the Army, who married  Margaret, daughter of Christopher  Hyre, Newfoundland, with issue,  three sons and five daughters--George Edward Mackenzie; Frederick William Mackenzie;  Charles Hyre Mackenzie; Mary  Isabella Mackenzie; Margaret  Caroline Mackenzie; Gertrude  Eliza Mackenzie; Minnie  Mackenzie, and Elsie Mackenzie;  (2) Edward Walker, Staff-Surgeon  in the Army, who died at Calcutta,  unmarried, in 1862; (3) Frederick  Mackenzie, Surgeon-Major in the  Army, who married Maria Theresa  Malcolm, with issue--two sons,  Frederic Mackenzie and Edward  George, and two daughters, Mary  Theresa and Margaret Sarah; (4)  Richard Alexander, residing in  America; (5) John Richards; (6)  Georgina Mary, and two daughters  who died in infancy.

6.  Margaret, who married Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of Muirton  of Kilcoy with issue.

7.  Elizabeth, who in 1755 married Donald Matheson of Attadale, with issue--from whom Sir Kenneth James Matheson, Baronet, now of Lochalsh and Ardross.

8.  Anne, who married James Rose of Cuilich, with issue; and  seven other daughters who died unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, fourth of Highfield, who  afterwards succeeded his uncle, John Mackenzie, as VI. of Applecross.    He obtained that estate from his maternal uncle, John, V. of Applecross.

In 1781 he sold Highfield to George Gillanders, commissioner for Seaforth, and purchased Lochcarron from Sir Alexander Mackenzie of  Delvine for ?0,000.  He married Elizabeth, daughter of Donald Mackenzie, V. of Kilcoy, with issue--John, VII. of Applecross, and several others.  (For his succession see Applecross Genealogy.)


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  REDCASTLE.

I.  RODERICK  MOR  MACKENZIE, progenitor of the family of Redcastle, was third son of Kenneth Mackenzie X. of Kintail, by Elizabeth Stewart, daughter of John, second Earl of Athole.  He was a distinguished warrior, and took a prominent part in the frequent encounters between the Mackenzies and the Macdonalds of Glengarry, often commanding the  Clan on these occasions.  In 1608 he has a charter under the Great Seal of  the lands of Redcastle.  He married Florence, daughter of Robert Munro,  XV. of Fowlis, with issue--

1.  Murdoch, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, I. of Kincraig, of whom presently.

3.  Isabel, who married  Hugh Mackay of Bighouse, with issue.

4.  Margaret, who married, as his first wife, Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, with issue.

5.  Helen, who married Thomas Dunbar of Grange.

6.  Catharine, who married, first, in 1605, Kenneth Mackenzie, III.  of Killichrist, with issue; and secondly, Thomas Chisholm of Kinneries,  also with issue.

7.  Agnes, who married John Dunbar of Bennetsfield.

8.  Another, who married John Bayne of Tulloch.

Roderick Mor was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  MURDOCH  MACKENZIE, second of Redcastle, who has a  sasine as heir to his father in 1615.  He married Margaret, daughter of William Rose, XI. of Kilravock (marriage contract 13th of June 1599;  tocher 4500 merks), [Kilravock Papers, p. 83.] with issue--

1.  Kenneth, who died young.

2.  Roderick, his father's heir and successor.

3.  Alexander, who married  a daughter of William Paterson,  with issue--Roderick, who married  a daughter of Mackenzie of  Fairburn; William; John; Murdo;  Colin; and two daughters, the elder  of whom married Roderick, son of  Murdoch Mackenzie, V. of Hilton,  with issue--Colin, who died  without issue in 1682.

4.  The Rev. John, who after  he was ordained, was schoolmaster at Chanonry, and died in 1640,  unmarried.

5.  William, M.D. at the  Court of Spain, where he died,  without issue.

6.  Margaret, who married  Angus Chisholm, XVIII. of  Chisholm, without issue.

7.  Finguala, who married  Roderick Mackenzie, I. of  Applecross, with issue.

8.  Catharine, who married  Donald Mackenzie, III. of Loggie, without issue.

Four other daughters married respectively, Alexander Fraser of Reelig the Rev. William Mackenzie, minister of Tarbat Alexander MacRae, Chamberlain of Kintail Fraser, son of Fraser of Foyers, and  secondly, Hugh, brother of Fraser of Culduthel.  He had also a natural  daughter, who married John Mor Mackenzie, natural son of William  Mackenzie of Shieldaig, Gairloch.

Murdoch was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

III.  RODERICK   MACKENZIE, third of Redcastle.   He has a sasine in 1629 and in  1638.  He was fined ?000 for  taking part in the wars of Montrose  against the Covenanters, and was  for some time imprisoned in  Edinburgh along with Thomas  Mackenzie of Pluscardine. During  his imprisonment General Carr  besieged his castle, the only  stronghold which still held out for  the King; killed the commander,  who exposed himself on the  ramparts, set fire to the castle, and  razed its walls to the ground.  He  was liberated on the intercession of  his maternal uncle on payment of  7000 merks Scots.  In 1690 he  excambed with Kenneth  Mackenzie, I. of Dundonnel, formerly of Glenmarkassie, the  lands of Acha-ta-Donill, Blachlach, etc., belonging to Redcastle, for the  davoch of Meikle Scatwell, of old  possessed by Allan and Alexander  Mackenzie.  He married Isobel,  daughter of Alexander Mackenzie,  I. of Kilcoy, with issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, an Advocate, who died unmarried.

3.  Charles, of whom nothing is known.

4.  Anne, who married John Mackenzie, II. of Scatwell, with issue --an only daughter, Lilias, who in 1679 married Colin Mackenzie, III. of  Kincraig, with issue.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, fourth of Redcastle, who was a very  prudent man and amassed a large fortune.  In 1676 he made an entail of  the Barony of Redcastle, which, however, he neglected to register, a fact only discovered long after his death.  He married, first, the eldest daughter  of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, Baronet, I. of Coul, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin of Rossend, who married, with issue--Colin, W.S., and  Charles, a goldsmith.  He was out in the Rising of 1715, and suffered  much in consequence.

3.  John, of whom there is no trace.

4.  Jean, described on her tombstone in Tam as the eldest daughter. She married, in 1679, John Urquhart of Newhall.

5.  Margaret, who in 1680 married Alexander Fraser, Younger of Belladrum.

6.  Elizabeth, who in 1685 married Ewen Mackenzie, VII. of  Hilton, with issue.

7.  Anna, who in 1687 married Lachlan Mackintosh of Daviot,  with issue.

Colin married, secondly, Marjory, daughter of John Robertson of Inshes, widow of Angus Mackintosh of Daviot, without issue.  He was killed at Killearnan in 1704, when he was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  RODERICK MACKENZIE, fifth of Redcastle,  known among the Highlanders as  "Ruairi Dearg," or Red Rory.  He  wrote a MS. history of his own  family, and married Margaret,  daughter of James Grant, XVI. of Grant (sasine to her as sister to  Ludovic Grant nunc de Freuchy," in  1680), with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Ludovic, who married Eliza, daughter of Simon Mackenzie, I. of Allangrange.

3.  James, M.D., who practised his profession in London.

4.  Alexander, who in 1721 married Margaret, daughter of Charles Mackenzie of Cullen.

5.  Isobel, who in 1718 married Aeneas Macbean, Younger of  Kinchyle, with issue.

6.  Jean, who in 1712 married William Mackenzie of Davochcairn, with issue.

7.  Anne, who died unmarried.

Roderick married, secondly, Katharina, daughter of Charles  Mackenzie of Cullen.

He died in 1725, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, sixth of Redcastle, usually called "Ruairi Mor," who married, first, in 1707, Margaret, daughter of Sir  James Calder of Muirton, widow of Alexander Dunbar of Westfield (by  whom she had seven sons and a daughter), with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, who in 1748,  married Mary, daughter of Sir John  Cochrane of Waterside, son of the  Hon. Sir John Cochrane of  Ochiltree, second son of the first  Earl of Dundonald, with issue--Kenneth Francis, Advocate-General, President of the Council,  and Acting Governor of the Island  of Granada, in the West Indies.  He  spent ?5,000 of his own money in  defending the island successfully against the French, for which Pitt  offered him a Baronetcy, which he declined.  Colin had also two  daughters--Rose, who married  John Wilson, and Margaret, who  married Gilbert Robertson of  Kindeace. Kenneth Francis  married Anne Townshend.  She  died in 1847.  He died in 1831,  aged 83, and left issue--(1)  Charles, who married Rebecca  Molyneux, with issue--Charles,  who married Lucie de Momet, with  issue--a son, Charles.  He died in  New York in 1865.  (2) James  Joseph, who married Marian,  daughter of Edward  Impey, B.C.S., and died without issue in  1872; (3) Kenneth, who died, without issue; (4) Colin,  Lieutenant-General, C.B., 48th  Regiment, Madras Army, Brigadier  Commanding, Commissioner  Southern Division Nizam  Dominions, and Governor  General's agent at Murshedabad in 1843.  He was, in 1844, Assistant  Political Agent at Peshawur, and afterwards for a time a hostage  with the Afghans.  He married, first, on the 26th of May, 1832,  Adeline Marian, daughter of James Pattle, Bengal Civil Service, with  issue--Adeline Anne, who married Major-General Henry Hoseason,  Madras Army, with issue--eight children Mary Julia, who married  Major Herbert Clogstorm, with issue--four children; Rose Prinsep,  who married, first, Lieutenant David Arnot, and secondly, Captain  Francis Pictet, Madras Army, with  issue--six children; (5) Anne; (6)  Isabella Jessy, who married, on the  17th of October, 1839, James  Baines of Ludlow, with issue; (7)  Mary Cochrane, who on the 17th of  March, 1835, married James King  of Staunton Park, Herts, for twenty  years M.P. for Hereford, with issue  --three sons and seven daughters; (8) Eliza Margaret, who on the 15th  of August, 1832, married Major-General Thomas  D. Carpenter,  Madras Army, with issue; (9) Amelia Frances, who in 1838  married her brother-in-law, the  Rev. Thomas King of Staunton  Park, Herts, with issue; and (10)  Townshend, who died without  issue.  Lieutenant-General Colin  married, secondly, in 1843, Helen  Catharine, daughter of Admiral  John Erskine Douglas, of the  Queensberry family, without issue,  and died in 1881.

Roderick Mor had twelve  other sons and two daughters, of  whose history very little is known.

One of the sons, either John or  William, married, with issue--at least two sons--the Rev. Hugh  Mackenzie, who was born in 1771, and was for fourteen years Baptist  minister at St. Ives, where he died  and was buried in 1836.  Hugh  married, with issue--a son and  daughter, both without issue.  The  second  son, ALEXANDER MACKENZIE, was born in 1772,  and married in 1795. Helen,  daughter of John Donaldson,  Dunfermline, factor for the Earl of  Dundonald, with issue--(1)  William, who was born in 1797 and  died in infancy; (2) JOHN   DONALDSON  MACKENZIE,  surgeon, who was born in 1803, and practised his profession in  Jersey.  He married, in 1840,  Emma Caroline, daughter of John   Landseer, and sister of the eminent painter, Sir Edwin Landseer, with   issue--Edwin John Landseer Mackenzie, of Kensington Park  Gardens, London, who was born in 1843; and Landseer Mackenzie, of  St. Bernard, Bournemouth, born in  1849.  (3) Alexander, who was  born in 1806, and died young in  1822; (4) David Donaldson, born in  1811, and died unmarried in 1836;  (5) Margaret Donaldson, who was  born in 1799, married James  Symington, banker, and died in  1863, without surviving issue; (6)  Helen, born in 1801, died in 1802;  (7) Mary Anne, born in 1808, and  died young in 1823; and (8) Jane  Donaldson, who, in 1840, married  Andrew Armstrong Kerr, banker,  Edinburgh, with issue--Robert,  who, born in 1843, became a Judge  in Jamaica, married, with issue,  and died in 1884; Alexander  Charles, born in 1847, married,  with issue; Andrew William, who,  born in 1848, married, without  issue; Henry Francis, born in 1855,  married, with issue; Frederick  Ebenezer, born in 1858, and died in  infancy. Helen Alexandrina, who  married Francis Suther Melville,  Edinburgh, Depute Clerk of  Session and Registrar of Law  Agents in Scotland, with issue;  Jane; and Margaret Jessie, who  died young in 1868. William  Mackenzie had also a daughter  Margaret, who married (and died in  1832) John Fraser of Honduras,  with issue--a son, John, and a  daughter, Catherine, who, in 1834,  married William Napier, of  Bathurst, New Brunswick, without  issue.  Alexander died in 1841.

Roderick Mor died on the 29th of March, 1751, at Redcastle, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, seventh of Redcastle, known  among his countrymen as  "Ruairi Ban."  He married in 1730, Hannah  Anna Murdoch of Cambodden, Galloway, with issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Captain John, who by the will of the then proprietor, he having had no son of his own to leave it to, succeeded as VI. of Kincraig.

3.  and 4.  Alexander and Roderick, died in infancy.

5.  Margaret, who on the 29th of November, 1755, married Sir Alexander Mackenzie, third Baronet and X. of Gairloch, with issue. She  died on the 1st of September, 1759.

6.  Mary who was born in 1732, and died, unmarried, at Lettoch, Redcastle, in 1828, aged 96 years.

7.  Elizabeth, who was born in 1746, and married in August 1782, Major-General Colin Mackenzie, with issue--Alexander Wedderburn, who died, unmarried, on the 4th of January, 1838, at Park House, Dingwall  and Hannah Margaret Cochrane, who died, unmarried, on the  2nd of February 1858, at Golder's Green, Hendon.

8.  Christina, who was born in 1749.

9.  Jean, who was born in 1752, married Robert Anderson,  Glasgow, and died, in 1819, without issue.

Roderick's wife died at Redcastle on the 21st of April, 1755, in the  39th year of her age.  He died at Inverness on the 10th of May 1785, and  was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII.  CAPTAIN  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, eighth of Redcastle.   He was born on the 21st of February, 1748, and married at Edinburgh, on  the 17th of August, 1767, Jean, daughter of James Thomson, Accountant-General of Excise in Scotland, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, who married at Edinburgh, on the 29th of March, 1800, Diana Davidson, daughter of Dr Davidson of the H.E.I.C.S., Leeds, with  issue--Robert Davidson Mackenzie, Adjutant 1st Bombay Light Cavalry,  who died of cholera on the 22nd of December, 1822, at Sholapore, India,  without issue.  She died at Garlieston in 1852.

3.  Boyd, who married  William MacCall of Newton--Stewart, without issue.

4.  Hanna, who was the last  surviving child of Kenneth, of  Redcastle, married William  MacCa, of Barnshalloch, and died  at Creebridge, Newton-Stewart, on  the 8th of August, 1849, aged 83  years.

Captain Kenneth was tried  for the murder of Kenneth  Mackenzie, alias Jefferson.  He  was found guilty and sentenced to  be hanged, but was afterwards  pardoned.  He divorced his wife  went abroad entered the Russian  service; and was killed in 1789  near Constantinople, where he was  Assistant Consul, in a duel with  Captain Smith, master of a  merchant ship, to whom he had  entrusted all his property when he  had got into trouble about  Jefferson.  He figures in Kay's  Edinburgh portraits as one of the  Bucks of the City.

He was succeeded by his  eldest son,

IX.  RODERICK   MACKENZIE, ninth of Redcastle.   He never took possession.  The  estate, being encumbered, he sold it  in June, 1790, to James Grant of  Corriemony, for ?5,450, whose  nephew, Patrick Grant, sold it in  1828 to Sir William Fettes of  Comely Bank, Bart., for ?33,000.   Sir William's trustees re-sold it to Colonel Hugh D. Baillie, whose  relative, James Evan Bruce Baillie of Dochfour, now possesses it.

This Roderick, the last  direct male representative of the  House of Redcastle, died in 1798,  in Jamaica, unmarried, when the representation of the family  devolved upon his uncle, Captain John Mackenzie, VI. of Kincraig,  of whom next.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  KINCRAIG.

I.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, second son of Roderick Mor Mackenzie, I. of Redcastle, who was the first of this  family, married Catherine, daughter  of the Rev. John Mackenzie of  Tolly, minister of Dingwall (sasine  to her 15th September, 1617), with  issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  Roderick, who married, first, Isabel, daughter of Hector Mackenzie, IV. of Fairburn, and secondly, Elizabeth, daughter of John  Bayne of Tulloch; sasine to him in 1652, and to her in 1656.

3.  Margaret, who in 1638 married, first, Gilbert Robertson, II. of Kindeace, and secondly, John, eldest son of Hugh Ross of Achnacloich.

4.  Florence, who in 1643 married David Cuthbert, Town-Clerk of Inverness.

5.  Agnes, who married, first, in 1672, Alexander Bayne of  Knockbain, and secondly, the Rev. John Macrae, minister of Dingwall,  author of the Ardintoul MS. History of the Mackenzies, and of a MS. Genealogy of the MacRas.

6.  A daughter, who married John Clunes, Cromarty.  Colin  married, secondly, a daughter of Innes of Inverbreakie, widow of Murdo Mackenzie of Towie, with issue--James, who married Catherine Innes.

He died in 1649, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, second of Kincraig, who married  Agnes, daughter of Duncan Bayne of Delny, with issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  Duncan, Lieutenant-Colonel Scots Guards, who married, and  died without issue in 1724.

3.  Lilias, who married the Rev. William Mackenzie, minister of Rosskeen.

4.  Katharine, who in 1680 married, as his second wife, William  Grant of Ardoch, with issue.  She was maternal great great-grandmother of the Rev. Gustavus Aird, D.D., Creich, ex-Moderator of the Free Church  General Assembly, and who has in his possession a copy of the marriage  contract dated as above.

5.  Christian, who in 1681 married William Mackenzie, brother of Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Ardross.

6.  Florence.

7.  Agnes.

Colin married, secondly, Christian Munro, widow of William  Ross, Knockgartie (contract of marriage 16th of March, 1680).

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, third of Kincraig, who in 1679  married Lilias, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Scatwell, with issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who succeeded his brother as V. of Kincraig.

3.  Anne, who married John Mackenzie, brother of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Ardross, without issue.

4.  Barbara, who married James Mackenzie, of Tarrel.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, fourth of Kincraig, who married, as  her third husband, Margaret, daughter of Sir Roderick Mackenzie of  Findon, without issue.

He was succeeded by his next brother,

V.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, fifth of Kincraig, Captain in Lochiel's  Regiment. He married Christina, daughter of James Menzies of Comrie,  without issue.  She died at Kincraig on the 21st of December, 1775.  He was dangerously wounded at Malplaguet in 1709.  On the 20th of December, 1760, he made a disposition of the lands of Kincraig to Roderick Mackenzie, VII. of Redcastle, in trust for his second son John,  then only nine years old.

John died a few days after, and was succeeded by his remote  cousin,

VI.  CAPTAIN  JOHN   MACKENZIE, sixth of Kincraig,  second surviving son of Roderick  Ban, VII. of Redcastle, born there  in 1751.  He served in Lord  Macleod's Regiment (now 71st  Highlanders), and was wounded at  Gibraltar.  His descendants, since  the death of Roderick, IX. of  Redcastle in 1798 without issue,  carried on  also the representation  of the main line of that family.  He  married Mary, daughter of the Rev.  Colin Mackenzie, minister of  Fodderty, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, Lieutenant 71st Regiment, killed in action at Vittoria, on  the 21st of June, 1813, without issue.

3.  John, who died without issue, on the 20th of August, 1822, off St. Helena, coming home from Java.

4.  Kenneth Francis, Colonel 64th Bengal Native Infantry, who married on the 6th of January, 1832, Margaret, daughter of the Rev. Thomas Taylor, D.D., of Tibbermore, with issue--Captain Roderick Boyd,  H.E.I.C.S., who died at Cheltenham, on the 5th of October, 1867,  unmarried Lieutenant Wedderburn Hannah, H.E.I.C.S.; Thomas Harry,  who died young Mary Christina, who married on the 17th of December,  1849, Colonel Brown-Constable, with issue -twelve children Margaret  Jane, who on the 10th of October, 1850, married Major-General H. F.  Waddington, of Monmouthshire, with issue--six children, several of  whom married with issue; Isabella Fraser, who died young; and Annie  Colina, who on the 31st of October, 1866, married Thomas H. Knolles,  with issue--five children.  Colonel Kenneth Francis died at sea in 1856.

5.  Hector, Major H.E.I.C.S., who died unmarried.

6.  Hugh, late Colonel 2nd Bengal Europeans, who married, first,  Anne, daughter of Thomas Duncan, Advocate, Aberdeen, with issue--Captain Harry Leith, R.A., who was twice married, with issue; John Hugh, M.D. Thomas Duncan, Bombay Civil Service, who married on the 25th of  April, 1871, with issue; Mary Janet, who on the 31st of July, 1866,  married Surgeon-Major Kilgour, with issue; and Sarah Anne. Colonel  Hugh married, secondly, Edith S. Hastings, Oxfordshire, also with issue.

7.  Charles Fitzgerald, H.E.I.C.S., who married the Hon. Mrs Fergusson, daughter of Lord Kirkcudbright, and died, without issue, on the  5th of September, 1850.

Captain John had also

8.  Maxwell, a natural son,  Lieutenant-Colonel  71st Regiment, killed at Bayonne in 1813, to whom  and his brother Colin a monument by Chantry is erected in Rosskeen  Church.

9.  Mary, who on the 28th of January, 1813, married Major-General Sir Donald Macleod.

10.  Johanna Charlotte Menzies, who died unmarried in 1794.

11.  Margaret, who married Donald Macintyre, Calcutta, with issue --(1) Lieutenant-General John Mackenzie Macintyre, Royal (Madras) Artillery, who, in 1857, married Marianne Margaret, daughter of Alexander Nisbet Shaw, Bombay Civil Service, with issue--Donald Charles Frederick, Captain 2nd (P.W.O.) Goorkhas; Alexander William; Robert Cadell; Isabella Mary, who married George Wade, sculptor, son of  Canon Wade, Bristol; Margaret Faimy, the celebrated prima donna and  Georgina Caroline.  (2) Major-General Donald Macintyre, V.C., who in  1882 married Angelica Alison, daughter of the Rev. T. J. Patteson,  Kinnettles, Forfarshire, with issue--Donald; Francis Hector Mackenzie;  Ian Agnew Patteson; and Alison Margaret.  (3) Colina Maxwell, who, in  1844, married Dr William Brydon, "the last man" or sole survivor of  13,000 men in the disastrous retreat from Cabul to Jellalabad in 1842,  who died in 1873, with issue--eight children.  (4) Mary Isabella, who in 1849 married General James Travers, V.C.; and (5) Charlotte Anne.

12.  Jane Petley, who died young.

13.  Isabella, who married, first, Captain Allan Cameron, with  issue and secondly, General Sir Hugh Fraser, K.C.B., of Braelangwell, with issue--(1) John Fraser of Braelangwell, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Beauchamp Colclough Urquhart of Meldrum, Aberdeenshire, with issue--Hugh K. Fraser of Braelangwell, and Annie M. Mackenzie Fraser; (2) Hugh Fraser, Lieutenant 71st Regiment, who died without issue; (3) Isabella Forbes Fraser, who married Beauchamp Colclough Urquhart of Meldrum, with issue--Beauchamp Colclough Urquhart; and  Isobel A. Urquhart, who married Garden A. Duff of Hatton; (4) Alexander, Captain 10th Regiment, who married a daughter of Major D'Arcy, with issue.  Isabella died in 1852.

14.  Elizabeth Jane, who died unmarried in 1832.

Captain John's widow died at Park House, Dingwall, on the 4th of January, 1838.  He having died at Kincraig on the 29th of April, 1822,  aged 72 years, when he was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, Major H.E.I.C.S., who married  in 1836, Katharine, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, of Millbank, son of Bailie Hector Mackenzie, of Dingwall, a cadet of Letterewe and Gairloch,  with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Katharine, who died unmarried in 1870.

3.  Eliza Jane, who married George Martineau, with issue--George; William; Alfred; and a daughter Katherine.

4.  Mary Ann, unmarried.

5.  Alice, who married Alexander Edmond, without issue.

Major Roderick died at Kincraig on the 6th of April, 1853, and  was succeeded by his only son.

VIII.  CAPTAIN  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, late of Kincraig,  who, on the 5th of February, 1867, married Georgina Adelaide, daughter  of Roderick Mackenzie, IV. of Flowerburn, without issue.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  CROMARTY.

THIS family, next to the House of Kintail and Seaforth, played the most  important part in the history of the  Highlands.  They are descended  from Sir Roderick Mackenzie of  Coigeach, Tutor of Kintail, who in  his day took such a conspicuous  part in the affairs of the Clan.  His  career is noticed at considerable  length in the history of the Seaforth  family, and need not here be  enlarged upon.  He was the second  son of Colin Cam Mackenzie, XI.  of Kintail, by Barbara, daughter of  John Grant, XII. of Grant.  He was  a brave and resolute man.  On a  certain occasion he seized MacNeil  of Barra by stratagem, and carried  that chief, of whom Queen  Elizabeth had been complaining, to  the Court of King James at  Holyrood.  When brought into His  Majesty's presence MacNeil, who,  much to the surprise of all, was a  tall, good-looking man of reverend  aspect, with a long grey beard,  proved a match for the King.

When asked by His Majesty what  could induce him to commit so many piracies and robberies on the  Queen of England's subjects, he  replied that he thought he was  doing the King good service by annoying "a woman who had  murdered his mother."  James  exclaimed, "The devil take the  carle!  Rorie, take him with you  again, and dispose of him and his  fortune as you please."  On another occasion, when Sir Roderick was  passing through Athole on his way to Edinburgh, in the interest of his  ward, he was stopped and found fault with by the men of that  district for passing through their country without the permission of  their lord.  The Tutor dismounted and sought out a stone, on which he  began to sharpen his claymore, whereupon the Athole men, from a  safe distance, asked him what he was doing?  "I am going to make a  road," was the ready answer. "You  shall make no road here."  "Oh, I  don't seek to do so; but I shall  make it between your lord's head  and his shoulders if I am hindered  from pursuing my lawful business."

On hearing this retort the Athole  men retired, and on reaching their  master told him what had occurred.   "It was either the devil or the Tutor  of Kintail," his Lordship replied,  "let him have a free path for ever."

That he was severe in his position  as Tutor is clear from the following  proverb; still current in Ross-shire:  --"There are but two things worse  than the Tutor of Kintail--frost in  spring and mist in the dog days."   He married Margaret, daughter and  co-heiress of Torquil Macleod,  "Torquil Cononach" of the Lewis,  Coigeach, and Assynt, with whom  Roderick obtained her father's  mainland possessions, previously,  however, in 1605, granted by  Torquil to Kenneth Mackenzie, X.  of Kintail, Sir Roderick's eldest  brother. He purchased Milton and  Tarbat Ness in Easter Ross from  the Munroes.  He had issue by his  wife--

1.  John, his heir and successor, afterwards Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat.

2.  Kenneth, I. of Scatwell, of whose family presently.

3.  Colin, I of Tarvie, who married Isobel, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Gairloch, and widow of John Mackenzie of Lochslinn, with issue.

4.  Alexander, I. of Ballone, of whom after Scatwell.

5.  James.  6.  Charles.  Both died unmarried.

7.  Margaret, who married Sir James Macdonald, IX. of Sleat, with issue--his heir and successor, and others.

He had also a natural son, the Rev. John Mackenzie, Archdean of  Ross, who, by his wife, Christian, daughter of John Wemyss of Lathocker,  had issue--the Rev. Roderick Mackenzie, first of Avoch, in 1671 Sub-Chaunter of Ross, and several other children.  He died in 1666.

In 1609 Sir Roderick was knighted for the part he took, along with his brother Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, in pacifying the  Lewis and civilising its inhabitants.

He died in 1628, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

SIR  JOHN  MACKENZIE of Tarbat, created a Baronet of Nova  Scotia on the 21st of May, 1628.  He married Margaret, daughter of Sir George Erskine of Innerteil, a Lord of Session, with issue--

1.  George, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who died young.

3.  Sir Roderick, who has a sasine as third son in June, 1654.  He was M.P. in 1700 for Cromarty, and in 1703 for the Burgh of Fortrose. He was subsequently raised to the Bench as Lord Prestonhall, and married,  first, Margaret, daughter of Dr Burnet, Archbishop of St. Andrews, with  issue--Alexander Mackenzie of Fraserdale, who, in 1702, married Amelia,  eldest daughter of Hugh, Xth Lord Lovat, with issue--several sons and  daughters.  Alexander's representation was proved extinct in 1826.  Lord  Prestonhall married, secondly, Margaret, daughter of Haliburton of Pitcur,  widow of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, without issue.

4.  Alexander, I. of Ardloch, whose representatives became heirs male to the Cromarty titles.

5.  Kenneth, who married Isobell Auckinleck, with issue--Kenneth, who died without issue.

6.  James, M.D., who died unmarried.

7.  Margaret, who married, first, Roderick Macleod, XV. of  Macleod, without surviving issue; and secondly, Sir James Campbell of  Lawers, Perthshire.

8.  Ann, who married Hugh, IXth Lord Lovat, with issue.

9.  Isabel, who married Kenneth, third Earl of Seaforth, with issue --his heir and successor, and others.

10.  Barbara, who married Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of Gairloch, with issue.

11.  Catherine, who married Sir Colin Campbell of Aberuchil, with issue.

Sir John died in 1654, when  he was succeeded by his eldest son,

I.  SIR  GEORGE MACKENZIE, created first Earl of  Cromarty, who made a  distinguished figure in the history  of his country during the reigns of  Charles II., James II., and William  III.  In 1661, at the early age of 31,  he was made a Lord of Session.  He  subsequently held the offices of  Lord-Justice-General and Clerk-Register of Scotland.  When  Maitland got into favour Sir George  shared the fall of his patron, Lord  Middleton, but on the death of the  Duke of Lauderdale he again got  into favour, and, until the close of the reign of King James, he held  the principal sway and power in  Scottish affairs.  He was accessory,  if not the principal, in putting  Spence and Carstairs to the torture  of the boot and thumb-screw after  the rebellion of Argyll.  In 1685  King James ennobled him by the  title of Viscount Tarbat, Lord  Macleod and Castlehaven.  During  the reign of William III. his  influence became much  diminished, but he afterwards got  into power, and, on the accession  of Queen Anne, he again became a  Royal favourite, and was by her in  1703 created Earl of Cromarty, and  made Secretary of State for  Scotland.  He subsequently  resigned this office and took up his  old post of Justice-General, and  recompensed Her Majesty's  favours by strongly advocating with  voice and pen the Union between  England and Scotland, of which he  was the original proposer.  In 1710,  after 60 years of the most active  public service, he retired into  private life.

That he possessed ability of  a very high order is undoubted,  though as a politician he held very  loose and changeable principles. Sinibert says that "as a judge, he  was addicted to the old practice of  considering the litigants rather than  their causes"; and Carstairs goes  the length of saying that "he  habitually falsified the minutes of  Parliament, and recorded in its  name decisions and orders never  really made."  In the course of his  long and checkered career he had  been a member of so many  Ministries and changed sides so  often that it was not to be expected  that he should escape charges of  inconsistency.  "Some do compare  him to an eel," said Lockhart of  Carnwath, "and certainly the  character suited him exactly.  He  had sworn all the most  contradictory oaths, and complied  with all the opposite Governments  since the year 1648, and was  humble servant to them all till he  got what he aimed at, though often  he did not know what that was."   Almost every statesman of his time  was as changeable as he was, but  he possessed a capacity for  business which distinguished few if  any of his rivals.  He is admitted on  all hands to have been in private life a gentleman of the most refined  habits.  He wrote well on various  subjects, his chief productions  being Essays on the Union of the  two Kingdoms of England and  Scotland; on the Gowrie Conspiracy; and a "Plain  Explication" of the Prophecies of  Daniel and St. John.  He also wrote  the MS. history of his clan, so often quoted and referred to in this work,  and he undoubtedly invented Colin  Fitzgerald.

His lordship married, first, Anne, daughter of Sir George Sinclair of Mey, with issue--

1.  Roderick, who died young.

2.  John, who became his heir and successor.

3.  Kenneth, who in 1704  obtained a baronetcy with his  grandfather's patent of creation, as  Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, Baronet of  Grandvale and Cromarty. [Sir  Kenneth and his younger brother,  Sir James Mackenzie of Royston,  were created baronets in the same  year, the patent of the latter being  dated 8th of February, 1704.  Sir Kenneth's patent (which is to his  heirs male for ever), was dated 29th  of April, 1704, and contained the  original precedency of the patent of  his grandfather, Sir John, who was  created a Baronet of Nova Scotia in  1628.  Sir Kenneth was a member  of Parliament for the County of  Cromartie in the reigns of King  William and Queen Anne.  He  warmly supported the treaty of  Union, was one of the members  nominated by the Parliament of  Scotland, on 13th February, 1707,  to sit in the United Parliament of  Great Britain, and was chosen  member for the County of  Cromartie at the general election in  1710.  A new writ for that county  was ordered On 22nd January,  1729, in consequence of his  decease, and his eldest son Sir  George, was elected in his place.--Earls of Cromartie]  He died in  1729, having married Anne  Campbell, with issue--Sir George, the second Baronet, M.P., who  married Elizabeth, daughter of Captain John Reid, of Greenwich,  without issue.  In 1741, his affairs  having become embarrassed, Sir  George sold Cromarty to Sir  William Urquhart of Meldrum.  He  died in 1748, and was buried at  Dingwall; his lady having survived  him 59 years, and died at Inverness  in 1807, aged 84.  Sir Kenneth's  other four sons were Colin; James;  Campbell; and Gerard, who all died  young or unmarried and Kenneth,  who, in 1748, succeeded his  brother Sir George, as third  Baronet, and died unmarried in  1763.  His daughter, Catherine,  married Dr Adam Murray, of  Stirling.  He had several other  daughters, married and unmarried.

4.  James, who on the 8th of February, 1704, was created a Baronet by Queen Anne as Sir James Mackenzie of Royston, and in 1710 he was  appointed a Lord of Session by the title of Lord Royston.  The Baronetcy  being limited to heirs male, and Lord Royston having died in 1744 without surviving male issue, the title became dormant.  He married Elizabeth,  daughter of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, with issue--George of  Farnese, who in 1743 married Isabella Stuart, and died before his father, without issue; Anne, who married Sir William Dick of Prestonfield; and  Elizabeth, who married Sir John Stewart of Grandtully, with issue.

5.  Lady Margaret, who married Sir D. Bruce of Clackmannan,  without issue.

6.  Lady Elizabeth, who married Sir John Brown of Coalstown.

7.  Lady Jean, married Sir Thomas Stewart of Balcaskie.

8.  Lady Anne, who married the Hon. John Sinclair, son of Lord Murkle, and died in 1740.

The Earl married, secondly, Margaret, Countess of Wemyss,  without issue.  He died in 1714, was buried at Dingwall, and succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  JOHN  MACKENZIE,  second Earl of Cromarty.  He does  not appear to have taken a  prominent part in public affairs,  and he kept out of the Rising of  1715.  Notwithstanding the division  which had been made of the family  estates to secure suitable provision for the two Baronetcies, his  Lordship still possessed extensive possessions in the Counties of  Ross, Inverness, Elgin, and Fife. He married, first, Lady Elizabeth  Gordon, daughter of the first Earl  of Aboyne, without issue.  He  afterwards divorced her and married, secondly, the Hon. Mary  Murray, daughter of the third Lord  Elibank, with issue--

1.  Lord George, his heir and successor.

2.  Captain Roderick, who married twice, with issue--Captain Kenneth of Cromarty, who succeeded to the estates in 1789, and died without issue male in 1796 and a daughter.

3.  Lord William who died at sea, without issue.

4.  Lord Patrick, who married, without male issue.

5.  Lord Gideon, who died without issue male.

6.  Lady Mary; 7.  Lady Anna; 8.  Lady Helen; all of whom died young or unmarried.

The Earl married, thirdly, Anna, daughter of Hugh, Xth Lord  Lovat, with issue--

9.  Lord  James; 10.  Lord Hugh; and 11. Lord Norman, all of  whom died young, the latter at sea in 1751.

12.  Lady Emilia, who in 1740 married Archibald Lamont of  Lamont, with issue.

His Lordship died in 1731, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, third Earl of Cromarty.  He joined  Prince Charles in 1745 and fought at the battle of Falkirk at the head of 400 or 500 of his clan. Afterwards, on the 15th of April, the day immediately preceding the battle of Culloden, he was taken prisoner, along with his eldest son, Lord Macleod, and all his officers, at Dunrobin  Castle, by two companies of Sutherlands and Mackays.  He had previously  detached himself from the main body of the Highland army with the view  of seizing this castle and repressing the adherents of the Government in  the far North.  He was at once sent to London and imprisoned in the  Tower.  His vacillating conduct and uncertain correspondence with Lord  President Forbes are notorious, for he actually wrote to the latter as late as  October, 1745, saying that he was then "stirring actively in the cause of the Government."  He was in due course tried, found guilty of high treason, and sentenced to death; but was afterwards pardoned through the  bold and urgent entreaties of his Countess.  In support of his own  application for mercy, she waited personally on the members of the  Cabinet, and presented a separate petition to each of them pleading for  mercy, and on the Sunday after sentence was passed upon him, she went  to Kensington Palace, dressed in deep mourning, accompanied by Lady  Stair, to make a personal appeal to His Majesty for the Royal clemency.

She was far advanced in pregnancy, and though a woman of strong mind,  who had hitherto exhibited great fortitude in her distressing position, on  this occasion she completely broke down, and gave way to grief.  Taking  her stand, surrounded by her ten young children, in the entrance of the  Chapel through which the King had to pass, she awaited his arrival, and as  he approached she fell on her knees, seized him by the coattails, presented  her petition, and fainted at his feet.  His Majesty immediately seized and  raised her, received the petition, and handed it to the Duke of Grafton, who was present as one of his attendants.  He then requested Lady Stair to  conduct the Countess to one of the apartments.  The Dukes of Hamilton  and Montrose, the Earl of Stair, and other courtiers, having subsequently supported her petition by a personal application to the King, His Majesty,  on the 9th of August, granted the Earl a free pardon, and he was at once  set at liberty.  His Lordship lived for several years in seclusion and  poverty, supported mainly by the contributions of his old tenants and  retainers on the forfeited estates.

He married Isabella, daughter of Sir William Gordon of  Invergordon, with issue--

1.  John, Lord Macleod, his heir.

2.  Lord William, who died young.

3.  Lord George, a Colonel in the 71st Regiment, who died  unmarried in 1788.

4.  Lady Isabella, who married George, VIth Lord Elibank, with issue, and in 1796 succeeded her cousin, Captain Kenneth, in the estates.

5.  Lady Mary, who married, first, Captain Clarke, London; secondly, Thomas Drayton,  South Carolina and thirdly, John Ainslie, Charlestown.

6.  Lady Anne, who married, first, the Hon. Edmond Atkin, of  South Carolina  and secondly, Dr John Murray of Charlestown.

7.  Lady Caroline, who married, first, a Mr Drake, of London, and secondly, Walter Hunter of Polmood and Crailieg.

8.  Lady Jean; and 9.  Lady Amelia, both of whom died young.

10.  Lady Margaret, who in 1769 married John Glassford of  Douglastown, Dumbarton, with issue.

11.  Lady Augusta, who married Sir William Murray of  Auchtertyre, with issue.

The Earl died in 1766, and was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

IV.  LORD  MACLEOD, Major-General in the army, by whose  noble and patriotic conduct the fortunes of the family were afterwards to some extent restored.  Disdaining to live on the charity of his friends and  as a burden on his father, he joined the Swedish army as a soldier of  fortune worked his way there, was aide-de-camp to the King, who created  him Count Cromarty, and, in 1775, returned to his native country, after  twenty-seven years of distinguished foreign service, full of fame and  honours, with the rank of Lieut.-General.  In 1754 the re-grant of the Lovat  estates by George III. to General Fraser emboldened Lord Macleod to  petition the King for the restoration of the Cromarty ancestral possessions; but his application at that time failed, although he succeeded later on.

When Lord Macleod joined  his father against the Government  he was only eighteen years of age,  and on account of his extreme  youth he had already obtained an  unconditional pardon on the 22nd  of June, 1748.  In 1777 he was  presented at Court, on which  occasion George III. received him  very kindly.  In return for this  gracious treatment, first pardoning  him, and now so generously  receiving him, his Lordship offered  to raise a Highland Regiment.  The offer was accepted, and in a very  short time, though without any property or political connections,  he soon raised a fine body of 840  men among his Highland  countrymen.  To this number 236 Lowlanders and 34 English and  Irish were added by some of his friends, making together a full  regiment of 1100 men, embodied at Elgin, and inspected there by  General Skene in April, 1778.

Immediately after, Letters of  Service were issued in his favour for raising a second battalion of the  same size as the first. This he soon  accomplished, not less than 1800 of  the men having been raised from  the possessions of his ancestors--a  splendid set of men with excellent  constitutions, and of most  exemplary conduct.  He was  appointed Colonel of the first  battalion, and his brother, the Hon.  Lieut.-Colonel Mackenzie, received  the command of the second  battalion.  The Regiment was  named Macleod's Highlanders,  numbered the 73rd, and is now well  known as the 71st Highlanders.  In  1779 Lord Macleod accompanied  his Highlanders to India, and  fought at their head in the Carnatic  against Hyder Ah, under Major-General Sir Hector Munro, where  they greatly distinguished  themselves, though the regiment  was nearly cut to pieces at the  battle of Conjeveram.  In 1782 his  Lordship attained the rank of  Major-General, and in the  following year he returned home.

In acknowledgment of his  distinguished services, an Act of Parliament was passed, on the 18th  of August, 1784, by which the forfeited estates of the Earldom  were restored to him, on payment of ?9,000 to relieve them of  existing burdens.

Lord Macleod married in  1786 Marjory, eldest daughter of  James, XVIth Lord Forbes, without  issue.  She afterwards married  John, fourth Duke of Athole, with  issue.  The mansion, which had  been almost entirely demolished  after the `Forty-five, was by him  rebuilt and enlarged, and the  policies put into good order and  properly attended to.  He died on  the 2nd of April, 1789, and was  succeeded in the estates by his  cousin-german,

V.  CAPTAIN  KENNETH  MACKENZIE of Cromarty, who died  in 1796, without male issue.  He was the last direct male heir, and on his death the representation of the family, carrying with it the dormant honours of Cromarty and Tarbat, went into the family of Ardloch. He was  succeeded in the estates by Lord Macleod's eldest sister,

VI.  LADY  ISABELLA, who married the sixth Lord Elibank.  She died on the 28th of December, 1801, without male issue, and was succeeded by her eldest daughter,

VII. THE  HON.  MARIA  MURRAY, who in 1790 married the  Hon. Edward Hay of Newhall, brother of George, VIIth Marquis of  Tweeddale, who thereupon assumed the name of Mackenzie in addition to  his own, with issue--

1.  John Hay, her heir and successor.

2.  Dorothea, who on the 2nd of July, 1813, married Sir David Hunter Blair, with issue.

3.  Isabella, who on the 1st of November, 1817, married John  Buckle, with issue.

4.  Georgina Ann, who married James, fifth Earl of Glasgow,  without issue.

Her only sister, the Hon. Isabella Murray, died unmarried in 1849.

The Hon. Maria Murray was succeeded by her only son,

VIII.  JOHN  HAY-MACKENZIE, who on the 23rd of April, 1828,  married Anne, daughter of Sir Gibson-Craig, Baronet, with issue--

1.  Anne his heir and successor.

He died at Cliefden on the 9th of July, 1849, and was succeeded by his only child,

IX.  ANNE  HAY-MACKENZIE of Cromarty, who,  on the 27th of June, 1849, married  His Grace the third Duke of  Sutherland.  On the 21st of  October, 1861, her Grace was, by a  new creation, made Countess of  Cromarty, Viscountess Tarbat of  Tarbat, Baroness Macleod of Castle  Leod, and Baroness Castlehaven of  Castlehaven, with remainder to her  second son, Viscount Tarbat.

Thus, should the old title ever be  restored, there would be two Earls,  with all the titles exactly similar,  excepting that the holder of the  original earldom would also inherit  the Nova Scotia Baronetcy, as well  as that of 1704.

On the death of the late Duchess of Sutherland, Countess of Cromartie, in 1888, she was succeeded by her second surviving son,

X.  FRANCIS  SUTHLRLAND  LEVESON  GOWER, as Earl of  Cromartie, in all her other titles, and estates.  He was born on the 3rd of August, 1852, and on the 2nd of August, 1876, married the Hon. Lilian Janet, second surviving daughter of Godfrey William Wentworth, 4th Lord  Macdonald of Sleat, with issue--

1.  Sibell Lilian, born on the 14th of August, 1878.

2.  Constance, born in 1882.

The Earl died on the 24th of November, 1893.  The limitation of this earldom being to his heirs male, and on the failure of such to his heirs,  with other remainders over, a question arises as to whether or not the  dignity is now in abeyance between his Lordship's two daughters and co-heirs.

As it is possible the old honours may yet be claimed, it may be interesting to note in a more concise manner the facts concerning them.   The original patent of the Nova Scotia Baronetcy to Sir John Mackenzie  of Tarbat, by Charles I., dated 21st May, 1628, was to him "suosque  haredes masculos quoscunque de tempore in tempus in posterum per  perpetuo," and the re-grant of 29th April, 1704, to his grandson, Kenneth,  second son of George, first Earl of Cromarty, being confessedly to restore  the old Baronetcy--now absorbed in the Earldom--intact, "as the samen  was given to the umquhile Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat," was to Kenneth  and his heirs male "in perpetuum," and was therefore granted with the  same succession, presumably to heirs male whomsoever.

Sir Kenneth Mackenzie of  Grandvale and Cromarty, first  Baronet of this re-grant, having  died in 1729, the dignity was  enjoyed by his eldest son, Sir  George, second Baronet, who died  without issue in 1748, and  afterwards by his youngest son, Sir  Kenneth, third Baronet, who died at  Tam in 1763, also without issue.   At this Sir Kenneth's death, it is  clear that the succession would, under the patent of 1704, then  devolve upon his heir male,  George, the attainted third Earl of  Cromarty, who survived all the  male descendants of the patentee,  but whose honours, having been attainted in 1746, had been restored  by the pardon granted to him under  the Great Seal on the 20th of  October, 1749.  Thus was this Baronetcy absorbed a second time  in the Earldom of Cromarty.  Nor does it appear that it was ever  assumed by George, the third Earl (who died in Poland Street,  London, on the 29th of September, 1766), nor by his son Lord  Macleod, who obtained a pardon  dated the 26th of January, 1748,  and with whom, who died without  issue, on the 2nd of April, 1789,  ended the direct line both of the Earldom and of the Baronetcy.

The succession then opened  to his cousin, Captain Mackenzie  of Cromarty, who obtained the  estates; but he also died without  issue in 1796, without having  assumed either title.

Taking the term "haredibus  masculis," according to the opinion of John Riddell, the well-known  Advocate and author "in the sense of our law, as an equivalent to heirs  male whatsoever," the representation of the Tarbat  Baronetcy would then revert to the brothers of George, first Earl of  Cromarty, the next of whom was Roderick, Lord Prestonhall.  But  here again the fatality to heirs male  which has dogged the steps of the  Cromarty titles in so extraordinary  a manner, ended the succession in  the children of his son, Alexander  of Fraserdale.  Riddell, in his  opinion upon the revival of 1826,  says, "I certainly saw proof of the  male extinction of the Prestonhall  branch several years ago."  That is, in one of the Lovat actions of  Fraserdale, or Macleod of Macleod; and, after that family, the  succession of the descendants of Alexander of Ardloch, fourth son  of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, was proved, in the Service at Tam,  on the 30th of October, 1826, in the  person of Lieutenant-Colonel  Alexander Mackenzie, eldest son of  Colonel Robert Mackenzie of  Milnmount, who assumed the dormant Baronetcies of Tarbat and  Royston, and who, dying without issue on the 28th of April, 1841,  was succeeded by his only brother,  Sir James Sutherland Mackenzie,  who also died unmarried on the  24th of November, 1858.  Since his  death these Baronetcies have  remained dormant, no effort to  assume them having been made by  the next heir male, although no  doubt it was quite in his power to  do so.

It is obvious from what has already been said that the  representation of the Earldom of Cromarty, granted to George, Viscount  Tarbat, on the 18th of September, 1703, the succession of which is  "haredibus masculis et tallia" devolves upon the same head as the above-named Baronetcies.  It is not, however, clear whether the pardon obtained by George, third Earl, is sufficient to remove the attainder, or whether an  Act of Parliament would not be necessary for that purpose, although the  attainted male-blood is long ago at an end. Since this question was  debated, the restoration of the Airlie and other forfeited peerages have, in  a great measure, cleared the ground, and in the new creation of 1861 the  older title and honours according to the decisions in these cases could be  in no way affected or disturbed.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  ARDLOCH.

THE first of this family, on which devolved the representation of the  original Earldom of Cromarty and the Baronetcies of Tarbat and Royston  in the male line, was

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth son of Sir John  Mackenzie of Tarbat, created a Baronet of Nova Scotia in 1628, by his  wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir George Erskine of Innerteil, a Lord of Session and Justiciary.  Alexander, who has a sasine as fourth son, dated June, 1654, married Barbara, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of  Gairloch, and relict of Fraser of Kinneries, with issue--

1.  Roderick, who died young.

2.  John, his heir and successor.

3.  James, of Keppoch, who married Isabella, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of Dundonnel, with issue--(1) Alexander, who married Henrietta Mackenzie of Fisherfield (sasine 1773); (2) Simon of Keppoch,  who married with issue--Alexander of Kildonan, on record in 1755; (3)  George of Kildonan, who married, first, Ann, daughter of Roderick  Mackenzie of Kernsary, with issue--James.  George died in 1809, aged  109 years; (4) Colin, of Jamaica, who married Janet, daughter of Kenneth  Mackenzie, III. of Dundonnel, without issue; (5) Mary, who married  Donald, grandson of John Mackenzie, I. of Gruinard, with issue; (6)  Isabella, who married Allan Mackenzie, of the family of Hilton.  James  sold Keppoch in 1730.

5.  Barbara, who married Roderick, son of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, with issue.

6.  Ann, who married William, sixth son of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, with issue.

7.  Margaret, who died  unmarried; and three others who  married respectively, Sinclair of  Dunbeath; Gordon of Auchintoul, a  cadet of the Gordons of Embo; and  Colin Mackenzie of Kildun.

He died in 1736, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

II.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, second of Ardloch, who married  Sibella, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of Dundonnel, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth.  3.  John.  Nothing is known of either.

4.  Annabella, and others; issue, if any, unknown.

John was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, third of Ardloch, who married  Margaret, daughter of Robert  Sutherland of Langwell, Caithness, twelfth  in descent from William de Sutherland, fifth  Earl of Sutherland, by his  wife, the Princess Margaret Bruce, sister and heir of David II., King of  Scotland, with issue--

1.  James, a Major in the army, who married a daughter of  Mackenzie of Fairburn, with issue--one son, who died before his father.

2.  Robert, of Milnmount,  Colonel H.E.I.C.S., married first, a daughter of Mackenzie of Bayfield,  without male issue; and secondly, Katharine, daughter of Colonel  Sutherland of Uppat, with issue--Sir Alexander Mackenzie,  Lieutenant-Colonel H.E.I.C.S.,  who, on the 30th of October, 1826,  assumed the dormant Baronetcies  of Tarbat and Royston, as heir male  collateral of Sir Kenneth  Mackenzie, brother of John, second  Earl of Cromarty.  On the 17th of  August at Tam, in the same year,  he was served nearest and lawful  heir male to George, first Earl of  Cromarty.  He died, unmarried, in  1841 (his father, Colonel Robert,  having died in 1809), and was  succeeded in the Baronetcies by his  next brother, Sir James Sutherland  Mackenzie, who in 1858 also died  without issue.  Sir James' sister,  Elizabeth, married Lieutenant  Sutherland, Royal Navy, with issue;  and his sister, Margaret, married  the Rev. James H. Hughes,  Chaplain H.E.I.C.S., Bombay, with  issue.  On the death of Sir James  the Baronetcies and other dignities  of the Cromarty family reverted to  his cousin, the late John  Mackenzie, Lochinver, son of  Kenneth Mackenzie, Ledbeg,  Assynt, who, however, never  assumed the titles.

3.  George, minister in Caithness, who died at sea, unmarried, in 1825.

4.  Kenneth, of Ledbeg, who married, first, a daughter of  Mackenzie of Elphin, with issue--(1) the late John of Lochinver, heir male to the Tarbat and Cromarty honours, twice married, without issue; (2)  Robert; (3) James; (4) Charles; and (5) Royston, all of whom died without surviving issue; (6) Jane; (7) Georgina; (8) Jessie, who married the Rev.  John Kennedy, minister of Redcastle, who died in 1841, with issue, one of whom was the Rev. John Kennedy, D.D., late Free Church minister of  Dingwall.

5.  Charles Stuart, who died unmarried.

6.  Roderick, who also died unmarried.

7.  John, who died unmarried, abroad.

8.  Murdoch, who married Janet, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie  of Dundonnel, without issue.

9.  Alexander, who married a daughter of Mackenzie of  Stronchrubie, with issue--James, who died in Assynt, unmarried, and two daughters--Margaret, who married Kenneth Macleod and Anne, who died unmarried.

Failing the male succession of this family, which has become  extremely difficult if not impossible to trace now that the representatives of Kenneth Mackenzie of Ledbeg have failed in the male line, the dormant  honours of Tarbat and Cromarty reverts to the family of Scatwell.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  SCATWELL.

I.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was the second son of Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach, Tutor of Kintail, by Margaret, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Torquil Macleod of the Lewis. He married, in  1634, Margaret, eldest daughter and co-heiress of Robert Munro the Black  Baron, XX of Fowlis (tocher 15,000 merks), with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Jean, who married a son of Munro of Lemlair.

3.  Anne, who married MacCulloch of Park, without issue.

4.  Catherine, who married Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of Langwell,  with issue.

He married, secondly, Janet, daughter of Walter Ross of  Invercharron, relict of Thomas Ross of Priesthill, life rentrix of Priesthill, Ulladale, etc. (who died on the 17th of March, 1699), with issue--

5.  Roderick, who died young.

6.  Alexander, who succeeded his half-brother John as III. of Scatwell.

7.  George, who died young.

8.  Kenneth, who succeeded his brother Alexander.

9.  Isabella, who married John Macleod of Contullich, Tutor of Macleod of Macleod, with issue.

10.  Christian, who married, first, John Gray of Arboll, and secondly, George Gordon of Ospisdale, without issue.

He has a sasine of Little Scatwell in 1619, and a charter of Allangrange, from George, Earl of Seaforth, in 1636.  He died at Lochluichart, of which place he has a sasine in 1634, on the 3rd of March,  1662, and was buried in St. Clement's Chapel, Dingwall, when according  to the Wardlaw MS.  "My Lord Lovat paraded there with near 100 horse  and 500 foot," to do honour to "a gallant and a great spirit."

Kenneth was succeeded by  his only son by the first marriage,

II.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, second of Scatwell, who has a sasine in 1667.  He married Anne, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Redcastle, with issue--an only child, Lilias, who married Colin Mackenzie, III. of Kincraig, with issue (sasine to her in 1679).  He died on  the 13th of May, 1677, and was succeeded by his half-brother,

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, third of Scatwell, who married  Janet Ross of Ulladale, who died in March, 1699.  He died on the 18th of March, 1680, without issue, and was succeeded by his brother,

IV.  SIR  KENNETH MACKENZIE, fourth of Scatwell.   He was created a Baronet of Nova  Scotia on the 22nd of February,  1703, by Queen Anne, six weeks  after the elevation of his cousin-german, George, Lord Tarbat, to  the Earldom of Cromarty.  He was  member of Parliament from 1702  to 1706.  Dr George Mackenzie  says that "he was a member of the  Union Parliament, and joined those  patriots of the country who stood  by the ancient and inalienable  privileges of the nation."  In 1688  he acquired by purchase from his  relative, Sir George Mackenzie of  Rosehaugh and Mary Haliburton  his wife, the lands of Pittonachty.

About the same time he married  Lilias (then only eighteen years old), eldest daughter of Sir  Roderick Mackenzie of Findon,  fourth son of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Kilcoy, who, on  the death of her father and mother,  and that of her only brother the  year following, was, on the 12th of  October, 1693, served heir of tailzie and provision to her father in  the lands of Findon, which property  she brought to her husband.  The  fortunes of the family of Scatwell  having thus been much improved,  in 1696 a dwelling-house was  erected by Kenneth and his wife at  Findon, into which they removed  from Lochluichart; and they  continued to reside in it until the  erection  of the new mansion at  Pittonachty by Sir Roderick Mackenzie, the second baronet, in  1795.  The old residence at Findon, now used as a farm house, still  bears the following inscription on  the lintel of the main door:--

"Omnia terrena per vices sunt aliena, Nunc mea, nunc hujus, Post mortem nescio cujus, Null certa domus." "K. MK. 16. 96 I. MK."

By his first wife, Lilias of Findon, who died in childbed on the 21st  of October, 1703, Sir Kenneth had issue--

1.  George, who was educated at Oxford, where he remained from July, 1702, until May, 1704, during which period he cost his father 8192  merks.  He is described as "a youth of great hope and spirit," but he died  "of a decay," unmarried, in 1705, in his 21st year.

2.  Roderick, who succeeded as second Baronet.

3.  Alexander, who died in 1711, in his 18th year.

4.  Simon, I. of Scotsburn--who was born on the 16th of May, 1702--representation extinct, Charles Roderick Mackenzie, the last male  representative of the family having died at Seaford, Sussex, on the 25th of  April, 1893, without issue.

5.  Margaret, who on the 13th of February, 1703, married, first, Aeneas Macleod of Cadboll (tocher 6000 merks), with issue; and secondly, Roderick Mackenzie, IV. of Applecross, with issue.

6.  Isabel, who married, first, Kenneth Bayne of Tulloch, without issue; and secondly, Roderick Chisholm, XXI. of Chisholm, with issue.

7.  Elizabeth, who married William Mackenzie, III. of Belmaduthy, with issue--a daughter, who married Fraser of Culduthel.

8.  Margaret, who married James Cuthbert of Farnese, merchant, Inverness.

Sir Kenneth married, secondly, in 1707, Christian, eldest daughter of the Rev. Roderick Mackenzie, minister and Laird of Avoch, without issue.  He married, thirdly, Abigail, daughter of John Urquhart of Newhall,  with issue--

9.  Kenneth, H.E.I.C.S., who died unmarried.

10.  Jean, who married   Kenneth Mackenzie, III. of  Dundonnel, with issue, and died in  1786.

11.  Ann, who in 1750 married Thomas Mackenzie, V. of Ord,  with issue.

12.  Lilias, born at Findon  on the 22nd of February, 1711.

In 1728, two years before his death, he mortified a sum of 906 merks for the education and benefit of the poor in the parish of Avoch.

He  died in 1730, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

V.  SIR  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fifth of Scatwell, and second  Baronet, who in 1710 married Janet, (who died 10th February, 1761)  daughter of Ludovic Grant, XVII. of Grant, with issue--

1.  Lewis, his heir and  successor.

2.  Captain Alexander, who married, first, his cousin Lilias, daughter of Simon Mackenzie, I. of Scotsburn, with issue; and secondly,  Janet, daughter of John Mackenzie, III. of Torridon, with issue.  Male  representation by both marriages extinct.

3.  Janet, who in 1730 married Sir Alexander Mackenzie, second Baronet and IX. of Gairloch, with issue.

4.  Elizabeth, who married Colin Mackenzie, III. of Mountgerald with issue.

5.  Margaret, who married James Cuthbert of Milncraig.

Sir Roderick died on the 24th of April, 1750, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  SIR  LEWIS   MACKENZIE, third Baronet and  sixth of Scatwell. He was born in  1715, and in 1739 married Isabella,  eldest daughter of Colin  Mackenzie, I. of Mountgerald, with  issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, who was born on  the 16th of April, 1746, the day on which the battle of Culloden was  fought.  He was a merchant in London, in partnership with Mark  Sprot, the then eminent financier, and married Janet, daughter of J.  Sprot, Edinburgh.  He died in 1814  and is buried in Bath Abbey.  He  has a sasine of Little Findon in life-rent, dated the 2nd of September,  1771.  By his wife, he had issue--(1) Colin, who died unmarried, in  1841; (2) Mark, who died  unmarried, in 1856; (3) Lewis,  Major in the Royal Scots Greys,  who married, in 1820, Nancy, only  child and heiress of Samuel  Forrester Bancroft.  He died in  1853, with issue--(a) Lewis Mark  Mackenzie, I. of Findon and  Mountgerald.  He succeeded to the  estate of Findon by deed of  arrangement with his cousin, Sir James John Randoll Mackenzie,  sixth Baronet and IX. of Scatwell, in 1849, and he purchased  Mountgerald from Colonel Simon  Mackenzie in 1855.  He died  unmarried in 1856, and was  succeeded, as II. of Findon, etc., by  his next brother (b) Augustus  Colin, who also died unmarried, in  1865; when the only surviving  brother (c) Sir James D.  Mackenzie, Baronet, Major half-pay, who, born in 1830, served in  the 79th and 14th Regiments.  He is  author of the "Mackenzie  Genealogies," published in 1879.   Having succeeded to the property,  as III. of Findon and Mountgerald,  he married, in 1858, Julia Stanley,  daughter of Samuel Clutsam,  D.C.L., with issue--James Kenneth  Douglas, born in 1859; Alice  Nancy; Julia Marion; Louisa  Augusta; Lilian Geraldine and  Evelyn; (d) Earnest Bancroft, who  died unmarried in 1861; (e) Colin,  who died young; (f) Nancy Copley,  who married Thomas Antony Lister  of Gargrave, barrister-at-law, with  issue--Nancy M. Augusta; (g) and  Julia Louisa, who, in 1824, married  Baron Iver Holger Rosenkrantz, Chamberlain to the King of  Denmark and minister at the Court  of Italy (who died in 1873), with  issue--four sons.

3.  Lewis, who died in the West Indies, unmarried.

4.  George, Colonel 72nd  Regiment, who married Joan,  daughter of John Campbell of  Wellwood, Ayrshire, with issue--(1) Lewis, Captain 72nd Regiment,  who married Jane, daughter of  William Logan, with issue--a  daughter, Margaret; (2) John  Campbell, Lieutenant 5th  Regiment, subsequently Sheriff-Substitute of Lanark.  He married,  in 1810, Marie Barbier Deshayeux,  at St. Jean de Luz, with issue--George Salvador, Lieutenant   H.E.I.C.S., drowned in the Ganges  in 1844; Admiral John Fraser  Campbell, who in 1850, married  Annabella, daughter of the Rev. Dr  Stirling, minister of Craigie, with  issue; Francois, Major H.E.I.C.S.,  who married, in 1854, Julia,  daughter of John Mercer, of  Maidstone, with issue; Lilias, who  died unmarried; and Louisa  Georgina, who, in 1843, married as  his second wife, Dr Stair M'Quhae,  with issue; (3) George, who died  young; (4) another George, who  died unmarried; (5) Isabel, who  died young; (6) Catherine, who  died unmarried; and  (7) Jane, who  married William Forrester Bow,  M.D., with issue--three sons.

5.  Lilias, who died unmarried, in 1777.

Sir Lewis was served heir to his father in 1752.  His wife died in 1786 at Findon, and he died in 1756, when he was succeeded by his eldest  son,

VII.  SIR  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fourth Baronet and seventh  of Scatwell.  On the 7th of April, 1764, he married Katharine, daughter of  Sir James Colquhoun of Luss, by Lady Helen Sutherland, daughter of  William, Lord Strathnaver, with issue--

1.  Lewis, Colonel of the Ross and Cromarty Rangers. In 1794, he married Grace, daughter of Thomas Lockhart of Newhall, and died without issue before his father, in 1810.

2.  James Wemyss, who succeeded his father.

3.  Helen, who in 1790 died unmarried.

4.  Katharine Morrison, who in 1819 died unmarried.

In 1795 Sir Roderick built, on his estate of Pittonachty, the present  mansion, to which, with the property, he gave the name of the adjoining  estate of Rosehaugh, and removed his family to it from the old house at  Findon.  He also built the present Church of Urquhart, or Ferrintosh, the old one having become uninhabitable from the accumulation of interments  within it.  He died on the 11th of June, 1811, and was succeeded by his  eldest surviving son,

VIII.  SIR  JAMES   WEMYSS  MACKENZIE, fifth  Baronet and eighth of Scatwell,  M.P., and Lord-Lieutenant for the  County of Ross. He resided for a  time in Jamaica, and was  Paymaster in the army. He was  born on the 10th of August, 1770,  and married on the 26th of March,  1810, Henrietta Wharton, only  surviving daughter and heiress of  William Mackenzie, IV. of Suddie,  by  Margaret, daughter of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, V. of Coul,  widow of Captain Robert Pott of  Galallan, without issue; and on the  death of her brother, Major-General  John Randoll Mackenzie, of the  78th Highlanders, at Talavera, in  1809, she brought to Sir James the  estate of Suddie.  By her (who died  on the 14th of November, 1840) he  had an only child, who on his death  in 1843, succeeded his father as

IX.  SIR  JAMES  JOHN   RANDOLL  MACKENZIE, sixth  Baronet and ninth of Scatwell, who  was born on the 20th of June, 1814,  and married on the 10th of  October, 1838, Lady Anne  Wentworth Fitzwilliam, daughter  of Charles William Wentworth,  fifth Earl Fitzwilliam, K.G.  She  died in 1879, without issue.

Sir James in 1849 obtained a disentail of the Scatwell estates, and  soon after alienated or sold them.  Findon went, under a deed of  arrangement, to his cousin, the late Lewis Mark Mackenzie, grandson of  Colin, second son of Sir Lewis Mackenzie, VI. and third Baronet of  Scatwell, and was until recently possessed by his brother, Sir James Dixon  Mackenzie of Findon and Mountgerald, who on the death of Sir James  John Randoll Mackenzie, on the 22nd of February, 1884, without issue,  assumed the Baronetcy of Scatwell, and who, failing the male  representation of the Mackenzies of Ardloch, is heir male also to the  Tarbat and Royston Baronetcies, and to the original Earldom of Cromarty.

The estate of Scatwell was sold to Mr Murray of Polmaise; Lochluichart to Lord Ashburton; Rosehaugh in 1864, to the late James Fletcher, while  that of Suddie was retained in the hands of the trustees under Sir James  John Randoll Mackenzie's marriage settlement.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  BALLONE.

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, the first of this family, was fourth son of Sir Roderick Mackenzie, Tutor of Kintail, by his wife Margaret, daughter and heiress of Torquil "Conanach" Macleod of the Lewis, Coigeach, and Assynt, by his wife Margaret, daughter of Angus Macdonald, VI. of Glengarry.  Alexander has a sasine as fourth son of the lands of Acha-ghluineachan, Lochbroom, in 1635, where Ballone, now  called Inverbroom, is situated, and comprising Acha-ghluineachan,  Achataskaill, Craigour, Strathnasealg, Arigholach, and other lands.  On  the 24th of June, 1637, he grants a disposition of the lands of Achataskaill  to Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat.  He married Agnes, widow of Kenneth  Mackenzie, II. of Inverlael (sasine on marriage contract in 1629), and  daughter of William Fraser, V. of Culbokie, by his wife Christian,  daughter of Alexander Chisholm, XVIII. of Chisholm, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Jean, who married first, in 1663, Simon, second son of the Hon. Simon Mackenzie of Lochslinn, and brother of Sir George Mackenzie of  Rosehaugh, with issue--Simon, I. of Allangrange.  She married secondly,  in 1667, Alexander Mackenzie, IV. of Loggie, without issue.

3.  Margaret, who married  first (sasines 1671 and 1673), Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Findon,  fourth son of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Kilcoy, with issue  --(1) Alexander, who died young;  (2) Lilias, who married Sir Kenneth  Mackenzie, first Baronet and IV. of Scatwell (marriage contract 6th of  July, 1682), with issue.  She was  served heir of entail to her brother  on the 12th of October, 1693; (3)  Isobel, who married her cousin,  Simon Mackenzie, I. of Allangrange (marriage contract  22nd of August 1693), with issue; (4) Jean, who married John  Chisholm, XX. of Chisholm, with  issue; and (5) Margaret, who  married Sir Kenneth Mackenzie,  first Baronet and VIII. of Gairloch  (marriage contract dated 21st of  April, 1696), with issue.  Margaret  of Ballone married, secondly, Colin Mackenzie, I. of Mountgerald,  without issue.

Alexander had also a natural son, Colin, who has a sasine of Kildonan of Lochbroom in  1684, and was Chamberlain to Lord Tarbat. He died at Munlochy, in 1645, and was buried in St. Clement's Church, Dingwall.

His widow, Agnes Fraser, married thirdly (marriage contract dated Kingillie, 12th of January, 1650), as his second wife, the Hon. Simon  Mackenzie of Lochslinn with issue--Kenneth Mor Mackenzie, I. of  Dundonnel, and two daughters--Isobel and Elizabeth, married respectively to Murdoch Mackenzie, VI. of Fairburn, and the Rev. Roderick  Mackenzie, minister and laird of Avoch.

Alexander was succeeded by his only son,

II.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, second of Ballone, to whom his  uncle, Kenneth Mackenzie, I. of Scatwell, has a retour of Tutory in 1656 as "nearest agnate-uncle on the father's side," Alexander being then under  age.  In 1673 he received a disposition and charter from his cousin, Sir  George Mackenzie of Tarbat, afterwards first Earl of Cromarty, followed  by a sasine in the same year of the lands of Ballone, and others.  In 1708  he has a charter under the Great Seal in the superiority of  Culinchmeanach, Culinchmore, Breakach, and Achnacloich.  He married  Lilias (marriage contract 20th July, 1670, and sasine 1671), daughter of  Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, by his wife, Anna, daughter of John  Grant of Grant, with issue--

1.  Margaret, who married,  first, a Mr Cathcart, without issue;  and secondly, George Mackenzie,  II. of Gruinard, with issue--George, his heir, thirteen other sons and  nine daughters, besides six sons  and four daughters he subsequently  had by a second wife. The sixth  son was Roderick Mackenzie,  tacksman of Tighnafaoilin, who  married Barbara, daughter of  Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Ardloch, with issue, among others,  Margaret, who married Captain John Mackenzie, VI. of Ballone.   George had also Annabella, who married Murdoch Mackenzie,  merchant, Stornoway, son of  Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Avoch,  with issue--two daughters, the  eldest of whom, Jean, married John  Tolmie, tacksman of Uiginish,  Dunvegan, Skye, with issue--among others, Annabella, who  married her cousin, Hector  Mackenzie, second son of Captain  John Mackenzie, VI. of Ballone.

He married, secondly, Mary, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, V.  of Fairburn (sasine  18th of February, 1676), by his first wife, a daughter  of Patrick Grant of Glenmoriston, with issue--

2.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

3.  Isabell, who married John Macrae, second wadsetter of  Conchra (sasine 1697), only surviving son of the Rev. John Macrae,  Chaplain to one of Seaforth's regiments at Sheriffmuir, where he was  killed in 1715, leaving issue--three sons and a daughter.

Alexander died in 1724, aged 80 years, and was buried at  Lochbroom, in a tomb built by himself in 1666, when he was succeeded  by his only son,

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, third of Ballone.  In 1728 he  has a disposition and ratification of his father's charter of 1673 granted to  him by Lord Tarbat   In 1732 he is seised in a wadset of the lands of  Achtaskaillriach in security for a loan of 3000 merks to the Earl of  Cromarty; and in the following year he is seised in the lands of  Culinchmore, Culinchmeanach, Breakach and Achnacloich.

He married his cousin Barbara, daughter of Kenneth Mor  Mackenzie, I. of Dundonnel (sasine in  1727, long after the marriage), and niece of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, first of  Badluachrach.  Colin was a Captain  in the Jacobite army under the Earl  of Cromarty in 1745-46 and  commanded the men of Ballone  who were out on that occasion.  He  was captured at Dunrobin on the  15th of April, 1746, conveyed to  London, but afterwards, through  the instrumentality of the Rev.  James Robertson, the famous  "Ministear Laider" of Lochbroom,  obtained his release, and  subsequently rewarded his  benefactor by marrying the lady to  whom the reverend gentleman was  engaged--Mary, daughter of  William Mackenzie of Achilty and   Kinnahaird, with issue--(1) Kenneth, served heir to his father in  Badluachrach in 1772; (2) Alexander, who married Barbara  Maclean, with issue--two sons and a daughter; (3) Donald of Fasna-crionach, who married Kelly  Fisher, Greenock, with issue--a  son, Kenneth.

3.  Kenneth, who married, first, Barbara, daughter of Colin  Ruadh Mackenzie, without surviving issue; and secondly, Barbara, daughter of  Roderick, tacksman of Tighnafaoilin, son of George Mackenzie, II. of  Gruinard, with issue--(1) Roderick, who married, first, Miss MacIver, in the Lewis, with issue--one son and two daughters. He married secondly in  Harris.  (2) Kenneth, who died unmarried; and (3) Barbara, who married  Roderick Mackenzie, Mellan Charles, with issue--Donald, who died  unmarried, and Barbara, who married Simon Mackenzie, Doire-na-Muc,  with issue.

4.  Margaret, who married first, James Macrae of Balnain, near Dingwall, third son (by a second marriage) of the Rev. John Macrae, minister of Dingwall, without surviving issue; and secondly, in 1749, as  his first wife, Colin Chisholm, IV. of Knockfin, with issue.

5.  Anne, who married Roderick, son of Mackenzie of Achilty,  with issue--four daughters, Annabella, Barbara, Christy, and Isabella, all  married with issue.  (See Findon's Tables, sheet 10.)

6.  Catherine, who in 1727, married Simon Mackenzie, II. of Loggie of Lochbroom, grandson of the Hon. Simon of Lochslinn, with issue--Annabella, who married Colin Riabhach  Mackenzie, third son of  Kenneth Mor Mackenzie, I. of Dundonnel, without issue.

7.  Margaret, who married  first, a gentleman at Craigour,  without issue; and secondly  Roderick Mackenzie, III. of  Kernsary, with issue (sasine 1742).

Alexander's wife died in 1768, aged 83 years, survived by over  sixty children and grandchildren at her death.  He died before 1752, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fourth of Ballone, retoured to  his father in 1752.  He married Catherine, daughter of George Mackenzie,  II. of Gruinard (sasine in 1742, several years after the marriage), with  issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and  successor.

2.  Captain John, who  succeeded his brother Alexander.

3.  Mary, who married her  cousin, Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Kernsary (sasine in 1762), with  issue.

4.  Catherine, who married  Colin Knight, in the Lewis, with  issue.

5.  Isobel, who married the  Rev. Alexander Stronach, minister  of Lochbroom, with issue.

6.  Barbara, who died  unmarried.

7.  Alexandrina, who  married Alexander Macrae, Strathmore of Lochbroom, with issue.

Alexander died in 1755, and was buried in Lochbroom.  He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Ballone, who was  retoured to his father in 1756.  He was at the same time served heir male in special to his great-grandfather, who died in 1724.  He died unmarried,  having been drowned at sea in 1762, when he was succeeded by his  brother,

VI.  CAPTAIN  JOHN   MACKENZIE, sixth of Ballone,  who was retoured heir to his  brother Alexander in 1764.  He has  a sasine of Ballone in 1792, but he  alienated the estate six years later,  in 1798, to Henry Davidson of  Tulloch, whose representatives  have since sold it to Sir John  Fowler, Baronet, of Braemore, its  present possessor.  Captain John  married Margaret, eldest daughter  of Roderick Mackenzie, tacksman  of Tighnafaoilin, by his wife, Barbara, daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Ardloch (sasine 1770), fourth son of Sir John  Mackenzie, first Baronet of Tarbat, by his wife. Margaret, daughter of  the Hon. Sir George Erskine of Inverteil, brother of Thomas, Earl  of Kellie, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Hector, who on the 13th of November, 1826, married  Annabella, youngest daughter of John Tolmie, tacksman of Uiginish, Isle  of Skye, by his wife Jean, daughter of Murdoch Mackenzie, Stornoway, and his wife Annabella, daughter of George Mackenzie, II. of Gruinard, with issue--an only son, John Tolmie Mackenzie, the present male representative of the family.  Hector and his wife first resided in Liverpool  but afterwards at Dunvegan, Skye.  In 1841 he emigrated to Cape Breton,  intending to settle there with his family, a project frustrated by his  assassination there a short time after his arrival.

3.  Barbara, who married Captain Campbell, with issue--a  daughter, Margaret.

4.  Catherine, who married William Mackenzie (of the Gruinard family.), Ullapool, with issue--(1) John, who married Mary Campbell, with issue--John William, and Catherine; (2) Isabella; (3) Lilias, who  married John MacPhail, merchant, Ullapool, with issue--the Rev. George  MacPhail, minister of Albert Square Church, Dundee William; Catherine,  who married John Cameron, teacher, Ullapool, with issue--three sons and  three daughters; Isabella, who married the Rev. Neil Morison, Free  Church minister of Barvas, Lewis, with issue--a son and a daughter;  Abigail; and Anne Barbara.  Captain John married secondly, Ann, daughter of George  Mackenzie, tacksman of Ach-na-h-Airde, Coigeach, with issue--

5.  George, who went to Cape Breton, and married Miss Fraser at St. Anne's there.

6.  Alexander, who also  emigrated to North British  America, and entered into business  along with his cousin, Roderick  Mackenzie, at St. Francois, a small  town on the St. Lawrence.  He  subsequently bought a farm in the  township of Wickham, and married  Sarah Duncan, of Grantham, with   issue--(1) James Mackenzie,  solicitor, Lapeer, Michigan, U.S.A.,  who married, first, in July, 1867, Georgina  Hunter, of Gardiner,  Maine, with issue--one son,  Harvard Hunter, who died young.   James married, secondly, in 1875,  his first wife having died in 1868,  Amanda Hart, with issue--Harrison Hart, and Emily Sarah; (2)  Roderick Munro; (3) Andrew  Duncan; (4) Norman;  (5)  Alexander Stronach; and (6) Henry,  all living in 1879.

7.  A daughter, who married William Mackenzie, Dornie of  Coigeach, with issue.

8.  Margaret, who married Alexander Macrae, Strathglass, with issue.

9.  Georgina, who married Kenneth Maclennan, Coigeach, with issue--one son, Donald.

10.  Hannah, married William Macdonald in America.

Captain John died at Coigeach, aged 97, in 1829, and was buried there, the weather at the time having been too stormy to allow of his  remains being taken for interment to the burial place of his ancestors.

He  was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

VII.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, shipowner, Stornoway, who married  Barbara, daughter of John MacIver, shipowner, and sister of the late Dr Alexander MacIver, Stornoway, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  A daughter, who died young.

3.  Lilias, who married  Alexander Morrison, rope manu-facturer, Stornoway, with issue--(1) John Mackenzie Morrison,  fishcurer and ship-broker there, and  a County Councillor.  He married  Anne Isabella, daughter of Captain  Alexander Macdonald, shipowner, Garmouth, with issue--two sons  and six daughters; (2) Alexander Morrison, importer and  commission agent, Stornoway,  unmarried (3) Catherine Anne, who  married Norman Forbes,  contractor, son of Captain Donald  Forbes, shipowner, Stornoway,  without issue. Alexander Morrison  died in January, 1881.

4.  Margaret, who married Captain Alexander Macleod, Valtos,  Lewis, without issue.

5.  Anne, who married Hector Mackenzie, Poolewe, with issue--Annabella Jessie and Helen Anne.

He was drowned at sea on the Cornish Coast, and was succeeded  as representative of the family by his only son,

VIII.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, who married Mary Macphie, with  issue--a son and two daughters, all of whom died young.  On his death the male representation of the family devolved on the only son of his uncle  Hector,

IX.  JOHN  TOLMIE  MACKENZIE, Dunvegan, Isle of Skye,  factor for Macleod of Macleod.  He was born on the 16th of June, 1828,  and on the 13th of January, 1857, married Henzell, second daughter of David Dixon Ferguson, artist (descended from the Perthshire Fergusons of  Dunfallandy), by his wife Mary, daughter of William Sanderson of  Springbank, with issue--

1.  Murdo Tolmie, M.B., North Uist.

2.  John Ferguson.

3.  Hector Hugh, North Uist Estate Office.

4.  David Ferguson.

5.  William MacNeil, Kansas City, America.

6.  George, a student of medicine.

7.  John Tolmie.

8.  Mary, who died young.

9.  Annabella.

10.  Mary, who married the Rev. John Francis Smith, London, with issue--four sons.

11.  Isabella Barbara.

12.  Margaret MacNeil.

13.  Henzell.

14.  Jean Lilias.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  KILCOY.

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was third son of Colin Cam Mackenzie, XI. of Kintail, by his wife Barbara, daughter of  John Grant, XII. of Grant, by Lady Marjory Stewart, daughter of John,  third Earl of Athole. In 1616 Alexander has a charter of the lands of  Kilcoy, dated 18th July.  On the 29th of January, 1618, he has a Crown  charter of the Barony of Kilcoy.  In July, 1634, he was appointed  Commissary of Ross, and in the same year, on the 17th of September, he  has a charter from King Charles appointing him Principal Sheriff of the  shire of Inverness.  He married in 1611 (marriage contract dated 15th  August) Jean, daughter of Sir Thomas Fraser of Strichen, Tutor of Lovat,  and widow of Sir James Stewart of Muiren and Kilcoy, with issue--

1.  Colin, his heir and successor.

2.  Thomas, who has a sasine in 1678.

3.  Alexander, I. of Muirton  of Kilcoy, who married Marie, daughter of John Cuthbert of  Drakies.  He has a sasine of the lands of Muiren in 1657, and a  charter to "Alexander in the Muir" in 1666.  By Marie of Drakies he  had issue--(1) Colin, his heir and successor; (2) the Rev. John,  successively minister of Kingussie and Laggan, in Badenoch; (3)  Kenneth; (4) Simon; (5) Isobell;  and (6) Lilias, who married George  Leslie (marriage contract dated 24th December, 1697).  Alexander  was succeeded as II. of Muirton by  his eldest son, COLIN   MACKENZIE, W.S., who married  Anna, daughter of Sir James Grant  of Moyness (she married secondly,  Hugh Innes, Younger of Rosskeen),  with issue--(1) Kenneth, his heir and successor; (2) Simon, who died  abroad; and three daughters. KENNETH  MACKENZIE, his  eldest son, succeeded as III. of  Muirton, and married Mary, second  daughter of Charles Mackenzie of  Cullen, with issue, a son--ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, IV.  of Muirton, who in 1752 excambed  the lands of Muirton of Kilcoy for  the lands of Wester Fairburn, then  the property of his cousin, Colin  Mackenzie, VI. of Kilcoy.  From  this time the lands of Wester  Fairburn were renamed Muirton,  after the original possessions of this  family in the Black Isle.   Alexander, IV. of Muirton, married  Margaret, eldest daughter of James  Mackenzie, III. of Highfield, with issue--(1) James; (2) Colin, M.D.,  who both died unmarried; and, according to the traditions of the  district, (3) Big Simon, who emigrated to New South Wales;  and (4) Alexander, who went to England, married there and had  issue; (5) Mary, who married as his first wife, without issue, Roderick  Mackenzie, II. of Scotsburn; (6)  Martha, who married Hugh Rose of  Cuilich, with issue; (7) Margaret,  who married the "Black" Calder,  with issue; (8) a daughter, who  married Alexander Cumming, with  issue; and (9) Jean, who married  James Shaw, Bailie of Inverness,  who died on the 21st of January,  1801.  Jean and her husband  apparently succeeded by will or  purchase to the lands of Muirton of  Fairburn, for they were un-doubtedly in a position at their  death to leave them to their eldest  son, Alexander Mackenzie Shaw, a  minor, only 17 years old when his  father died.  The management,  however, was left in the hands of a  Mr Fraser, who squandered the  funds which should have been  invested for the second son  William, a Colonel, H.E.I.C.S. (married with issue), and ten  daughters, who survived their  father and to make up the  deficiency, not only Muirton of  Fairburn, but Waternish in Skye  and Woodside near Fortrose, also  the property of Bailie Shaw at his  death, had to be sold.  Muirton was  bought by a Mr Reid, who  afterwards resold it to William  Mackenzie, W.S., son of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Portmore.   Alexander Mackenzie Shaw, the  Bailie's eldest son, was a Captain  in the army, and married in 1804,  Mary Laing, with issue--(1) Gilbert  Shaw, who, born in 1806, was a  Judge in Jamaica, and died a few  years ago at Tongland,  Kirkcudbrightshire; (2) Gilbert,  who died young; (3) Henry  Bridgwater; (4) Alexander, Colonel  Madras Infantry; (5) John; (6)  Mary, who died unmarried; (7)  Hectorina, who married Mr Sprott;  and (8) Eleanor, who married Mr  Seabank.

4.  Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Findon, who married Margaret,  daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Ballone, with issue--Alexander, who died in 1693; Lilias, who married Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, IV. of  Scatwell, with issue; Isobel, who married Simon Mackenzie, I. of  Allangrange, with issue; Jean, who married John Chisholm, XX. of  Chisholm, with issue; and Margaret, who married Sir Kenneth Mackenzie,  VIII. of Gairloch, with issue.  Sir Roderick died in 1692.

5.  Isobel, who married Roderick Mackenzie, III. of Redcastle, with issue.

6.  Jean, who married David Ross, III. of Pitcalnie, Tutor of David Ross, thirteenth of Balnagown.

7.  Katherine Beatrice, who married first, Duncan Bayne of  Tulloch; and secondly, in 1651, George Munro, Younger of Lemlair.

8.  A daughter, who married Maclean of Borreray.

He also had three natural daughters who married respectively Hector Mackenzie IV. of Fairburn (marriage contract dated 11th of February, 1637); Neil Bayne, in Uist; and the Rev. John, son of John Roy  Mackenzie, IV. of Gairloch.

Alexander married, secondly, Margaret Dunbar, with issue--a  daughter, Barbara, who died unmarried in 1656.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  COLIN  MACKENZIE, second of Kilcoy, who married  (contract, 21st March, 1640) Lilias, sister of Sir Alexander Sutherland,  Lord Duffus (sasine 1649), with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Roderick of Dalvennan, Advocate, who  married Margaret,  sister of John Cathcart of Castletown, without male issue.  He has a sasine of Allangrange in 1672.

3.  Charles of Cullen, who  in 1682 married Florence, daughter  of John Mackenzie, II. of  Applecross, with issue--a son, who  died young  Abigail, who married  Alexander Mackenzie of Lentran; Mary, who married Kenneth Mac-kenzie, III. of Muirton, with issue; Katharina, who married Roderick  Mackenzie, IV. of Redcastle; Florence, who married Duncan  Macrae of Inverinate, with issue; and Margaret, who married  (marriage contract 25th of  November, 1719) Alexander  Mackenzie, fourth son of Roderick  Mackenzie, V. of Redcastle.   Charles Mackenzie of Cullen was  Tutor to Donald, V. of Kilcoy,  during his minority and the  troublous times of 1715.  In that  year the Earl of Sutherland  addresses a letter, dated Inverness,  19th November, "To Charles  Mackenzie of Cullen and the  Family of Culcowie" demanding  payment of ?00 sterling "towards  the militia"  and "if ffailzie" that  their goods and effects shall be  given up to free quarters.  He died  in 1732.

4.  Thomas, I. of Cleanwaters, who in 1680 married Margaret, daughter of Matthew Robertson of Davochcarty, with issue--Colin, who  married Florence, daughter of Simon Mackenzie, I. of Torridon, with issue --a son, Alexander, who married a daughter of William Mackenzie, II. of  Pitlundie, by whom he had one son, who died young.

5.  John, who in 1683, married Isobel Mackenzie, with issue--two sons, the second of whom, Charles, married and had a son Alexander, who  succeeded to his cousin Alexander's estate and became IV. of Cleanwaters.  He married, with issue--at least one son--Alexander, V.  of  Cleanwaters, who was also tacksman of Muirend from 1770 to 1778.  His  father, who died before 1759, was tenant of Drumnamarg, in the Black  Isle.

Colin was succeeded in 1682 by his eldest son,

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, third of Kilcoy, who married  (marriage contract 21st of March, 1664) Mary, daughter of Kenneth  Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander.

3.  Lilias.

In 1658 he bought the lands  of Allan (now Allangrange) from Seaforth's trustees, and in 1682  sold it to his uncle, Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Findon, whose  daughter Isobel carried it to Simon Mackenzie, progenitor of  Allangrange.

Alexander died in 1687, and was succeeded by

IV.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fourth of Kilcoy, who married  (contract, 7th January, 1689) Annabella, daughter of Sir Donald Bayne of Tulloch, with issue--

1.  Donald, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who died young.

3.  Lilias, who married Donald Dingwall, Provost of Dingwall.

Roderick died in December 1700, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  DONALD  MACKENZIE, fifth of Kilcoy, who in 1716,  married Elizabeth, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Highfield, with  issue--

1.  Roderick, who died young.

2.  Colin, who succeeded to Kilcoy.

3.  James, who died young.

4.  William, who married Jean, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of Davochmaluag, without issue.

5.  Alexander, who died in Holland without issue.

6.  Kenneth, Tutor of  Kilcoy, who married Janet,  daughter and heiress of Sir Robert  Douglas of Glenbervie, Baronet,  author of the Peerage and  Baronage, with issue--(1) General  Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, who  succeeded to his mother's estate of  Glenbervie, and assumed the name  of Douglas in addition to his own.  (See Mackenzie-Douglas of  Glenbervie.)  (2) Donald  Mackenzie, who was born in 1772,  and married, in 1809, Anne,  daughter of T. Mylne of Mylnfield,  with issue--(a) Colonel Kenneth  Douglas Mackenzie, who was born  on the 1st of February, 1811, and  married on the 26th of June, 1861,  Mary, second daughter of General  Thomas Colomb, Colonel 97th  Regiment.  Colonel Kenneth died  on the 24th of August, 1873.  (b)  Anne, who married Donald  Maclachlan, 79th Highlanders, with  issue--Donald George Campbell,  who died in the Crimea, unmarried;  Kenneth Francis, Captain Royal  Artillery.  He was born on the 1st  of December, 1845, and on the 9th  of January, 1877, married Amy  Elizabeth, eldest daughter of the  late John William Fletcher, of the  Bengal Army and of Shifnal, Salop,  with issue--Kenneth Douglas, born  on the 25th of March, 1882, and Gladys Elma; and Ann Campbell.   (3) Alexander Douglas Mackenzie of Burleston, Hants.  He married in  1799 Sophia, only daughter of  General Ross Lang, County  Roscommon, with issue, one son  and five daughters--(a) Charles  Douglas, who was born on the 6th  of July, 1817, and on the 1st of  June, 1854, married Jessie,  daughter of Isaac  Barker,  Cumberland, with issue--Kenneth  Ross, Lieutenant 78th Highlanders  Charles Douglas, R.N.; Jessie  Harriet Isabella; and Helen Harriet;  (b) Anne Douglas, unmarried; (c)  Amelia Georgina, who in October,  1845, married William Prue  Jordan, of London, M.D., with  issue, one daughter--Annie Mary  Josephine, married, with issue; (d)  Frances Donald, who in 1822  married Joseph Bristow, without  issue; (e) Jessie Barbara, who in  1845 married the Rev. Charles  Cook, Canon of Exeter Cathedral,  and Chaplain to the Queen; and (f)  Rachel Catherine Andrews, who in 1842 married the Rev. Robert  Montgomery, M.A. of Oxford, with issue--Jessie Anne Douglas  Montgomery.  (4) Janet Mackenzie,  who married the Rev. Dr  Snodgrass, and died on the 30th of  July, 1852, aged 90 years, in New  South Wales; (5) Margaret  Mackenzie, who as his second wife  married William Chalmers of  Glenericht, with issue--General Sir  William Chalmers; (6) a daughter,  who married a Mr Wilson; and (7)  Barbara Mackenzie, who married  Mr Keith.

7.  Elizabeth, who married Thomas Mackenzie, IV. of Highfield  and VI. of Applecross, with issue.

Donald was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

VI.  COLIN  MACKENZIE,  sixth of Kilcoy, who was infeft in  the lands of Kilcoy on the 16th of  December, 1742.  In 1747  (marriage contract 28th March) he  married Martha, eldest daughter of  Charles Fraser of Inverallochy, by  Anne, daughter of Udney of Udney.

Her eldest brother, Charles, on  whom the Lovat Estates were entailed, fell in command of the  Clan Fraser at Culloden, and her second brother, William, who had  also succeeded to the property of  Udney, dying in 1792, the  representation of the family of Inverallochy and Castle Fraser  devolved upon Martha and her  sister Eliza Fraser (who died  without issue in 1814).  Through  this marriage, the family of Kilcoy  claim to be heirs to the old  Earldom of Buchan, conferred in  1469 upon James Stuart, half-brother of James II., by the second  marriage of his mother, Queen  Jane, to Sir James Stewart, the  Black Knight of Lorn.  In 1617 a  Crown charter of Novodamus is  granted to the then Countess Mary  of Buchan, who married James  Erskine (eldest son of John Earl of  Mar) with the precedence of the  former charter to herself and her  husband in life rent and the heirs  male of their marriage, whom  failing to his nearest heirs male  whatsoever.  In 1625 the Earl and  Countess had another charter of the  Earldom with the same limitation.   In 1633 the charter of 1625, and a  decree of 1628 giving the Earldom of Buchan precedence over those of  Eglintoun, Montrose, Cassilis, Caithness, and Glencairn, were  ratified by Act of Parliament.

These charters make the Kilcoy  claim quite hopeless, not because they are not the rightful heirs, but  because the Earldom was given in  1617 by charter to the heirs male of  James Erskine, though he had no  more right to it than he had to the  throne itself, beyond having  married the Countess Mary of  Buchan, now represented by the  Mackenzies of Kilcoy.  Nothing  can annul a charter but another Crown charter, and as a matter of  fact and justice, the Cardross Erskines have no more right to  represent and sit as the Earls of Buchan of 1469 than they have to  be Kings of Great Britain.  By this  lady Kilcoy had issue--

1.  Donald, who died young.

2.  Charles, his heir and successor.

3.  Colin, Lieutenant 71st  Regiment, killed in the American  War, without issue.

4.  Alexander, who on  succeeding to his mother's property  of Inverallochy, assumed the  additional name of Fraser by Royal license dated the 22nd of July,  1803, and became the well-known Lieutenant-General Alexander  Mackenzie-Fraser of Inverallochy and Castle Fraser, Colonel of the  78th Regiment, and M.P. for the county of Cromarty, 1802-6, Ross-shire, 1806-1807, and 1807 until his death at Walcheren, on the 13th  of September, 1809.  He married  Helen, sister of Francis  Humberston-Mackenzie, last Lord Seaforth, with issue, two sons--(1)  Charles Mackenzie-Fraser, II. of  Castle Fraser, his heir, Captain  Coldstream Guards, Colonel Ross-shire Militia.  He served in the  Peninsular War with the 52nd  Regiment in 1808-9, and was M.P.  for Ross-shire 1814-1818. He was  born on the 9th of June, 1792, and  died on the 7th of March, 1871,  having married on the 25th of  April, 1817, Jane, daughter of Sir  John Hay, Baronet of Smithfield  and Haystoune, with issue--(a)  Alexander, who died in 1843; (b)  John Wingfield, who died in 1846;  (c) Charles Murray, who died in  1846; (d) Francis Mackenzie, who  died in 1849; and (e) Kenneth, who  died young in 1836--all without  issue.  (f) Frederick Mackenzie-Fraser, now of Castle Fraser,  Aberdeen-shire, late of the Ross-shire Militia, Lieutenant-Colonel  H.M. Reserve Forces.  He was born  on the 4th of April, 1831, and  married first, on the 24th of April,  1871, Lady Marie Augusta  Gabrielle Berengere Blanche  Drummond, elder daughter of  George, fourteenth Earl of Perth  and Melfort.  She died in 1874  without issue.  He married,  secondly, in 1879, Theodora Lovett, daughter of William Henry  Darby of Leap Castle, King's County, Ireland.  (g) Catherine,  who died unmarried in 1856; (h) Mary, who died unmarried in 1847;  (i) Eleanor Jane, who died on the  22nd of October, 1858, having on  the 6th of January, 1855, married,  as his second wife, the Right  Reverend George Tomlinson, D.D.,  first Bishop of Gibraltar, who died  on the 6th of February, 1863, and  had a son and two daughters--George Charles James Tomlinson,  born on the 16th of April, 1857;  Eleanor Fraser; and Mary  Elizabeth; (j) Grace Harriet, who  died without issue; and (k) Augusta  Charlotte, who on the 25th of  April, 1854, married Robert Drummond, with issue--Charles  and Sybil.  (2) Lieutenant-Colonel Frederick Alexander Mackenzie-Fraser who died in December,  1848, married first, Emma Sophia,  daughter of Hume Macleod of  Harris, with issue (a) Frederick  Charles, who died in 1875, leaving  issue; (b) Colin; and (c) Isabella,  who died unmarried.  He married, secondly, Georgina Augusta,  daughter of Sir Charles Bagot, Governor-General of Canada.   Lieutenant-General Alexander had also two daughters--(3) Marrianne;  and (4) Helen, both of whom died  unmarried.

5.  Anne, who married Alexander Mackenzie, W.S., I. of Portmore, with issue.

6.  Elizabeth, who died young.

7.  Jean, who in 1766 married Alexander Elphinstone of Glack, Aberdeenshire, Sheriff-Depute of that county in 1777, with issue--a son, John, and two daughters--Jane, who in 1787 married John Mackenzie,  VII. of Applecross, and Mary, who died in Edinburgh unmarried in 1796.

8.  Janet, who died unmarried in 1789.

9.  Martha; and  10.  Janet, both of whom died young.

Colin of Kilcoy died in 1758, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

VII.  CHARLES  MACKENZIE, seventh of Kilcoy, who in 1781  married Jane Gordon, third daughter of Patrick Grant of Glenmoriston  with issue--an only son, by whom on his death in 1813 he was succeeded  as

VIII.  SIR  COLIN   MACKENZIE, eighth of Kilcoy,  created a baronet on the 15th of  March, 1836, with remainder to his  second and third sons, Evan and  Colin John.  He was Lieutenant-Colonel Commandant 1st Ross-shire Local Militia, and Vice-Lieutenant and Convener of the  county, and claimed the Earldom of  Buchan and Barony of Auchterhouse.  He was born on the  22nd of April, 1782, and married on the 30th of March, 1805,  Isabella (who died on the 26th of  May, 1874), second daughter of  Ewen Cameron of Glen Nevis, with  issue--

1.  Charles, his heir and successor, in the entailed estates.   He was  born on the 25th of December, 1811, and died unmarried on the 30th of  July, 1887.

2.  Evan, who succeeded to the Baronetcy and the unentailed  estates.

3.  Colin, died unmarried on the  21st of April, 1868.

4.  Jane, who in 1853 married James Wardlaw, Major 2nd Royal Lancashire Militia (who died on the 3rd of October, 1867), with issue--(1)  John Colin Wardlaw Captain 34th Regiment.  He was born on the 19th of  July, 1856, and married in 1889, Mabel, daughter of William Bousfield  Page, of Carlisle.  (2) George Lake, born on the 19th of April, 1864; (3) James Robert Preston, born on the 22nd of September, 1867; (4)  Geraldine Anne Isabella Mary Jane, who married on the 21st of  December, 1876, George Francis Gillanders of Highfield, with issue--a  daughter, Frances Geraldine; (5) Horatia Georgina Ramsay, who married  first on the 19th of July, 1877, William Gordon Cumming Asher, with  issue--William Augustus, born on the 6th of July, 1878, and Isabella  Cameron.  She married secondly, Thomas Home, W.S., Edinburgh, with  issue; (6) Jane Frances Harriet, who in 1890 married George Mullen of  Springfield, County Sligo, with issue--a daughter, Jane Horatia Mary.

Sir Colin died in January, 1845, when he was succeeded in the  Baronetcy and unentailed estates by

IX.  SIR  EVAN  MACKENZIE, second Baronet of Kilcoy.  He  was born on the 15th of August, 1816, and married on the 2nd of  November, 1844, Sarah Ann Philomena, daughter of James Parkes,  County of Londonderry, with issue--

1.  Colin Charles, Lieutenant 79th Cameron Highlanders, born on the 7th of February, 1848, and died unmarried at Gibraltar on the 15th of June, 1880.

2.  Isabella Jane, who became her father's heir and successor.

3.  Edith Millicent.

4.  Eva Mary Marjorie  Erskine, who on the 22nd of  February, 1872, married Roderick  Grogan Mackenzie, V. of  Flowerburn, Lieutenant-Colonel  Ross-shire Militia, late 16th  Lancers, with issue.

5.  Sarah Anna Philomena.

Sir Evan Mackenzie died in  1883, and on the death of his  brother, Charles Mackenzie of  Kilcoy, in 1887, the estates and  representation of the family of  Kilcoy devolved on Sir Evan's  eldest daughter,

X.  ISABELLA  JANE, who on the 30th of March, 1869, married  Colonel John Edward Burton (now Burton-Mackenzie), late 91st  Highlanders, second son of the late John Standfast Burton, by Mary Anna,  daughter of David Morgan and niece and heiress of Richard Toulmin  North of Newton Hall and Thurland Castle, Lancashire, with issue--

1.  Evan North, who was born on the 9th of March, 1870.

2.  Colin John Mackenzie, born on the 14th of September, 1871.

3.  Edward Grove, born on the 7th of August, 1876.

4.  Isabella Alicia Eva.

On succeeding to the estates  of Kilcoy, Colonel and Mrs Burton assumed the name and arms of  Mackenzie of Kilcoy, in addition to those of Burton (recorded in 1633),  by Letters Patent from the Lyon  King at Arms on the 7th of  December, 1887.


MACKENZIE-DOUGLAS  OF  GLENBERVIE.

I.  GENERAL  SIR  KENNETH  MACKENZIE-DOUGLAS, first of this family, was the eldest son of Kenneth Mackenzie, Tutor to Charles Mackenzie, VII. of Kilcoy, by his wife Janet, daughter of Sir Robert  Douglas, Baronet, of Glenbervie (author of the Peerage and Baronage of  Scotland), and co-heir of her brother, Sir Alexander Douglas, M.D., the  last Baronet of that family, descended from Archibald, fifth Earl of Angus,  whose second son, Sir Robert Douglas, succeeded in 1591 to his estates of Glenbervie and Kemnay. The General, who was Colonel of the 58th  Regiment, was created a Baronet on the 30th of September, 1831, and on  the 31st of October following he assumed by Royal license the name of  Douglas in addition to his own.  He married on the 18th of December,  1804, Rachel, only child and heir of Robert Andrews of Hythe, Kent, with issue--

1.  Robert Andrews, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, Lieutenant 58th Regiment, who was born on the 14th of July, 1809, and died unmarried in Ceylon in 1830.

3.  Alexander Douglas, an  officer in the 58th and 68th  Regiments. He was born on the  22nd of December 1811, and on the  17th of April, 1834, married Ann,  daughter and co-heir of Joshua  Rouse, Southampton, with issue--(1) Rouse Douglas, Captain 96th  Regiment, born on the 29th of  December, 1836, and married on  the 20th of December, 1861, Alice,  daughter of John O'Neill of  Montbello, County Wicklow, with  issue--a son and daughter; (2)  Alexander Douglas, of the  Mounted Police, Queensland.  He  was born on the 7th of February,  1843, and married in 1864, without  issue; (3) Annie Douglas, who on  the 31st of March, 1864, married  John Croft, F.R.S.; (4) Mary  Elizabeth  Mackenzie-Douglas; and  (5) Rachel Adela Douglas.   Alexander died in 1848.

4.  Edward, who died unmarried in 1835.

5.  Lynedoch, Lieutenant 97th Regiment.  He was born on the 28th of October, 1818, and on the 26th of July, 1848, married Laura Susanna,  youngest daughter of Lieutenant-General Sir Archibald Campbell,  Baronet, G.C.B., with issue--(1) Helen Maria Mackenzie, who on the  22nd of December, 1874, married Andrew Mitchell Mackenzie, son of the  late Hon. Donald Mackenzie, Senator of the College of Justice, with issue --Donald Mackenzie, born on the 15th of July, 1878;  Lilias Douglas; and  Helen Maria Douglas; (2) Laura Augusta Mackenzie Douglas, who on the  13th of July, 1878, married Donald Mackenzie,  B.A., W.S., eldest son of the Hon. Donald Mackenzie aforesaid; (3) Jessie Beatrice Mackenzie  Douglas, who on the 25th of October, 1873, married as his first wife the  Rev. Philip Richard Pipon Braithwaite, vicar of St. Luke's, Jersey, since 1881, and formerly of Abbotsham, Devon, with issue--William Douglas Braithwaite, born on the 22nd of October, 1876; Jessie Pipon; and Mary  Mackenzie.  Lynedoch Douglas died on the 15th of May, 1859.

6.  Donald Douglas, Captain Royal North Down Rifles.  He was  born on the 7th of July, 1821, and on the 5th of August, 1847, married Emily Jane, fifth daughter of Hugh Kennedy of Cultra, County Down,  with issue--(1) Donald Sholto Mackenzie, born on the 14th of December,  1849; (2) Kenneth Nigel Mackenzie, Lieutenant Essex Rifles.  He was  born on the 1st of November, 1851, and on the 31st of July, 1879, married Emma daughter of Thomas B. Street, of Friers Place, near Acton,  Middlesex; (3) Emily Elizabeth Mackenzie, who on the 28th of  November, 1877, married Colonel Robert Blair Kennedy, with issue--Kathleen Carlotta Douglas.

7.  Rachel, who on the 23rd  of February, 1843, married her  cousin, John Snodgrass, Major 96th  Regiment, with issue--(1) John  Douglas, Captain R.A., born on the  21st of April, 1844, and married,  with issue--a son who died young;  (2) Rachel Etah; and (3) Edith  Mary Mackenzie.  Rachel died on  the 15th of January, 1877, her  husband, Captain Snodgrass,  having predeceased her on the 27th  of January, 1856.

General Sir Kenneth Mackenzie-Douglas died on the 22nd of  November, 1833, when he was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  SIR  ROBERT  ANDREWS  MACKENZIE-DOUGLAS,  second Baronet and Major in the army.  He was born on the 25th of April,  1807, and on the 29th of April, 1835, married his sister-in-law, Martha Elizabeth, daughter of Joshua Rouse, of Southampton, with issue--

1.  Robert Andrews, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth Douglas, who was born on the 17th of October, 1842,  and on the 21st of August, 1867, married at Christchurch, New Zealand, Caroline Nicholls, with issue--(1) Kenneth, who succeeded as fourth Baronet; (2) Blanche; and (3) Martha.  Kenneth Douglas died on the 25th  of January, 1882.

3.  Elizabeth, who on the 6th of August, 1861, married Sir Francis George Augustus Fuller-Eliott-Drake, Baronet, Captain Royal Horse Guards, with issue--Elizabeth, who in 1887 married Reginald John Upton  Colborne, third Lord Seaton.

Sir Robert died on the 1st of November, 1843, when he was  succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  SIR  ROBERT  ANDREWS  MACKENZIE-DOUGLAS, third  Baronet, Captain 57th Regiment.  He was born on the 19th of July, 1837.

He died unmarried in 1884, when he was succeeded in the title and estates by his nephew,

IV.  SIR  KENNETH  MACKENZIE-DOUGLAS,  fourth Baronet,  who was born on the 29th of May, 1868.


THE  MACKENZIES OF  APPLECROSS.

THE immediate progenitor of this family was Alexander Mackenzie of  Coul, so often referred to in the body of this work, and who so greatly  distinguished himself in the wars with Glengarry and Macleod of the  Lewis.  He was a natural son of Colin Cam, XI. of Kintail, by Mary, eldest  daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, II. of Davochmaluag, by his wife, Ann,  daughter of Donald  Gorm Macdonald. VII. of Sleat.  Alexander was a  great favourite with his brothers Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail,  and Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Coigeach.  He has a sasine of half the  lands of Applecross and others, as a "natural son of Colin Mackenzie of  Kintail," dated 10th of March, 1582.  He has another, in 1607, from  Roderick Dingwall of the lands of Kildun, and one in 1619 of the lands of Pittonachty, now Rosehaugh, and Castleton.  It is said that Alexander  when quite an infant was sent by his mother to his father, Colin of Kintail, to Brahan Castle, who consulted his wife, Barbara, daughter of John Grant of Grant, as to what he should do with the little stranger. Naturally  incensed both at her husband's infidelity and the proposed addition to her  family circle, she indignantly replied--"Cuir `sa chuil e," that is "put him  in the ash-hole, or corner."  Realising the imprudence of further offending  her, but being naturally of a humane disposition, and wishing to act  honourably by his innocent offspring, he took the child away, and on his  return told his wife that he had carried out her proposal and left him in the  Coul. He secretly sent Alexander to the place then and now called "A Chuil," or Coul, to be nursed and  brought up by a respectable woman,  and thus carried out the letter if not the spirit of his lady's request, and at  the same time performed his duty towards his afterwards distinguished  son, to whom he gave that estate as his inheritance.

Kenneth's grandson, John, II. of Applecross, who in 1669, wrote the well-known Genealogy of his clan, gives the following account of the  progenitor of his family:--"He was happy in his youth by the comeliness  of his person, and agility of body, to be looked upon by Kenneth, Lord  Kintail, his brother, and all his followers, being then engaged in their  hottest feuds with the Clan Ranald and Macleods of Lewis, as the fittest  man to command what force his brother was to make use of on these  occasions, wherein he failed not their expectations, managing that  command (which he enjoyed until the Tutor of Kintail put a period to all  these troubles by the transaction with Glengarry, and utter extirpation of  the Macleods of Lewis) with so much courage and expedition, that albeit during the whole tract of these broils there passed not any action of  moment wherein he was not signally concerned, yet in all of them his  constant success brought no less honour to himself than advantage and  reputation to his party.  This, with his singular industry and upright  dealing in affairs, got him so much of the love of his brethren, especially  Lord Kenneth, who on his death-bed honoured him with the gift of his  own sword in testimony of his esteem and affection for him, and so much  of the respect of his friends and neighbours, and the good opinion of the country people, that, without difficulty or the least grudge of any person whatsoever, he in a short time purchased a considerable estate, which he  still augmented by the same means during the rest of his life."  Among  these purchases was Applecross and other lands which exceeded in extent  the lands of Coul, which was bestowed on him by his father.

Alexander married, first, Annabella, daughter of Murdoch  Mackenzie, I. of Fairburn, and relict of Thomas Mackenzie, I. of Ord, with issue--

1.  Roderick, infeft by his father in the estate and Parony of Applecross.

2.  Isabel, who as his second wife married Alexander, V. of  Gairloch, with issue.

3.  Marjory, who married the Rev. William MacCulloch of Park, minister of Fodderty.

Alexander married secondly, Christian, daughter of Hector Munro of Assynt, with issue--

4.  Kenneth, first of Assynt and afterwards of Coul.

5.  Alexander, who died unmarried in 1639.

6.  Hector of Assynt, who married a daughter of Hugh Fraser of Belladrum, with issue.  Sasine to him in 1650.

7.  A daughter, who as his second wife married John Chisholm,  XVI. of Chisholm, with issue--his heir and successor.

8.  Another, who married  Sir Alexander  Innes of Coxtoune.  He has a charter from James VI., dated 28th July, 1617, in favour  of "Alexandro Mackenzie de Coul, et Christianae Munro ejus spousae terrarum ecclesiasticarum de Uladil, etc.," in Inverness-shire, and he has a  second to him and his second wife, of the lands of Pittonachty, Wester  Haldock, Pitfla, etc., in the same county, dated 28th June, 1621.  He has a  third, dated 12th July, 1634, to "Alexandero Mackenzie de Coul, et  Kennetho ejus filio, terrarum de Urquhart, etc."  He was a very prudent  man, and besides the large patrimony bestowed upon each of his children,  he left a large sum of money for pious uses and for the children of several of his relations.  He died in March, 1650, very advanced in years, at  Pittonachty, was buried in a tomb which he caused to be built for himself at Chanonry, and was succeeded in the lands of Applecross by his eldest  son,

I.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, who shall be described as first of Applecross--his father having been both of Applecross and Coul.  He married Finguala, daughter of Murdoch Mackenzie, II. of Redcastle, with  issue--

1.  John "Mollach" his heir and successor.

2.  Colin, I. of Sanachan, who married a daughter of Murdo  Mackenzie of Sand, Gairloch, with issue.

3.  Sibella, who married  first, Alexander Macleod, V. of  Raasay, with issue; secondly,  Thomas Graham of Drynie, and  thirdly, Alexander Mackenzie, VI.  of Hilton, with issue--his heir and  successor.

4.  A daughter, who married  Lachlan Mackinnon, eldest son of Mackinnon of Scalpa, Tutor of  Mackinnon of Mackinnon, with  issue.

5.  A daughter, who married  the eldest son and heir of William Mackenzie, Shieldaig, Gairloch.

He had the estate of Applecross given him as his patrimony during the life of his father, whom he predeceased on the 6th of July, 1646, and was buried in his father's tomb at Chanonry.  He was succeeded by his  eldest son,

II.  JOHN  MACKENZIE,  second of Applecross, known as  "Ian Mollach," or Hairy John, who  married a daughter of Hugh Fraser  of Belladrum, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and  successor,

2.  Roderick, who married  Isabella, daughter of Kenneth  Mackenzie, VI. of Gairloch, with  issue.   The descendants of this  Roderick now represent the Old  Mackenzies of Applecross in the  male line John Mackenzie, V. of  Applecross, having died without  issue, when the estates went by will  past his brother Kenneth into the possession of his sister Mary's  eldest son, James Mackenzie, IV. of Highfield.  Several of Roderick's  descendants are still alive, male  and female--one of the latter being  the widow of the late Farquhar  Macrae, Strome Ferry Hotel (north  side), who has had a fine family--a  son and several daughters.

3.  Kenneth, I. of Alduinny,  who married a daughter of John Matheson of Bennetsfield, with  issue.

4.  John, called "Ian Og,"  one of the four famous Johns killed  in 1715, serving under his brother  Alexander, Lieutenant-Colonel of Seaforth's 1st Regiment, at  Sheriffmuir.  He married a  daughter of the Rev. John Macrae,  last Episcopalian minister of  Dingwall, with issue; for which,  and the issue of Kenneth of  Alduinny, see Findon's Tables.

5.  A daughter, who married  Sir Donald Bayne of Tulloch, with issue.

6.  Catherine, who married  Simon Mackenzie, I. of Torridon,  with issue.

7.  Ann, who in 1684  married Charles Mackenzie, I. of  Letterewe, with issue.

8.  Mary, who married  Thomas Mackenzie, III. of Ord,  with issue.

9.  Florence, who in 1682  married Charles Mackenzie of  Cullen, third son of Colin  Mackenzie, II. of Kilcoy, with  issue.

John has a sasine in 1663.  He purchased the Baronies of Tarradale and Rhindoun.  In his grandfather's life-time he had a charter under the  Great Seal, "Johanni Mackenzie de Applecross, terrarum de Lochslyne,  Newton de Lochslyne, etc."  He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, third  of Applecross.  He  joined the Earl of Mar in 1715, and was Lieutenant-Colonel of Seaforth's 1st Regiment, for which he was attainted of high treason, and the estates forfeited to the Crown.  He married, first, Anne, daughter of Alexander  Fraser, Tutor of Lovat, by his wife Sibella (Elizabeth), daughter of  Kenneth, first Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, with issue--

1.  Roderick, his heir and  successor.

2.  Kenneth, a merchant in Inverness, who married a daughter of Rose, Merkinch.

3.  Colin, a doctor in Edinburgh, who married Miss Dunbar of Linkwood.

4.  Sibella, who in 1697 married the Hon. John Mackenzie of Assynt, second son of Kenneth Mor, third Earl of Seaforth, with issue--Kenneth, who married Frances, his cousin, daughter of Colonel Alexander, without issue.

5.  Anne, who in 1707 married first Alexander Mackenzie, II. of Kinachulladrum, with issue--Anne, his only child in life in 1766; secondly, John MacRae, of Dornie and, thirdly, Colin Mackenzie of the  Gruinard family, a goldsmith in Inverness.

6.  A daughter, who married the Rev. Archibald Macqueen,  minister of Snizort, Skye.

7.  Another married William Mackenzie, of Shieldaig.

8.  Mary, who married  Malcolm Macleod, VIII. of Raasay,  with issue--his heir and others.

Alexander married, secondly, Margaret, daughter of Mackenzie, of  Fairburn, with issue--one son, Simon, in the Foot Guards.  He married,  thirdly, in 1713, Christian, daughter of Fraser of Belladrum, with issue --a  daughter, who married her cousin, Roderick Mackenzie of Achavannie  son of John Og, killed at Sheriffmuir.

He was succeeded as representative of the family by his eldest son,

IV.  RODERICK  MACKENZIE, fourth of Applecross, who has a  sasine of Kinachulladrum, of which place he is designed in 1721.  In 1724 he re-purchased the estate of Applecross from the Court of Enquiry for  ?550.  He married, first, Anne, only daughter of Alexander Macdonell,  XI. of Glengarry, by his first wife, Ann, daughter of Hugh Lord Lovat,  with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, a Captain in Marjoribanks' Regiment, in the Dutch service, who died unmarried.

3.  Kenneth, a watchmaker in London, died unmarried. On the 17th of August, 1737, he was entered as an apprentice to Thomas Gordon, clock and watchmaker, for six years.

4.  Mary, who married James Mackenzie, III. of Highfield, whose eldest son Thomas, IV. of Highfield, inherited Applecross from his uncle  John.

5.  Anne, who married, first, Alexander Mackenzie, I. of Lentran; and secondly, as his second wife, Alexander Mackenzie, VIII. of Davochmaluag, with issue--an only daughter, Anne.

6.  Another daughter who married the Rev. John Maclean, minister of Kintail.

Roderick married, secondly, Margaret, daughter of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, first Baronet and IV. of Scatwell, and widow of Aeneas Macleod of Cadboll, with issue--an only daughter, Elizabeth, who married Alexander Chisholm, XXII. of Chisholm, with issue--his heir and others.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  JOHN  MACKENZIE,  fifth of Applecross, who married  Anne, only daughter of Sir Colin  Mackenzie, IV of Coul, without  issue.  He willed the estate of  Applecross away from his brother  Kenneth [This John, the last of this  family, deprived his brother,  Kenneth, of the property, and  passed it in favour of Thomas  Mackenzie of Highfield, his sister's  son.  In order to set aside the legal succession, and to prevent his  brother, Kenneth, from marrying,  he allowed only ?0 yearly for his  subsistence during his lifetime, which small allowance made it  inadequate for him to rear and  support a family, so that in all  probability this has been the cause  of making the family extinct.  After  this Kenneth the succession should  have reverted back to Roderick  Mackenzie, a descendant of  Roderick, second son of John, II. of  Applecross, who went to Nova  Scotia in 1802, or failing the family  of this Rory, next to his brother's  family, Malcolm, who died a few  years ago in Kishorn, and failing  heirs of that family to the other  descendants of John of Applecross,  viz.:--Kenneth of Auldinie, and  John, killed at Sheriffmuir in 1715.  --MS. of the Family, written in  1828.] to the son of his Sister Mary,  Thomas Mackenzie, IV. of  Highfield, by whom he was  succeeded as

VI.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, sixth of Applecross and IV. of  Highfield. In 1781 he sold the estate of Highfield to George Gillanders, Commissioner for Seaforth, and about the same time purchased Lochcarron from Sir Alexander Mackenzie of Delvine, for ?0,000 sterling.  It was previously bought from Seaforth by Sir Alexander for half  that sum.  He married Elizabeth, only daughter of Donald Mackenzie, V.  of Kilcoy, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  James, who died unmarried, in India.

3.  Colin, who also died unmarried, in India.

4.  Donald, a Captain in the 100th Regiment of Foot.  He married Anna, daughter of James Macleod, IX. of Raasay, with issue--two sons  and. six daughters, John; Thomas; and Elizabeth, who died unmarried  Flora Loudon, who married General Sir Alexander Lindsay, H.E.I.C.S.;  Jane, who married James Thomas Macdonald of Balranald, North Uist,  with issue--Alexander, flow of Balranald, and others; Anne, who married  Christopher Webb Smith, B.C.S.; Isabella Mary, who married Dr  Lauchlan Maclean; and Maria, who married John Mackenzie, the famous  piper, "Piobaire Ban," with issue.

5.  Thomas, who died unmarried.

6.  Jean, who died unmarried.

7.  Anne, who married Kenneth Mackenzie of Inverinate, brother to Alexander Mackenzie, XI. of Hilton, with issue--Thomas, who succeeded as X. of Applecross, and others. 	Catherine, Mary, and Elizabeth, died unmarried.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

VII.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, seventh of Applecross and  Lochcarron, who in 1787 married Jane, daughter of Alexander  Elphinstone of Glack, Aberdeenshire, with issue--

1.  Thomas, his heir and successor.

2.  Elizabeth, who succeeded to Applecross; John Alexander; and Frederick, all died young.

Thomas made a new disposition of the estates by which, in  consequence of a family quarrel, he cut out his only surviving brother, Captain Donald and his daughters--two sons having previously died unmarried--from the succession.  The property, under this new settlement,  went, first, to his son and heir, Thomas, and his issue secondly, failing these, to his daughter Elizabeth; and thirdly, failing her and her issue, to  Thomas, the eldest son of his sister Anne, who, as already stated, married  Kenneth Mackenzie of Inverinate, W.S.; and failing him and his issue, to  the other children of the same sister.

Thomas was succeeded by his eldest and only surviving son,

VIII.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE, eighth of Applecross, who was  for many years, and until his death in 1827, Member of Parliament for the County of Ross.  He died, unmarried, and was, in terms of the abovenamed settlement, succeeded by his sister,

IX.  ELIZABETH  MACKENZIE, ninth of Applecross.  She was in delicate health when her brother died, and continued so until her death  two years after him, in 1829.  She was never served heir, and, dying  unmarried, she was in terms of her brother's settlement succeeded by her  cousin-german,

X.  THOMAS   MACKENZIE of Inverinate, W.S.,  Edinburgh, tenth of Applecross,  who represented the County of  Ross in Parliament from 1837 to  1847.  He married Mary, daughter  of George Mackenzie of Avoch,  with issue--

1.  Kenneth John, his heir  and successor.

2.  George Alexander, a  merchant in Liverpool, who  married Elizabeth, daughter of  John Cay of Charlton, with issue--an only daughter, Mabel Georgina.   He died in 1874.

3.  Thomas, W.S.,  Edinburgh, who died unmarried.

4.  Francis James, who died,  unmarried, in 1875.

5.  Duncan Davidson, who  died, unmarried, in 1863.

6.  Margaret.

7.  Anne Jane.

8.  Geddes Elizabeth, who  married John Cay, W.S.,  Edinburgh.

Thomas sold the estate of Applecross in 1857 to the Duke of  Leeds, and Inverinate to the late Sir Alexander Matheson of Ardross and Lochalsh.  On his death in 1857, he was succeeded as representative of the  family by his eldest son,

XI.  KENNETH  JOHN  MACKENZIE, who was born in 1819 and  died unmarried in 1868, when he was succeeded as representative of the family by his next brother,

XII.  GEORGE  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, who died in 1874,  without male issue.  He was succeeded as representative of the family by  his next brother,

XIII.  THOMAS  MACKENZIE,  Edinburgh, who died unmarried  a few years ago, the last male of the Highfield Applecrosses, failing the descendants of Captain Donald, who was disinherited.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  COUL.

ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE of Coul and Applecross, son of Colin Cam, XIth Baron of Kintail, by Mary of Davochmaluag, had, among others, whose names are given under APPLECROSS,

I.  SIR  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, first designated of Assynt, but  in 1649 he has a sasine of Coul.  He was a "man of parts," and in great  favour with Charles II., who made him a Baronet by Royal patent with  remainder to the heirs male of his body, dated on the 16th of October,  1673.  He was also appointed Sheriff-Principal of Ross and Inverness,  these counties being then one under the jurisdiction of one Sheriff.

He married, first, Jean, eldest daughter of Alexander Chisholm, XIX. of Chisholm, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Simon, I. of Torridon and Lentran, of whom presently.

3.  John, I. of Delvine, of whom after Torridon.

4.  Roderick, who married a daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, VI.  of Davochmaluag.

5.  A daughter, who married Colin Mackenzie, IV. of Redcastle, with issue.

6.  Agnes, married Sir John Munro of Fowlis, with issue.

7.  Jane, who married Alexander Baillie, IX. of Dunain.

8.  Christian, who married John Dunbar, Younger of Bennetsfield.

9.  Lilias, married John Munro of Inverawe, with issue.

10.  Mary, who as his first wife married Kenneth Mackenzie, VI. of Davochmaluag, with issue.

11.  Another, who married Gordon of Cluny.

He married, secondly, a daughter of Thomas Mackenzie of  Inverlael, with issue--two sons, who died young.

12.  Catharine, who married Alexander Mackenzie, II. of  Belmaduthy, with issue.

13.  A daughter, who married Ross of Aldie.

14.  A daughter, who  married Evander Maciver of Tour-naig, with issue.

15.  Another, married  MacIver of Tournaig's brother.

He was succeeded by his  eldest son,

II.  SIR  ALEXANDER   MACKENZIE, second of Coul,  who married first, Jean, daughter of  Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonston,  Tutor of Sutherland, with issue--

1.  John, his heir and  successor.

2.  Colin, who succeeded as IV. of Coul.

3.  Lucy, who married Angus Mackintosh, X. of Kyllachy.

4.  Janet, who in 1695 married Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of  Davochmaluag, with issue--an only daughter, Janet, who in 1715 married  Aeneas Macleod, of Camuscurry, with issue--an only daughter, Mary, who married John Urquhart of Mount Eagle.  Sir Alexander married secondly, Janet Johnstone of  Warriston, with issue--William,  Simon, and James; and a daughter,  Margaret, who married Andrew  Brown of Dolphinton, with issue.

He had a charter under the Great Seal, in 1681, by which his lands of Coul and others were, upon his own resignation, erected into one free  barony in favour of himself and his heirs male, holding of the Crown.  He afterwards, in 1702, made a deed of entail by which all his estates were  settled upon heirs male of his own body.  He died shortly after, and was  succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  SIR  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Coul, who married first, Margaret, daughter of Hugh Rose of Kilravock, with issue--an only daughter, who married Bayne of Delny.  He married, secondly, in 1703,  Helen, daughter of Patrick Lord Elibank, with issue--two daughters, one  of whom married Sir George Hope of Kirkliston, Baronet.  The other died  unmarried.  He joined the Earl of Mar in 1715, was attainted for high  treason, and dying without issue male the titles and estates were assumed by his next brother,

IV.  SIR  COLIN   MACKENZIE, fourth of Coul, who  was Clerk to the Pipe in the  Exchequer, an office which he held  during his life. He married  Henrietta, daughter of Sir Patrick  Houston of Houston, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  William of Achilty and Kinnahaird, who married Mary,  daughter of Alexander, VII. of Davochmaluag, with issue--extinct in the  male line.  John, the last male representative of the family sailed for Melbourne in 1850, in the Owen Glendower, which has never since been  heard of.

3.  Anne, who married John Mackenzie, V. of Applecross, without issue.

Sir Colin died in 1740, in the 67th year of his age, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

V.  SIR  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, fifth of Coul.  He had a  charter, under the Great Seal, to himself and his heirs male, as heir to his  grandfather, of the whole estate of Coul, in 1742.  He married Janet,  daughter of Sir James Macdonald, XIII. of Sleat, Baronet, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  James, who died unmarried.

3.  Henrietta, married Thomas Wharton, without issue.

4.  Margaret, who married William Mackenzie, IV. and last of  Suddie, with issue.

5.  Stewart, who married William Dallas of Cantray, with issue.

6.  Christina.

7.  Janet.

Sir Alexander died in 1792, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  MAJOR-GENERAL  SIR  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, Bengal Army, sixth of Coul.   He was provincial Commander-in-Chief of Bengal, 1790-1792, and  married in 1778, Catherine,  daughter of Robert Ramsay, with  issue--one son, who on his death in  1795, succeeded him as

VII.  SIR  GEORGE  STEWART  MACKENZIE,  F.R.S., seventh  of Coul. He was born on the 22nd of June, 1780, and married, first, on the 8th of June, 1802, Mary, daughter of Donald Macleod of Geanies, with  issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  William, who succeeded as IX. of Coul.

3.  George, who died unmarried in 1839.

4.  Robert-Ramsay, who succeeded as X. of Coul.

5.  The Rev. John, Free Church minister of Ratho.  He was born in  1813, and married, in 1839, Eliza, daughter of the celebrated Thomas  Chalmers, D.D., without issue.  He died in London in 1878. She died in  1892.

6.  Donald Macleod, Rear Admiral, R.N.  He was born in 1815 and married, in 1865, Dorothea, daughter of Admiral Sir Michael Seymour, G.C.B., without issue.

7.  The Rev. James, who in 1847 married Philadelphia, daughter of Sir Percival Hart Dyke of Lullingstone, Kent, Baronet, and died without  issue in 1857.

8.  Margaret.  9. Catherine.  10. Mary.  All died unmarried.

Sir George married, secondly, on the 27th of October, 1836, Catherine, daughter of Sir Henry Jardine of Harwood, with issue--

11.  Henry Augustin Ornano, who, born on the 24th of April, 1839, married Mary Ann, daughter of Louis Botte, with issue--four sons and a  daughter.

He died in 1848, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

VIII.  SIR  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, eighth of Coul, an  officer in the Bengal army.  He died unmarried on the 3rd of January,  1856, and was succeeded by his next brother,

IX.  SIR  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, ninth of Coul.  He was born  on the 20th of May, 1806, and on the 16th of August, 1858, married  Agnes, daughter of Ross Thomson, of Ardmore, Derry, and died without issue on the 21st of December, 1868, when he was succeeded by his next  surviving brother,

X.  SIR  ROBERT  RAMSAY-MACKENZIE, tenth of Coul, who,  born on the 21st of July, 1811, married in September, 1846, Louisa  Alexandrina, daughter of Richard Jones, member of the Legislative  Assembly of Sydney, New South Wales, with issue--

1.  Arthur George Ramsay, his heir and successor.

2.  Mary Louisa, who on the 9th of May, 1871, married Alexander Archer, of Brisbane, Queensland, without issue.  They both perished in the  wreck of the Quetta on her way home from Australia.

3.  Katherine Elizabeth.

4.  Louisa Stewart, who on the 26th of February, 1885, married James G. L. Archer, of Gracemere, Queensland, and Laurvig, Norway.

5.  Frances Philadelphia.

In  1867 Sir Robert was appointed Premier of the Executive  Council and Colonial Treasurer of Queensland, having previously held the offices of Colonial Secretary and Treasurer.  He died on the 19th of  September, 1873, when he was succeeded by his only son,

XI.  SIR  ARTHUR  GEORGE  RAMSAY-MACKENZIE,  eleventh and present Baronet of Coul.  He was born on the 2nd of May,  1866, and is still unmarried.



THE  MACKENZIES  OF  TORRIDON.

I.  SIMON  MACKENZIE, first of Torridon and Lentran, was second son  of Sir Kenneth Mackenzie, first Baronet of Coul, by his first wife, Jean, daughter of Alexander Chisholm, XIX. of Chisholm.  He has a sasine of  the half of Arcan on disposition in 1697.  He married Catharine, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Applecross. She has a sasine in 1672 and  another in 1694.  By her he had issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  Alexander, I. of Lentran, Tarradale, and Rhindoun, who  married, first, Anne, daughter of Roderick Mackenzie, IV. of Applecross  (sasine 1745), with issue--(l) Alexander, who died young; (2) Roderick of Tarradale, a Captain in Marjoribanks' Regiments, killed in America, without issue; (3) John Mackenzie of Arcan, secretary to the Highland Society of London, so well known as "John Mackenzie of the Temple," and intimately connected with the editing and publication of Macpherson's Gaelic Ossian.  He succeeded to the property, but afterwards sold or alienated it--Rhindoun to the Chisholm  Tarradale to  his nephew, Dr Murchison; and Arcan to his sister, Elizabeth, widow of  John Mackenzie of Sanachan.  He died unmarried in 1803, the last male  representative of the Lentran Mackenzies.  Alexander's daughters were--(1) Anne, who married Donald Macrae, Camusluinie, Kintail, with issue;  (2) another, who married Alexander Murchison of Achtertyre, with issue;  (3) Janet, who married William Mackenzie of Strathgarve, with issue; (4)  Catharine, who married Colin Green, Scatwell, without issue; (5) Isabella,  who married, first, Colonel Mackay of Bighouse, Sutherlandshire, without  issue; and secondly, her cousin, John Mackenzie, I. of Delvine, with issue;  and (6) Elizabeth, who married Captain John Mackenzie, III. of Sanachan  and Tullich, Lochcarron, who in right of his wife succeeded to Arcan. She  died without issue.  Alexander married secondly Abigail, daughter of  Charles Mackenze of Cullen.  She has a sasine in 1715.

3.  A daughter, who married Archibald Macdonald of Barisdale,  with issue.

4.  Anne, who in 1694 married Farquhar Macrae of Inverinate,  with issue.

5.  Catherine, married Roderick Mackenzie of Aulduinny.

6.  Florence, who married Colin Mackenzie, II. of Cleanwaters, with issue--Alexander.  Simon was succeeded by his eldest  son,

II.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, second of Torridon, who in 1703  married Ann, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, VII. of Gairloch, with  issue--

1.  John, his heir and successor.

2.  Mary, who married  Colin Mackenzie, a Bailie of  Dingwall, with issue--(1) Kenneth,  who married Margaret Macdonald,  Skye, with issue--Alexander, who  died young in Jamaica; John,  Lieutenant 78th Regiment, who  died in India, without issue; and  Donald, who died young. Kenneth  had also several daughters--Janet,  who married John Chisholm,  Dingwall, where she died, without  issue, in 1870, aged 95; Mary, and  Margaret Anne, both of whom died  unmarried; and Alexanderina, who  married Captain Munro, 42nd  Highlanders. (2) John, a merchant  in Bishopsgate Street, London, who  married a daughter of his partner,  Alexander Mackenzie of the Coul  family, with issue--Colin  Alexander, known as "the  Ambassador," who died unmarried  in 1851; Kenneth, who died young;  John, a Colonel H.E.I.C.S.;  Alexander, of Christ Church,  Oxford, who died unmarried; and  Caroline, who married Dr William  Wald, without issue.  (3) Alexander, who died young.  (4)  Mary, who married Murdoch  Mackenzie, Bailie of Dingwall,  without issue.  (5) Anne, who  married Andrew Robertson,  Provost of Dingwall and Sheriff-Substitute of Ross, grandson of  Colin Robertson of Kindeace, with  issue--Anne, who as his second  wife married Sir John Gladstone,  Baronet of Fasque, with issue,  among others--the great statesman,  the Right Hon. William Ewart  Gladstone of Hawarden, M.P., who  as we write is, in his eighty fifth  year for the fourth time Prime  Minister of Great Britain.  (6)  Fanny, who married John  Mackenzie of Kinellan, with issue--Colin, who died young; Alexander,  who married Mary Macdonald;  Margaret, who married Farquhar  Matheson and Mary, Christy, and  Janet, all of whom died unmarried.   (7) Betsy, who married a Mr  Simpson; and (8) Elizabeth.

Kenneth died before 1738  and was succeeded by his eldest  son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Torridon.  He fought at  Culloden, and is said to have been "one of the prettiest men in Scotland."

The following is from a letter by his grandson, the late Bishop Mackenzie of Nottingham, dated the 10th of September, 1878, in answer to a request  by the author that he should kindly communicate anything he knew about  his more immediate ancestors:--

He led into action the few  Mackenzies who fought in that  battle. He was a nephew of  Macdonald of Keppoch, one of the  seven men of Moidart, and was  personally requested by Lady  Seaforth to take up arms for the  Prince, and he attached himself,  with the personal following who  attended him, to his uncle's  standard.  The Macdonalds, in  Strong resentment for having been  placed on the left instead of the  right of Charles Edward, refused to  charge when ordered by their  commander.  Keppoch, uttering the  touching exclamation, "My God!  that I should live to be deserted by  my own children then charged,  accompanied by my grandfather  and his small following. He soon  fell pierced by balls and then, while  my grandfather wept over him,  exhorted him to leave the field as  the brief action was already over,  and the dragoons were already  scattering over the field in pursuit.

Some of the Macdonalds placed  themselves under their Chief's favourite nephew, as he is called in  Scott's account of the battle. Tradition says that some of them  were disposed to run when they saw parties of the dragoons  approaching them, but that  Torridon, spoke briefly,  "Keep  together men.  If we stand shoulder  to shoulder these men will be far  more frightened at us than we can be of them. But remember, if you  scatter, they have four legs to each  of your two, and you will stand  singly but small chance against  them."  They took his advice, and  he led them in fair order off the  field.  It is further reported that he  was proscribed after the battle, and  that his life was saved by Sir  Alexander Macdonald of Sleat,  ancestor of the present Lord  Macdonald, who was one of the  Royal Commissioners.  Sir  Alexander urged that Torridon was  a young and inexperienced man,  and not likely to be dangerous to  the Government, on account of the  distance and comparative smallness  of his wild Highland estate  however, it is said that he added--"Torridon is a great favourite with  the ladies, and if you hang  Torridon it is certain that half the ladies of the country will hang  themselves."  This reasoning is said  to have prevailed and it is certain  that the estate descended to my  eldest brother in right of  inheritance, without having been confiscated.

John, who entertained Prince Charles in 1745, married Isobel, daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, II. of Dundonnel (sasine in 1741), with  issue--

1.  Kenneth, his heir and successor.

2.  John, who succeeded as V. of Torridon.

3.  Janet, who married, as his second wife, Captain Alexander, second son of Sir Roderick Mackenzie, second Baronet and V. of Scatwell, with issue.  She died in 1808.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  KENNETH  MACKENZIE, fourth of Torridon.  He sold the  estate to his brother John.  He married Miss Cockerell, daughter of a solicitor, in London, with issue--

1.  Kenneth Cockerell, who married, with issue--(1) Kenneth Cockerell, who died without issue; (2) John Scott, of the Manchester and  Liverpool Railway Company, who married and in 1859 died, leaving issue  --an only son, who since died without issue.

2.  Isabella, who died  without issue.

Kenneth was succeeded by  his next brother,

V.  JOHN  MACKENZIE,  fifth of Torridon, who had  previously purchased the estate  from him, and whose descendants  became the heirs male of his  predecessors, Kenneth's  descendants having, as already  shown, become extinct.  He  married Anne Isabella, daughter of  Isaac Van Dam, West Indies, with  issue--

1.  John, his heir and  successor.

2.  Anthony Van Dam, who  died unmarried in 1824.

3.  Rev. Charles,  Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral.

4.  Rev. Henry, consecrated  Bishop Suffragan of Nottingham in  1870. He resigned his Episcopal  duties in 1877, but retained the title of Bishop, and the offices of Arch-dean of Nottingham, and Canon and Sub-Dean of the Cathedral of  Lincoln. He married, first, Elizabeth, daughter of Robert  Ridley, of Demerara, with  issue--an only daughter, Edith, who  married the Rev. H. Fellowes.  He married, secondly, Antoinette,  daughter of Sir James Henry Turing of Foveran, Baronet, with issue--a  large family of whom 11 survived. He died in 1878.

John died in 1820, and was  succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, sixth of Torridon, who married  Katharine Yallop, and died without issue in 1852.  He sold the estate to James Alexander Stewart-Mackenzie of Seaforth, and was succeeded as  representative of the family by his eldest surviving brother,

VII.  THE  REV. CHARLES  MACKENZIE, Prebendary of St.  Paul's Cathedral, who married Henrietta, daughter of Henry Simonds, of Reading, Berkshire, with issue--

1.  Henry Douglas, who married Miss Suttar, Bathurst, N.S.W.,  with issue--Dudley B. Douglas, and two daughters.

The Rev. Charles had also four daughters.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  DELVINE.

I.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was third son of Sir Kenneth  Mackenzie, first Baronet of Coul, by his first wife, Jean Chisholm of  Chisholm.  He married first, his cousin Isabella, daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Lentran, with issue--one son, George, who married, and  died before his father, without issue in 1772.  He married, secondly, a  daughter of Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonston, with issue--William, who  married, and died in England before his father, without issue.  He married,  thirdly, Margaret, daughter of Hay of Alderston, with issue--

1.  Alexander, who on the death of his half-brother George,  became his father's heir.

2.  Kenneth (who died in 1756), Professor of Law in the University of Edinburgh.  He married Grizel Hume, daughter of Browne, I. of Dolphinton, with issue--two sons and two daughters.  The second son,  Andrew, was a W.S., and married a daughter of Campbell of Achlyne,  with issue.  The daughters died unmarried.  The eldest son, John,  succeeded his father-in-law, and became JOHN  MACKENZIE, II. of  DOLPHINTON.  He in 1773 married Alice, daughter of Robert Ord, Lord  Chief-Justice of the Exchequer, with issue--five sons, four of whom--Robert,  Kenneth, John, and George, died unmarried. The second son,  Andrew, had a son (with three daughters--Mary, Grace, and Anne)  Kenneth, a Major in the 4th Regiment, who married a Miss Solomon in  America, with issue--four sons and three daughters. The only surviving  son of John succeeded him as RICHARD  MACKENZIE, III. OF  DOLPHINTON, who died in 1850.  He married Jane, daughter of Captain  Hamilton, 73rd Regiment, with issue--JOHN  ORD  MACKENZIE, IV. of  Dolphinton, W.S., who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas  Kirkpatrick of Closeburn, with issue.  Richard had also three other sons, Kenneth, Richard James, and George.

3.  Thomas, who died young.

4.  John, Chief Clerk of Session, who married Miss Renton of Lamerton, without issue.

5.  Donald, a Surgeon in the Army, who died unmarried in 1741.

6.  Anne, who married Alexander Robertson of Faskally, with  issue, and died in 1772.

7.  Helen, who married Crawford Balfour of Bingry.

8.  Rebecca, who married John Mackenzie, IV. of Belmaduthy,  with issue; and five other daughters, Janet, Catharine, Mary, Christina, and Jane, all of whom died unmarried.

John Mackenzie, I. of Delvine, died in 1731, when he was  succeeded by his second and eldest surviving son,

II.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, second of Delvine, who  married, with issue--an only daughter,

III.  MARGARET  MACKENZIE, third of Delvine, who married  George Muir of Cassencarie, with issue--an only son.  She died in 1767, and was succeeded by her son,

IV.  SIR  ALEXANDER  MUIR-MACKENZIE, created first  Baronet of Delvine on the 9th of November, 1805.  He married in  September, 1787, Jane, daughter of Sir Robert Murray of Hillhead and  Clermont, Baronet, with issue--one son, and eight daughters, seven of  whom died unmarried.  The eldest, Susan, married in 1817 Robert Smythe of Methven.  He died in 1832, when he was succeeded by his only son,

V.  SIR  JOHN  WILLIAM  PITT  MUIR-MACKENZIE, second  Baronet and fifth of Delvine.  He married Sophia Matilda, fifth daughter  of James Raymond Johnstone of Alva, County Clackmannan, with issue--

1.  Alexander, his heir and successor.

2.  Robert-Smythe, late  Lieutenant-Colonel, R.A.  He was  born on the 27th of November,  1842, and married on the 17th of  October, 1872, Anne-Elizabeth-Augusta, daughter of Captain  Charles Kinnaird Johnstone  Gordon of Craig, Aberdeenshire,  with issue--Robert Cecil, born in  1876, and Georgina Sophia.

3.  Cecil Cholmeley, Lieutenant Royal Engineers.  He was born in 1843 and died on the 2nd of November, 1863, unmarried.

4.  Kenneth Augustus, M.A., C.B., bencher of Lincoln's Inn, Q.C., barrister-at-law.  He was born in 1845, Permanent Secretary to the Lord  Chancellor since 1880, and Clerk of the Crown in Chancery since 1884.   He married in 1874 Amy, daughter of William Graham, M.P., for  Glasgow, with issue--William Montague, and three daughters.

5.  Montague Johnstone, barrister, late Fellow of Hertford College, Oxford, Recorder of Sandwich.  He was born in  1847, and married in  1888, the Hon. Sarah Napier Bruce, daughter of Lord Aberdare, with issue  --a daughter, Enid.

6.  John William Pitt, Magistrate Indian Civil Service.  He was born in 1855, and married on the 2nd of August, 1876, Fanny Louisa, second daughter of Lieutenant-General Montague Cholmeley Johnstone, with issue--two sons and two daughters.

7.  Georgina Mary, who on the 24th of November, 1871, married  Sir Charles Sebright, K.C.M.G., and died on the 24th of January, 1874.

8.  Lucy Jane Eleanora, who on the 20th of October, 1859, married Bentley, youngest son of William Murray of Monkland, with issue. She  died in 1874.

9.  Susan Anne Eliza, unmarried.

Sir John died on the 1st of February, 1855, when he was succeeded by his eldest son,

VI.  SIR  ALEXANDER  MUIR-MACKENZIE, third and present  Baronet of Delvine.  He was Captain in the 78th Highlanders and  subsequently Major in the Highland Borderers Infantry Militia.  He was  born on the 26th of July, 1840, and on the 21st of February, 1871, married Frances Rose, sixth daughter of Sir Thomas Moncrieffe, Seventh Baronet  of Moncrieffe, without issue.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  GRUINARD.

I.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, first of this family, was a natural son of George,  second Earl of Seaforth.  He has a charter of Little Gruinard and other  lands in 1669, in which he is described as then "of Meikle Gruinard."  He married before 1655, Christian, daughter of Donald Mackenzie, III. of  Loggie (sasine in that year as his wife), with issue--

1.  George, his heir, whom his mother describes in a sasine, dated 10th August, 1685, as "George Mackenzie, my eldest lawful son."

2.  Kenneth, who married Frances Herbert, daughter of William, Marquis of Powis, and widow of Kenneth, fourth Earl of Seaforth, without  issue.

3.  John, a doctor in Inverness five other sons and eight daughters, all married, several of them with issue.

John was succeeded by his eldest son,

II.  GEORGE  MACKENZIE, second of Gruinard, who has a  sasine in 1696, married, first, Margaret, daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, II. of Ballone (marriage contract 1696) with issue--

1.  George, his heir and successor.

2.  Kenneth, who married a daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, III. of Suddie, with issue.

3.  Colin, a goldsmith in Inverness, who married Anne, daughter of Alexander Mackenzie, III. of Applecross, with issue--two daughters.

4.  Simon, who married Mary, daughter of John Mackenzie, II. of Ardloch, with issue.

5.  Captain Donald of Woodlands, who married Janet daughter of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, third Baronet and X. of Gairloch, without issue.

6.  Roderick, who married Barbara, daughter of Alexander  Mackenzie, I. of Ardloch, widow of John, third son of Kenneth  Mackenzie, II. of Dundonnel, with issue--four daughters.

7.  William.

8.  Kenneth.

9.  William, Lieutenant  R.N., who married Ann, daughter  of Alexander Mackenzie, I. of  Ardloch, with issue--an only  daughter, Mary Howard, who  married Dr Grant, Inverness, with  issue--four sons and seven  daughters.

10.  George.

11.  Captain John of Castle Leod, who married Geddes, daughter of his uncle, Simon Mackenzie.  He bought the estate of Avoch with money left him by Admiral George Geddes Mackenzie, his wife's brother. By this marriage he had issue--George of Avoch, a merchant in London (with several other sons and daughters), who married Margaret, daughter  of the Rev. William Mackenzie, minister of Glenmuick, with issue--(1)  Geddes, who in 1812, married Sir Alexander Mackenzie, the celebrated  North American explorer, and discoverer of the Mackenzie River, with  issue--Alexander George of Avoch; George Alexander; and Geddes  Margaret; (2) Margaret, who married Thomas Mackenzie, X. of  Applecross, with issue.

George had three other sons and nine daughters by this marriage, making twenty-three in all.  He married, secondly, Elizabeth, natural  daughter of President Forbes of Culloden, who has a sasine of Meikle  Gruinard in 1729 "to Elizabeth Forbes, his spouse," with issue--four sons  and six daughters, making the extraordinary total of thirty-three children,  nineteen of whom are known to have married, many of them into the best  families in the north.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

III.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, third of Gruinard, who married first in 1713 Catherine, daughter of George Mackenzie, I. of Culbo, third son of  Alexander Mackenzie, II of Belmaduthy, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  John, of whom nothing is known.

3.  Annabella, who married the Rev. Murdo Morrison, Stornoway, with issue.

4.  Lilias, who married Rev. James Macaulay, Gairloch.

5.  Isabella, who married Alexander Mackenzie, Little Gruinard, with issue.

John married secondly, a daughter of Mackenzie of Sand.

He was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, fourth or Gruinard, who married  Lilias, daughter or John Mackenzie, I. of Lochend, with issue--

1.  Simon, Captain 78th Regiment, who died before his father, returning from India, unmarried.

2.  George, who was killed by a fall before his father's death, in Jamaica, unmarried.

3.  John, who became his father's heir and successor.

4.  Alexander, Colonel in the army, "a most distinguished soldier." He served with the 36th Regiment throughout the Peninsular War, and in  the course of his service was dangerously wounded in the neck, lost an  eye, and had two horses killed under him.  He was a gallant and  distinguished  officer, in every sense a thorough Highlander.  He married first, Eliza, daughter of Colonel George Mackenzie, son of John  Mackenzie, I. of Lochend, with issue--(1) George, a Captain in the 36th  (his father's) Regiment, killed while leading an escalading party at the  assault of Burgos, unmarried; (2) Alexanderina, who married Alexander  Grove, M.D., R.N., at Greenwich Hospital, with issue--three daughters.   Colonel Alexander married, secondly, Eliza, daughter of Captain James  Graeme, R.N., with issue--(3) George, who died unmarried in 1842; (4)  Major-General Alexander Mackay Mackenzie, who became the  representative of the family; (5) William, who died  young; (6) Eliza; (7)  Lilias, who married Sir John W. Fisher, M.D., without issue; and (8) Janet, who married W. F. B. Staples, barrister, with issue.

5.  Catherine, who married the Rev. Donald Mackintosh, Gairloch, with issue--five daughters, one of whom, Annabella, married Murdo Macrae, with issue.

6.  Margaret, who died unmarried.

William, IV. of Gruinard,  raised a Company of Highlanders  in 1778 for Lord Seaforth's  Regiment.  Simon, his eldest son,  went to India in command of it,  and, as already stated, died on his return voyage, from the accidental  bite of a favourite Arab horse which he brought along with him  when lock-jaw supervened and caused his death.

William was succeeded by his eldest surviving son,

V.  JOHN  MACKENZIE, fifth of Gruinard, Captain 73rd  Regiment, who married Margaret, daughter of Gun Munro of Braemore,  Caithness, with issue--

1.  William, his heir and successor.

2.  Christina, who married John Campbell, Poolewe, with issue--several sons and daughters.

In 1795  he sold the property--which in his time comprised Meikle Gruinard, Udrigle, and Sand, "with the pendicle thereof called Little  Gruinard"--to Duncan Davidson of Tulloch, whose son re-sold it to the  late Meyrick Bankes of Letterewe.  He was succeeded as representative of  the family by his only son,

VI.  WILLIAM  MACKENZIE, Captain 72nd Regiment, said to  have been the handsomest man in his day in the Highlands.  In 1829 he unsuccessfully claimed the Chiefship of the clan.  (See pp. 351-355). He married Margaret, daughter of Wilson of Wilsonton, with issue--

1.  John, who died young; and three daughters, two of whom, both named Mary, died young.  The third, Margaret Innes, married Lachlan Maclachlan, Killinochannich, Argyleshire, without issue.

Captain William having died without male issue, was succeeded as representative of the family by his cousin,

VII.  MAJOR-GENERAL  ALEXANDER  MACKAY  MACKENZIE, eldest surviving son of the distinguished Colonel Alexander  Mackenzie, fourth son of William Mackenzie, IV., and brother of Captain  John, V. of Gruinard.

He married  Marion, daughter of the Rev. William Colville of  Newton, Cambridgeshire, with issue--

1.  John.

2.  Stuart.

3.  Lilias.

4.  Sybil.

He died in London on the 21st of May, 1879, when a sketch of his career by the present writer, appeared in Celtic Magazine, vol. IV., pp.  321-327.


THE  MACKENZIES  OF  FAWLEY  COURT  AND  FARR.

I.  ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE, the first of this remarkable family  prominently known in the engineering world, was born at Wester  Fairburn, in the county of Ross, on the 5th of June, 1769, and educated at  the Grammar School, Inverness.  He joined an old school-fellow, David Mackintosh, a native of Cawdor, Nairnshire, as a firm of contractors and  engineers.  They constructed several canals in England, and were very  successful.  He married Mary, daughter of William Austin, from her great  beauty known as one of the "Lancashire Witches," with issue--

1.  William, of whom presently.

2.  Alexander, C.E., who was born at Hollinwood, Lancashire, in 1796.  He married. with issue--(1) William Seager, who married, first, a daughter of Thomas Woodhouse, C.E., with issue; and secondly, a  daughter of George Woodhouse, C.E.  William was for many years a civil  engineer in the employment of the Russian Government, and lived for  some time at Nyksa in that country.  He afterwards went to Canada, and  died in London on the 26th of February, 1887; (2) Kenneth, C.E., killed in  a railway accident near Bordeaux, in France, unmarried; (3) Richard, C.E.,  who married his cousin, Eliza, daughter of John Griffith, and died at  Montreal on the 16th of February, 1887; (4) Alexander, CE., who was  killed in a railway accident in Canada, without issue; (5) Mary, who  married Mr Scott, in Canada.

3.  Daniel, who was born in 1799, and died in 1802.

4.  John, who was born on the 1st of November, 1804 went to  Virginia as a planter, and died there, unmarried.

5.  David, born in 1807, and died in 1811.

6.  Thomas, who was born in 1808, and died in 1811, the same day as his brother, both being buried in the same grave.

7.  Edward, from whom the  Mackenzies of Fawley Court, Farr,  etc.

8.  Sarah, born in 1797, and  died unmarried.

9.  Margaret, who married  John Griffith, with issue--(1)  Edward Mackenzie, who settled in  the United States, and married a daughter of Colonel Campbell; (2)  William Alexander, who settled in  Canada and married a daughter of  Mr Baldwin, Baldwin House, Boston, United States, without  issue.  He lives in Quebec.  (3) Mary, who married Slack Davis,  MA., of Oxford, barrister-at-law, a  well-known writer and poet in  America, where he died on the 31st  of March, 1889; (4) Alice, who  married Thomas Musgrave, with issue; (5) Emily Mackenzie, who  married Joseph William Painter, barrister, deceased, with issue--several sons, ranching near Denver, Colorado; (6) Harriet, who married  William Johnson Shaw, of Buenos Ayres, with issue; and (7) Eliza  Ann, who married her cousin, Richard Mackenzie, C.E.,  Montreal, above mentioned.

10.  Mary, born in 1814, and married James Barnard, shipowner, Greenock, without issue.  She died in 1875.

11.  Eliza, who married  Alexander Duckworth, with issue.

Alexander died on the 23rd of February, 1836, aged 66 years, his  wife having predeceased him on the 8th of June, 1828.  They were both  buried at Blackburn, Lancashire.  He was succeeded as representative of  the family by his eldest son,

II.  WILLIAM   MACKENZIE, afterwards of  Newbie, Dumfries-shire, and of  Auchenskeoch, County of Kirkcud-bright, who was born at Marsden  Chapel on the 20th of March, 1794.

He was a celebrated engineer, first  beginning his career under David  Mackintosh, his father's partner.

He subsequently practised his  profession under Telford.  He made his way very rapidly, taking part in  most of the great engineering works--railways, canals, and  bridges--of his time; and in the Shannon improvements, in  connection with which the  Secretary for Ireland complimented  him in the highest terms in the  House of Commons.  After the  introduction of railways he  constructed the great Lime Street  tunnel under Liverpool.  He  afterwards contracted for and  engineered many  railways--in  some of which be was partner with  John Stephenson and others--in  Scotland and England, including  the Glasgow and Greenock line, the  London and Birmingham, the Trent  Valley, the Lancaster and Carlisle,  the North Union, the Ormskirk, and  the Caledonian railway.  He and Brassey finding they were  tendering against one another, in  1841 joined forces for French  railways, and constructed under the firm name of Mackenzie & Brassey  (which consisted of himself, his brother Edward, and Brassey) the  Paris and Rouen and Paris and Boulogne and Amiens, and several  other railways in France, Belgium, and Spain, notably the Barcelona  and Seville, and the Paris and Bourdeaux lines.  Both King Louis  Philippe and his successor Prince  Louis Napoleon, then President of  the French Republic and afterwards  Emperor, showed him many marks  of friendship and esteem, the latter  having decided to make him a  Chevalier of the Legion of Honour  just before he died.  In 1851, at  Tours, at the opening of the Paris  and Orleans Railway, Napoleon,  grasping him by the band, thus  addressed him--"I am happy to see  you again so well.  I am still  happier to have the opportunity of  thanking you. as President, for the  great and useful works you have  executed in France.  I shall be glad  to confer on you the decoration of  the Legion of Honour, and I trust  your Government will permit you  to wear a distinction so well-merited."  On the same occasion  Napoleon exchanged portraits with  him.  Mackenzie, however, died  very soon after, before the honour  offered him by the President of the French Republic could be formally  conferred upon him.  In 1844 he was a claimant to the Muirton of  Fairburn estate, but he does not seem to have followed it up.

He married, first, on the 9th  of November, 1819, Mary,  daughter of James Dalziel,  Glasgow, a native of Rothesay,  county of Bute, without issue.  She  died on the 19th of December,  1838, aged 49 years.  He married  secondly, on the 31st of December,  1839, Sarah, daughter of William  Dewhurst of Chorley, Lancashire  (she died in 1866), also without  issue.  He died on the 20th of  October, 1851, when he was  succeeded in his estates, and as  representative of the family in this  country, by his youngest brother,

III.  EDWARD  MACKENZIE, who was born at Witton,  Lancashire, on the 1st of May,  1811, and who, as has been already seen,  was one of the partners of Mackenzie & Brassey.  Shortly after the death of his brother William, from whom he inherited Newbie and other estates  in the county of Dumfries, and Auchenskeoch in the Stewartry of  Kirkcudbright, Edward retired, and in 1853 purchased the Manor and  estate of Fawley, in the counties of Buckingham and Oxford, the noble  mansion-house of which was rebuilt by Christopher Wren in 1684.  He  was a J.P., D.L., and in 1862, High Sheriff of Oxfordshire and J.P. for the  counties of Buckingham, Dumfries, and Kirkcudbright. He married first,  on the 29th of January, 1839, Mary, daughter of William Dalziel of the  Craigs, Dumfries-shire, a descendant of the first Earl of Carnwarth, with issue--

1.  William Dalziel, his heir and successor.

2.  Edward Philippe of Auchenskeoch, in the Stewartry of  Kirkcudbright; the Craigs, Dumfries-shire, and Downham Hall, Suffolk,  educated at Harrow and Oxford.  He was formerly a Lieutenant in the 9th Lancers, and Colonel of the Loyal Suffolk Yeomanry Hussars.  In 1882 he  was High Sheriff of Suffolk, of which county he is a J.P. and D.L., as also  J.P. for Norfolk and Dumfries.  He was born on the 14th of March, 1849,  and married, in October, 1865, Helen Jane, third daughter of Henry  Baskerville, J.P. and D.L., of Crowsley Park, Oxfordshire, with issue--a daughter, Beryl Marie Baskerville, who on the 30th of August, 1890,  married Colonel Geoffry Barton, C.B., of the 7th Royal Fusiliers, with  issue--Philip Geoffry, born in 1891.

3.  Austin, educated at Eton,  late of Warmanbie, Dumfries-shire, formerly Lieutenant 3rd Battalion  Scots Fusiliers, present Master of  the Woodland Pytchley Hounds,  and J.P for Dumfries-shire and North Hants.  He was born on the  10th of October, 1856, and on the 31st of January, 1878, married  Lucy, daughter of Major Gustavus Tuite Dalton of Kell, County  Meath, half brother of the third Marquis of Headfort, without issue.

4.  Keith Ronald, of Gillott's Oxon, who was born on the 17th of May, 1861, educated at Clifton, and is still unmarried.

5.  Marie Ada, who in 1869 married John William Rhodes of  Hennerton, Berks, formerly Lieutenant 60th Rifles, with issue--John  Edward, Lieutenant 60th Rifles; Breda; Victor; Wilfrid; and Violet.

6.  Claire Evelyn, who in 1866 married Francis Henry of  Elmestree, late 9th Lancers, and now Lieutenant-Colonel Gloucestershire Yeomanry Hussars, with issue--Gilbert Francis, Lieutenant 9th Lancers Vivian, Lieutenant Royal Fusiliers; Edward; Mary; Maud; and Olive.

7.  Sarah Rosa, who married John Edward Cooke, with issue--Bertram Hunter; Montague Edward; aud Mignon.

8.  Alice Edith, who in 1881 married Major Walter Partridge, late of the 61st Regiment, with issue--two daughters, Edith St. Ives and Maud.

9.  Aimee Gertrude, who on the 22nd of October, 1872, married  Sir William Robert Clayton, sixth Baronet of Marden Park, without issue.

10.  Mary Maude Janetta, unmarried.

Edward Mackenzie married, secondly, in 1864, Ellen daughter of James Mullett, of Tours, France, who survives him, without issue. He  died on the 27th of September, 1880, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IV.  WILLIAM  DALZIEL   MACKENZIE, M.A., Oxford,  educated at Harrow, now of Fawley  Court, Bucks; Thetford, Norfolk;  Farr, Inverness; and Newbie,  Dumfries-shire.  He was born on  the 31st of March, 1840, at  Eastbank, Renfrewshire, and is a  barrister-at-law of the Inner  Temple, and Hon. Major of the  Queen's Own Oxfordshire Hussars.

He was High Sheriff of that county  in 1873, is a D.L. of Inverness-shire, and a J.P. of the counties of  Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Bucks,  and Oxford, and was for some time  a director of the London and North Western Railway Company.  He  married on the 1st of December,  1863, Mary Anna, eldest daughter  of the late Henry Baskerville, J.P., D.L., of Crowsley Park,  Oxfordshire, by Mary Anna,  daughter of John Standfast Burton,  father of Lieutenant-Colonel John  Edward Burton-Mackenzie, late  91st Highlanders, now of Kilcoy,  with issue--

1.  William Roderick Dalziel, who was born on the 2nd of  September, 1864.  He is Captain in the 2nd Battalion (Inverness Militia) Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, and on the 21st of November, 1888,  married Maud Evelyn, eldest daughter of General Sir George Wentworth   Higginson,  K.C.B., by Florence Virginia Fox, daughter of the first Baron Castletown, with issue--Douglas William Alexander Dalzell, born on the  2nd of October, 1889; Kenneth Fitzpatrick, born on the 13th of June,  1891; and Archibald Edward, who was born in July 1892 and died in  March, 1893.

2.  Edward Baskerville, Second Lieutenant 2nd Battalion Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders (Inverness Militia), who was born on the 11th  of December, 1874.

3.  Mary Gwendoline, who, on the 15th of November, 1887,  married Duncan Davidson of Tulloch, eldest son of the late Duncan  Caithness Reay Davidson, by his wife Georgina Elizabeth, daughter of the  late Dr John Mackenzie of Eileanach, fourth son of Sir Hector Mackenzie, fourth Baronet and XI. of Gairloch.

4.  Isla Jessie, who on the 23rd of February, 1892, married Harry Officer Blackwood, Captain 4th Battalion Lincolnshire Regiment, and son  of the late Richard Blackwood of Hartwood, New South Wales, by a  daughter of Sir Robert Officer, K.C.M.G.

5.  Aimee Dorothea.

6.  Kathleen Helen.







End  