                   PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC FORMATIONS 
 
                                 1857-58 
 
                           
 
 
          As these were not intended for publication, but rather  
          Marx's self-clarification, no care was given to the 
          construction of paragraphs.  Rather than leave such 
          interminable paragraphs intact -- and which are even  
          harder to read on a computer screen -- they have been 
          broken up.  They can be reassembled as follows --  
          consider a one-space indent a Marx paragraph, all  
          others soft paragraphs.  
 
 
                                    I 
 
 
 One of the prerequisites of wage labor, and one of the historic  conditions for capital, is free labor and the exchange of free labor  against money, in order to reproduce money and to convert it into  values, in order to be consumed by money, not as use value for  enjoyment, but as use value for money.  Another prerequisite is the  separation of free labor from the objective conditions of its  realization -- from the means and material of labor.  This means above  all that the workers must be separated from the land, which functions as  his natural laboratory.  This means the dissolution both of free petty  landownership and of communal landed property, based on the oriental  commune.     In both these forms, the relationship of the worker to the objective  conditions of his labor is one of ownership: this is the natural unity  of labor with its material prerequisites.  Hence, the worker has an  objective existence independent of his labor.  The individual is related  to himself as a proprietor, as master of the conditions of his reality.   The same relation holds between one individual and the rest.  Where this  _prerequisite_ derives from the community, the others are his co-owners,  who are so many incarnations of the common property.  Where it derives  from the individual families which jointly constitute the community,  they are independent owners co-existing with him, independent private  proprietors.  The common property which formerly absorbed everything and  embraced them all, then subsists as a special _ager publicus_ [common  land] separate from the numerous private owners.      In both cases, individuals behave not as laborers but as owners -- and  as members of a community who also labor.  The purpose of this labor is  not the _creation of value_, although they may perform surplus labor in  order to exchange it for foreign labor -- i.e., for surplus products.   Its purpose is the maintenance of the owner and his family as well as of  the communal body as a whole.  The establishment of the individual as a  _worker_, stripped of all qualities except this one, is itself a product  of _history_.      The first prerequisite of this earliest form of landed property appears  as a human community, such as emerges from spontaneous evolution  [naturwuchsig]: the family, the family expanded into a tribe, or the  tribe created by the inter-marriage of families or combination of  tribes.  We may take it for granted that pastoralism, or more generally  a migratory life, is the first form of maintaining existence, the tribe  not settling in a fixed place but using up what it finds locally and  then passing on.  Men are not settled by nature (unless perhaps in such  fertile environments that they could subsist on a single tree like the  monkeys; otherwise they would roam, like the wild animals).  Hence the  tribal community, the natural common body, appears not as the  consequence, but as the precondition of the joint (temporary)  appropriation and use of the soil.     Once men finally settle down, the way in which to a smaller degree this  original community is modified, will depend on various external,  climatic, geographical, physical, etc., conditions as well as on their  special natural make-up -- their tribal character.  The spontaneously  evolved tribal community, or, if you will, the herd -- the common ties  of blood, language, custom, etc.  -- is the first precondition of the  appropriation of the objective of life, and of the activity which  reproduces and gives material expression to, or objectifies  [vergegenstandlichenden] it (activity as herdsmen, hunters,  agriculturalists, etc.).  The earth is the great laboratory, the arsenal  which provides both the means and the materials of labor, and also the  location, the _basis_ of the community.  Men's relations to it is naive;  they regard themselves as its _communal proprietors_, and as those of  the community which produces and reproduces itself by living labor.   Only in so far as the individual is a member -- in the literal and  figurative sense -- of such a community, does he regard himself as an  owner or possessor.  In reality, appropriation by means of the process  of labor takes place under these preconditions, which are not the  _product_ of labor but appears as its natural or _divine_ preconditions.     Where the fundamental relationship is the same, this form can realize  itself in a variety of ways.  For instance, as is the case in most  Asiatic fundamental forms, it is quite compatible with the fact that the  _all-embracing unity_ which stands above all these small common bodies  may appear as the higher or _sole proprietor_, the real communities only  as _hereditary_ possessors.  Since the _unity_ is the real owner, and  the real precondition of common ownership, it is perfectly possible for  it to appear as something separate and superior to the numerous real,  particular communities.  The individual is then in fact propertyless, or  property -- i.e., the relationship of the individual to the natural  conditions of labor and reproduction, the inorganic nature which he  finds and makes his own, the objective body of his subjectivity --  appears to be mediated by means of a grant [Ablassen] from the total  unity to the individual through the intermediary of the particular  community.  The despot here appears as the father of all the numerous  lesser communities, thus realizing the common unity of all.  It  therefore follows that the surplus product (which, incidentally, is  legally determined in terms of [infolge] the real appropriation through  labor) belongs to this highest unity.  Oriental despotism therefore  appears to lead to a legal absence of property, in most cases created  through a combination of manufacture and agriculture within the small  community which thus becomes entirely self-sustaining and contains  within itself all conditions of production and surplus production.     Part of its surplus labor belongs to the higher community, which  ultimately appears as a _person_.  This surplus labor is rendered both  as tribute and as common labor for the glory of the unity, in part that  of the despot, in part that of the imagined tribal entity of the god.   In so far as this type of common property is actually realized in labor,  it can appear in two ways.  The small communities may vegetate  independently side by side, and within each the individual labors  independently with his family on the land allotted to him.     (There will also be a certain amount of labor for the common store --  for insurance as it were -- on the one hand; and on the other for  defraying the costs of the community as such, i.e., for war, religious  worship, etc.  The dominion of lords, in its most primitive sense,  arises only at this point, e.g., in the Slavonic and Rumanian  communities.  Here lies the transition to serfdom, etc.)    Secondly, the unity can involve a common organization of labor itself,  which in turn can constitute a veritable system, as in Mexico, and  especially Peru, among the ancient Celts, and some tribes of India.   Furthermore, the communality within the tribal body may tend to appear  either as a representation of its unity through the head of the tribal  kinship group, or as a relationship between the heads of families.   Hence, either a more despotic or a more democratic form of the  community.  The communal conditions for real appropriation through  labor, such as irrigation systems (very important among the Asian  peoples), means of communication, etc., will then appear as the work of  the higher unity -- the despotic government which is poised above the  lesser communities.  Cities in the proper sense arise by the side of  these villages only where the location is particularly favorable to  external trade, or where the head of the state and his satraps exchange  their revenue (the surplus product) against labor, which they expend as  labor-funds.      The second form (of property) has, like the first, given rise to  substantial variations, local, historical, etc.  It is the product of a  more dynamic [bewegten] historical life, of the fate and modification of  the original tribes.  The _community_ is here also the first  precondition, but unlike our first case, it is not here the substance of  which the individuals are mere accidents [Akzidenzen] or of which they  form mere spontaneously natural parts.  The basis here is not the land,  but the city as already created seat (centre) of the rural population  (landowners).  The cultivated area appears as the territory of the city;  not, as in the other case, the village as a mere appendage to the land.   However great the obstacles the land may put in the way of those who  till it and really appropriate it, it is not difficult to establish a  relationship with it as the inorganic nature of the living individual,  as his workshop, his means of labor, the object of his labor and the  means of subsistence of the subject.  The difficulties encountered by  the organized community can arise only from other communities which have  either already occupied the land or disturb the community in its  occupation of it.  War is therefore the great all-embracing task, the  great communal labor, and it is required either for the occupation of  the objective conditions for living existence or for the protection and  perpetuation of such occupation.  The community, consisting of kinship  groups, is therefore in the first instance organized on military lines,  as a warlike, military force, and this is one of the conditions of its  existence as a proprietor.  Concentration of settlement in the city is  the foundation of this warlike organization.  The nature of tribal  structure leads to the differentiation of kinship groups into higher and  lower, and this social differentiation is developed further by the  mixing of conquering and conquered tribes, etc.  Common land -- as state  property, ager publicus -- is here separate from private property.  The  property of the individual, unlike our first case, is here not direct  communal property, where the individual is not an owner in separation  from the community, but rather its occupier.  Circumstances arise in  which individual property does not require communal labor for its  valorization (e.g., as it does in the irrigation systems of the Orient);  the purely primitive character of the tribe may be broken by the  movement of history or migration; the tribe may remove from its original  place of settlement and occupy _foreign_ soil, thus entering  substantially new conditions of labor and developing the energies of the  individual further.  The more such factors operate -- and the more the  communal character of the tribe therefore appears, and must appear,  rather as a negative unity as against the outside world -- the more do  conditions arise which allow the individual to become a _private  proprietor_ of land -- of a particular plot -- whose special cultivation  belongs to him and his family.     The community -- as a state -- is, on the one hand, the relationship of  these free and equal private proprietors to each other, their  combination against the outside world -- and at the same time their  safeguard.  The community is based on the fact that its members consists  of working owners of land, small peasant cultivators; but in the same  measure the independence of the latter consists in their mutual relation  as members of the community, in the safeguarding of the ager publicus  for common needs and common glory, etc.  To be a member of the community  remains the precondition for the appropriation of land, but in his  capacity as member of the community the individual is a private  proprietor.  His relation to his private property is both a relation to  the land and to his existence as a member of the community, and his  maintenance as a member of the community, and his maintenance of the  community, and vice versa, etc.     Since the community, though it is here not merely a de facto _product of  history_, but one of which men are conscious as such, has therefore _had  an origin_, we have here the precondition for _property_ in land --  i.e., for the relation of the working subject to the natural conditions  of his labor as belonging to him.  But this "belonging" is mediated  through his existence as a member of the state, through the existence of  the state -- hence through a _pre-condition_ which is regarded as  divine, etc.     [Translator's Note: Marx's habit of occassionally omitting auxiliary  verbs makes it impossible always to interpret his meaning unambiguously.   An alternative meaning would be:    Since the community, though it is here not merely a de facto _product of  history_, but one of which men are conscious as such, has therefore _had  an origin_ (and is thus) here the precondition for _property_ in land --  i.e., for the relation of the working subject to the natural conditions  of his labor as belonging to him.  But this "belonging" is, however,  mediated by his existence as a member of the state, through the  existence of the state -- hence through a _pre-condition_ which is  regarded as divine, etc. ]    There is concentration in the city, with the land as its territory;  small-scale agriculture producing for immediate consumption; manufacture  as the domestic subsidiary, labor of wives and daughters (spinning and  weaving) or achieving independent existence in a few craft occupations  (fabric, etc.).  The precondition for the continued existence of the  community is the maintenance of equality among its free self-sustaining  peasants, and their individual labor as the condition of the continued  existence of their property.  Their relation to the natural conditions  of labor are those of proprietors; but personal labor must continuously  establish these conditions as real conditions and objective elements of  the personality of the individual, of his personal labor.     On the other hand, the tendency of this small warlike community drives  it beyond these limits, etc.  (Rome, Greece, Jews, etc.) As Niebuhr  says:         "When the auguries had assured Numa of the divine approval for his       election, the first preoccupation of the pious monarch was not the       worship of the gods, but a human one.  He distributed the land       conquered in war by Romulus and left to be occupied: he founded the       worship of Terminnus (the god of boundary-stones).  All the ancient       law-givers, and above all Moses, founded the success of their       arrangements for virtue, justice, and good morals [Sitte] upon       landed property, or at least on secure hereditary possession of       land, for the greatest possible number of citizens."                                       (Vol.I, 245, 2nd ed. _Roman History_)    The individual is placed in such condition of gaining his life as to  make not the acquiring of wealth his object, but self-sustenance, its  own reproduction as a member of the community; the reproduction of  himself as a proprietor of the parcel of ground and, in that quality, as  a member of the commune.  [Translator Note: This sentence in English in  original.]    The continuation of the commune is the reproduction of all its members  as self-sustaining peasants, whose surplus time belongs precisely to the  commune, the labor of war, etc.  Ownership of one's labor is mediated  through the ownership of the conditions of labor -- the plot of land,  which is itself guaranteed by the existence of the community, which in  turn is safeguarded by the surplus labor of its members in the form of  military service, etc.  The member of the community reproduces himself  not through co-operation in wealth-producing labor, but in co-operation  in labor for the (real or imaginary) communal interests aimed at  sustaining the union against external and internal stress [nach aussen  und innen].  Property formally belongs to the Roman citizen, the private  owner of land is such only by virtue of being Roman, but any Roman is  also a private landowner.     Another form of the property of working individuals, self-sustaining  members of the community, in the natural conditions of their labor, is  the _Germanic_.  Here, the member of the community as such is not, as in  the specifically oriental form, co-owner of the communal property.     (Where property exists _only_ as communal property, the individual  member as such is only the _possessor_ of a particular part of it,  hereditary or not, for any fraction of property belongs to no member for  himself, but only as the direct part of the community, consequently as  someone in direct unity with the community and not as distinct from it.   The individual is therefore only a possessor.  What exists is only  _communal_ property and _private possession_.  Historic and local, etc.,  circumstances may modify the character of this possession in its  relation to the communal property in very different ways, depending on  whether labor is performed in isolation by the private possessor or is  in turn determined by the community, or by the unity standing above the  particular community.)    Neither is the land [in the Germanic community] occupied by the  community as in the Roman, Greek (in brief, the ancient classical) form  as Roman land.  Part of it [that is, in classical antiquity] remains  with the community as such, as distinct from the members, ager publicus  in its various forms; the remainder is distributed, each plot of land  being Roman by virtue of the fact that it is the private property, the  domain, of a Roman, the share of the laboratory which is his;  conversely, he is Roman only in so far as he possesses this sovereign  right over part of the Roman soil.     [ Translator Note: The ensuing passages are noted down by Marx from  Niebuhr's _Roman History_, I, 418, 436, 614, 615, 317-19, 328-31, 333,  335. ]         In antiquity urban crafts and trade were held in low, but       agriculture in high, esteem; in the Middle Ages their status was       reversed.          The right of use of common land by possession originally belonged       to the Patricians, who later granted it to their clients; the       assignment of property out of the ager publicus belonged       exclusively to the Plebeians; all assignments in favor of Plebeians       and compensation for a share in the common land.  Landed property       in the strict sense, if we except the area surrounding the city       wall, was originally in the hands only of Plebeians (rural       communities subsequently absorbed).          Essence of the Roman Plebs as a totality of agriculturalists, as       described in their quiritarian (citizen) property.  The ancients       unanimously commended farming as the activity proper to free men,       the school for soldiers.  The ancient stock [Stamm, which also       means "tribe"] of the nation is preserved in it; it changes in the       towns, where foreign merchants and artisans settle, as the natives       migrate there, attracted by the hope of gain.  Wherever there is       slavery, the freedman seeks his subsistence in such activities,       often accumulating wealth; hence in antiquity such occupations were       generally in their hands and therefore unsuitable for citizens;       hence the view that the admission of craftsmen to full citizenship       was a hazardous procedure (the Greeks, as a rule, excluded them       from it).  "No Roman was permitted to lead the life of a petty       trader or craftsman."  The ancients had no conception of gild pride       and dignity, as in medieval urban history; and even there the       military spirit declined as the gilds vanquished the (aristocratic)       lineages, and was finally extinguished; as, consequently also the       respect in which the city was held outside and its freedom.          The tribes [Stamme] of the ancient states were constituted in one       of two ways, either by kinship or by locality.  Kinship tribes       historically precede locality tribes, and are almost everywhere       displaced by them.  Their most extreme and rigid form is the       institution of castes, separated from one another, without the       right of inter-marriage, with quite different status; each with its       exclusive, unchangeable occupation.  The locality tribes originally       corresponded to a division of the area into districts [Gaue] and       villages; so that in Attica under Kleisthenes, any man settled in a       village was registered as a Demotes [villager] of that village, and       as a member of the Phyle [tribe] of the area to which that village       belonged.  However, as a rule his descendants, regardless of place       of domicile, remained in the same Phyle and the same Deme, thereby       giving to this division an appearance of ancestral descent.  The       Roman kin-groups [gentes] did not consist of blood-relatives;       Cicero notes, when mentioning the family name, descent from free       men.  The members of the Roman gens had common shrines [sacra], but       this had already disappeared in Cicero's day.  The joint       inheritance from fellow-kinsmen who died intestate or without close       relatives, was retained longest of all.  In most ancient times,       members of the gens had the obligation to assist fellow-kinsmen in       need of assistance to bear unusual burdens.  (This occurs       universally among the Germans, and persisted longest among the       Dithmarschen.)  The gentes of a sort of gild.  A more general       organization than that of kin groups did not exist in the ancient       world.  Thus among the Gaels, the aristocratic Campbells and their       vassals constitute a clan.     Since the Patrician represents the community to a higher degree, he is  the _possessor_ of the ager publicus, and uses it through the  intermediary of his clients, etc.  (also gradually appropriates it).     The Germanic community is not concentrated in the city; a concentration  -- the city the centre of rural life, the domicile of the land workers,  as also the centre of warfare -- which gives the community as such an  external existence, distinct from that of its individual members.   Ancient classical history is the history of cities, but cities based on  landownership and agriculture; Asian history is a kind of  undifferentiated unity of town and country (the large city, properly  speaking, must be regarded merely as a princely camp, superimposed on  the real economic structure); the Middle Ages (Germanic period) starts  with the countryside as the locus of history, whose further development  then proceeds through the opposition of town and country; modern  (history) is the urbanization of the countryside, not, as among the  ancients, the ruralization of the city.       Here begins a new notebook of Marx's manuscript, entitled:  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~    Notebook V.                                             January 22, 1858  Chapter on capital. Continued.      Union in the city gives the community as such an economic existence; the  mere _presence_ of the town as such is different from a mere  multiplicity of separate houses.  Here the whole does not consist of its  separate parts.  It is a form of independent organism.  Among the  Germans, where single heads of families settle in the forests, separated  by long distances, even on an _external_ view, the community exists  merely by virtue of every act of union of its members, although their  unity _existing in itself_ is embodied [gesetzt] in descent, language,  common past and history, etc.  The _community_ therefore appears as an  _association_, not as a _union_, as an agreement [Einigung], whose  independent subjects are the landowners, and not as a unity.  In fact,  therefore, the community has no existence as a _state_, a _political  entity_ as among the ancients, because it has no existence as a _city_.   If the community is to enter upon real existence, the free landowners  must hold an _assembly_, whereas, e.g., in Rome it _exists_ apart from  such assemblies, in the presence of the _city itself_ and the officials  placed at its head, etc.     True, the ager publicus, the common land or peoples' land, occurs among  the Germans also, as distinct from the property of individuals.  It  consists of hunting grounds, common pastures or woodlands, etc., as that  part of the land which cannot be partitioned if it is to serve as a  means of production in this specific form.  However, unlike the Roman  case, the ager publicus does not appear as the particular economic being  of the state, by the side of the private owners -- who are, properly  speaking, private proprietors as such insofar as they have been  _excluded_ from or deprived of the use of the ager publicus, like the  Plebeians.  The ager publicus appears rather as a mere supplement to  individual property among the Germans, and figures as property only  insofar as it is defended against hostile tribes as the common property  of one tribe.  The property of the individual does not appear mediated  through the community, but the existence of the community and of  communal property as mediated through -- i.e., as a mutual relation of  -- the independent subjects.     At bottom, every individual household contains an entire economy,  forming as it does an independent centre of production (manufacture  merely the domestic subsidiary labor of the women, etc.).  In classical  antiquity, the city with its attached territory formed the economic  whole.  In the Germanic world, the individual home, which itself appears  merely as a point in the land belonging to it; there is no concentration  of a multiplicity of proprietors, but the family as an independent unit.   In the Asiatic form (or at least predominantly so), there is no  property, but only individual possession; the community is properly  speaking the real proprietor -- hence property only as _communal  property_ in land.  In antiquity (Romans as the classic example, the  thing in its purest and most clearly marked form), there is a  contradictory form of state landed property and private landed property,  so that the latter is mediated through the former, or the former exists  only in this double form.  The private landed proprietor is therefore  simultaneously an urban citizen.  Economically, citizenship may be  expressed more simply as a form in which the agriculturalist lives in a  city.  In the Germanic form, the agriculturalist is not a citizen --  i.e., not an inhabitant of cities -- but its foundation is the isolated,  independent family settlement, guaranteed by means of its association  with other such settlements by men of the same tribe, and their  occassional assembly for purposes of war, religion, the settlement of  legal disputes, etc., which establishes their mutual surety.  Individual  landed property does not here appear as a contradictory form of communal  landed property, nor as mediated by the community, but the other way  round.  The community exists only in the mutual relation of the  individual landowners as such.  Communal property as such appears only  as a communal accessory to the individual kin settlements and land  appropriations.  The community is neither the substance, of which the  individual appears merely as the accident, nor is it the general, which  _exists and has being_ as such in men's minds, and in the reality of the  city and its urban requirements, distinct from the separate economic  being of its members.  It is rather on the one hand, the common element  in language, blood, etc., which is the premise of the individual  proprietor; but on the other hand, it has real being only in its _actual  assembly_ for communal purposes; and, insofar as it has a separate  economic existence, in the communally-used hunting-grounds, pastures,  etc., it is used thus by every individual proprietor as such, and not in  his capacity as the representative of the state (as in Rome).  It is  genuinely the common property of the individual owners, and not of the  union of owners, possessing an existence of its own in the city,  distinct from that of the individual members.      The crucial point here is this: in all these forms, where landed  property and agriculture form the basis of the economic order, and  consequently the economic object is the production of use values --  i.e., the _reproduction of the individual_ in certain definite  relationships to his community, of which it forms the basis -- we find  the following elements:      1. Appropriation of the natural conditions of labor, of the _earth_        as the original instrument of labor, both laboratory and        repository of its raw materials; however, appropriation not by        means of labor, but as the preliminary condition of labor.  The        individual simply regards the objective conditions of labor as        his own, as the inorganic nature of this subjectivity, which        realizes itself through them.  The chief objective condition of        labor itself appears not as the _product_ of labor, but occurs        as _nature_.  On the one hand, we have the living individual, on        the other the earth, as the objective condition of his        reproduction.      2. The _attitude_ to the land, to the earth, as the property of the        working individual, means that a man appears from the start as        something more than the abstraction of the "working individual",        but has an _objective mode of existence_ in his ownership of the        earth, which is _antecedent_ to his activity and does not appear        as its mere consequence, and is as much a precondition of his        activity as his skin, his senses, for whole skin and sense        organs are also developed, reproduced, etc., in the process of        life, they are also presupposed by it.  What immediately mediates        this attitude is the more or less naturally evolved, more or        less historically evolved and modified existence of the        individual as _a member of a community_ -- his primitive        existence as part of a tribe, etc.    An isolated individual could no more possess property in land than he  could speak.  At most, he could live off it as a source of supply, like  the animals.  The relation to the soil as property always arises through  the peaceful or violent occupation of the land by the tribe of the  community in some more or less primitive or already historically  developed form.  The individual here can never appear in the total  isolation of the mere free laborer.  If the objective conditions of his  labor are presumed to belong to him, he himself is subjectively presumed  to belong to a community which mediates his relationship to the  objective conditions of labor.  Conversely, the real existence of the  community is determined by the specific form of its ownership of the  objective conditions of labor.  The property mediated by its existence  in a community may appear as _communal property_, which gives the  individual only possession and no private property in the soil; or else  it may appear in the dual form of state and private property, which  co-exist side by side, but in such a way as to make the former the  precondition of the latter, so that only the citizen is and must be a  private proprietor, while on the other hand his property qua citizen  also has a separate existence.  Lastly, communal property may appear as  a supplement to private property, which in this case forms the basis; in  this case, the community has no existence except in the _assembly_ of  its members and in their association for common purposes.     These different forms of relationship of communal tribal members to the  tribal land -- to the earth upon which it has settled -- depend partly  on the natural character [Naturanlagen] of the tribe, partly on the  economic conditions in which the tribe really exercises its ownership of  the land -- i.e., appropriates its fruits by means of labor.  And this  in turn will depend on the climate, the physical properties of the soil,  the physically conditioned mode of its utilization, the relationships to  hostile or neighboring tribes, and such modification as are introduced  by migrations, historical events, etc.  If the community as such is to  continue in the old way, the reproduction of its members under the  objective conditions already assumed as given, is necessary.  Production  itself, the advance of population (which also falls under the head of  production), in time necessarily eliminates these conditions, destroying  instead of reproducing them, etc., and as this occurs the community  decays and dies, together with the property relations on which it was  based.     The Asiatic form necessarily survives the longest and most stubbornly.   This is due to the fundamental principle on which it is based -- that  is, that the individual does not become independent of the community;  that the circle of production is self-sustaining, unity of agriculture  and craft manufacture, etc.  If the individual changes his relation to  the community, he modifies and undermines both the community and its  economic premise; conversely, the modification of this economic premise  -- produced by its own dialectic, pauperization, etc.  Note especially  the influence of warfare and conquest.  While, e.g., in Rome this is an  essential part of the economic condition of the community itself, it  breaks the real bond on which the community rests.     In all these forms, the basis of evolution is the _reproduction_ of  relations between individuals and community _assumed as given_ -- they  may be more or less primitive, more or less the result of history, but  fixed into tradition -- and a _definite, predetermined objective_  existence, both as regards the relation to the conditions of labor and  the relation between one man and his co-workers, fellow-tribesmen, etc.   Such evolution is therefore from the outset _limited_, but once the  limits are transcended, decay and disintegration ensue.  Evolution of  slavery, concentration of landed property, exchange, a monetary economy,  conquest, etc., as among the Romans.  All these appeared nevertheless up  to a point to be compatible with the base, and merely innocent  extensions of it, or else mere abuses arising from it.  Considerable  developments are thus possible within a given sphere.  Individuals may  appear to be great.  But free and full development of individual or  society is inconceivable here, for such evolution stands in  contradiction to the original relationship.      Among the ancients, we discover no single enquiry as to which form of  landed property, etc., is the most productive, which creates maximum  wealth.  Wealth does not appear as the aim of production, although Cato  may well investigate the most profitable cultivation of fields, or  Brutus may even lend money at the most favorable rate of interest.  The  enquiry is always about what kind of property creates the best citizens.   Wealth as an end in itself appears only among a few trading peoples --  monopolists of the carrying trade -- who live in the pores of the  ancient world like the Jews in medieval society.  Wealth is, on the one  hand, a thing, realized in things, in material products as against man  as a subject.  On the other hand, in its capacity as value, it is the  mere right to command other people's labor, not for the purpose of  dominion, but of private enjoyment, etc.  In all its forms, it appears  in the form of objects, whether of things or of relationships by means  of things, which lie outside of, and as it were accidentally beside, the  individual.     Thus the ancient conception, in which man always appears (in however  narrowly national, religious, or political a definition) as the aim of  production, seems very much more exalted than the modern world, in which  production is the aim of man and wealth the aim of production.  In fact,  however, when the narrow bourgeois form has been peeled away, what is  wealth, if not the universality of needs, capacities, enjoyments,  productive powers etc., of individuals, produced in universal exchange?  What, if not the full development of human control over the forces of  nature -- those of his own nature as well as those of so-called  "nature"? What, if not the absolute elaboration of his creative  dispositions, without any preconditions other than antecedent historical  evolution which make the totality of this evolution -- i.e., the  evolution of all human powers as such, unmeasured by any _previously  established_ yardstick -- an end in itself? What is this, if not a  situation where man does not reproduce in any determined form, but  produces his totality? Where he does not seek to remain something formed  by the past, but is in the absolute movement of becoming? In bourgeois  political economy -- and in the epoch of production to which it  corresponds -- this complete elaboration of what lies within man,  appears as the total alienation, and the destruction of all fixed,  one-sided purposes as the sacrifice of the end in itself to a wholly  external compulsion.  Hence in one way the childlike world of the  ancients appears to be superior; and this is so, insofar as we seek for  closed shape, form and established limitation.  The ancients provide a  narrow satisfaction, whereas the modern world leaves us unsatisfied, or,  where it appears to be satisfied, with itself, is _vulgar_ and _mean_  [gemein].      What Mr.  Proudhon calls the _extra-economic_ origin of property -- by  which he means landed property -- is the pre-bourgeois relationship of  the individual to the objective conditions of labor, and in the first  instance to the _natural_ objective conditions of labor.  For, just as  the working subject is a natural individual, a natural being, so the  first objective condition of his labor appears as nature, earth, as an  inorganic body.  He himself is not only the organic body, but also  inorganic nature as a subject.  This condition is not something he has  produced, but something he finds to hand; something existing in nature  and which he presupposed.  Before proceeding in our analysis, a further  point: poor Proudhon not only could, but ought equally to be obliged, to  accuse _capital_ and _wage-labor_ -- as forms of property -- of  _extra-economic_ origin.  For the fact that the worker finds the  objective condition of his labor as something separate from him, as  _capital_, and the fact that the capitalist finds the _worker_  propertyless, as abstract laborers -- the exchange as it takes place  between value and living labor -- assumes a _historic process_, however  much capital and wage-labor themselves reproduce this relationship and  elaborate it in objective scope, as well as in depth.  And this historic  process, as we have seen, is the evolutionary history of both capital  and wage-labor.  In other words, the _extra-economic origin_ of property  merely means the historic origin of the bourgeois economy, of the forms  of production to which the categories of political economy give  theoretical or ideal expression.  But to claim that pre-bourgeois  history and each phase of it, has its own _economy_ [Okonomie -- not  clear if Marx means "economies" or "economy"] and an _economic base_ of  its movement, is at bottom merely to state the tautology that human life  has always rested on some kind of production -- _social_ production --  whose relations are precisely what we call economic relations.      The original conditions of production cannot initially be themselves  produced -- they are not the results are not the results of production.   (Instead of original conditions of production we might also say: for if  this reproduction appears on one hand as the appropriation of the  objects by the subjects, it equally appears on the other as the  moulding, the subjection, of the objects by and to a subjective purpose;  the transformation of the objects into results and repositories of  subjective activity.) What requires explanation is not the _unity_ of  living and active human beings with the natural, in organic conditions  of their metabolism with nature, and therefore their appropriation of  nature; nor is this the result of a historic process.  What we must  explain is the _separation_ of these inorganic conditions of human  existence from this active existence, a separation which is only fully  completed in the relationship between wage-labor and capital.     In the relationship of slavery and serfdom there is no such separation;  what happens is that one part of society is treated by another as the  mere _inorganic and natural_ condition of its own reproduction.  The  slave stands in no sort of relation to the objective conditions of his  labor.  It is rather _labor_ itself, both in the form of the slave as of  the serf, which is placed among the other living things [Naturwesen] _as  inorganic condition_ of production, alongside the cattle or as an  appendage of the soil.  In other words: the original conditions of  production appear as natural prerequisites, _natural conditions of  existence of the producer_, just as his living body, however reproduced  and developed by him, is not originally established by himself, but  appears as his _prerequisite_; his own (physical) being is a natural  prerequisite, not established by himself.  These _natural conditions of  existence_, to which he is related as to an inorganic body, have a dual  character: they are (1) subjective and (2) objective.  The producer  occurs as part of a family, tribe, a grouping of his people, etc.  --  which acquires historically differing shapes as the result of mixture  and conflict with others.  It is as such a communal part that he has his  relation to a determined (piece of) nature (let us still call it earth,  land, soil), as his own inorganic being, the conditions of his  production and reproduction.  As the natural part of the community he  participates in the communal property and takes a separate share in his  own possession; just so, as a Roman citizen by birth, he has (at least)  ideally a claim to the ager publicus and a real claim to so and so many  juggera [units] of land, etc.  His _property_ -- i.e., his relation to  the natural prerequisites of his own production as _his own_ -- is  mediated by his natural membership of a community.  (The abstraction of  a community whose members have nothing in common but language, etc., and  barely even that, is plainly the product of much later historical  circumstances.) It is, for instance, evident that the individual is  related to his language as _his own_ only as the natural member of a  human community.  Language as the product of an individual is an  absurdity.  But so also is property.      Language itself is just as much the product of a community, as in  another respect it is the existence of the community: it is, as it were,  the communal being speaking for itself.  Communal production and  communal ownership, as found, e.g., in Peru, is evidently a _secondary_  form introduced and transmitted by conquering tribes, who amongst  themselves [bei sich selbst] had been familiar with common ownership and  communal production in the older and simpler forms, such as occurs in  India and among the Slavs.  Similarly, the form found, e.g., among the  Celts in Wales appears to have been introduced there by more advanced  conquerors, and thus to be _secondary_.  The completeness and systematic  elaboration of these systems under [the direction of] a supreme  authority demonstrate their later origins.  Just so the feudalism  introduced into England was formally more complete than the feudalism  which had naturally grown up on France.     Among nomadic pastoral tribes -- and all pastoral people are originally  migratory -- the earth, like all other conditions of nature, appears in  its elementary boundlessness, e.g., in the Asian steppes and the Asian  high plateaux.  It is grazed, etc., consumed by the herds, which provide  the nomadic peoples with their subsistence.  They regard it as their  property, though never fixing that property.  This is the case with the  hunting grounds of the wild Indian tribes of America: the tribe  considers a certain region as its hunting territory and maintains it by  force against other tribes, or seeks to expel other tribes from the  territory they claim.  Among the nomadic pastoral tribes the community  is in fact always united, a travelling party, caravan, horde, and the  forms of higher and lower rank develop out of the conditions of this  mode of life.  What is _appropriated_ and _reproduced_ is here only the  herd and not the soil, which is always used in temporary commonality  wherever the tribe breaks its wanderings.     Let us pass on to the consideration of settled peoples.  The only  barrier which the community can encounter in its relation to the natural  conditions of production _as its own_ -- to the land -- is some _other  community_, which has already laid claim to them as its inorganic body.   Was is, therefore, one of the earliest tasks of every primitive  community of this kind, both for the defence of property and for its  acquisition.  (It will be sufficient to speak of original property in  land, for among pastoral peoples property in such natural products of  the earth as, e.g., sheep, is at the same time property in the pastures  they pass through.  In general, property in land includes property in  its organic products.) Where man himself is captured as an organic  accessory of the land and together with it, he is captured as one of the  conditions of production, and this is the origin of slavery and serfdom,  which soon debase and modify the original forms of all communities, and  themselves become their foundation.  As a result, the simple structure  is determined negatively.      Thus originally _property_ means no more than man's attitude to his  natural conditions of production as belonging to him, as the  _prerequisites of his own existence_; his attitude to them as _natural  prerequisites_ of himself, which constitutes, as it were, a prolongation  of his body.  In fact, he stands in no relation to his conditions of  production, but has a double existence, subjectively as himself and  objectively in these natural inorganic conditions of his being.  The  forms of these natural conditions of production have a double character:  (1) his existence as part of a community, which in its original form is  a tribal community, more or less modified; (2) his relation to the  _land_ as _his own_ [als dem seinigen], in virtue of the community,  communal landed property, at the same time _individual possession_ for  the individual, or in such a manner that the soil and its cultivation  remain in common and only its products are divided.  (However,  _dwellings_ etc., even if no more than the waggons of the Scythians,  nevertheless appear to be always in the possession of individuals.)  Membership of a _naturally evolved society_, a tribe, etc., is a natural  condition of production for the living individual.  Such membership is,  e.g., already a condition of his language, etc.  His own productive  existence is only possible under this condition.  His subjective  existence as such is conditioned by it as much as it is conditioned by  the relationship to the earth as to his laboratory.  (True, property is  originally _mobile_, for in the first instance man takes possession of  the ready-made fruits of the earth, including animals and especially  those capable of domestication.  However, even this situation --  hunting, fishing, pastoralism, subsistence by collecting the fruit of  the trees, etc.  -- always assumes the appropriation of the earth,  whether as a place of fixed settlement or a territory for roaming, a  pasture for his animals, etc.)     _Property_ therefore means _belonging to a tribe_ (community) (to have  one's subjective/objective existence within it), and by means of the  relationship of this community to the land, to the external primary  condition of production -- for the earth is at the same time raw  material, tool, and fruit -- as the preconditions belonging to his  individuality, as its mode of existence.  We reduce this _property to  the relationship to the conditions of production_.  Why not to those of  consumption, since originally the act of producing by the individual is  confined to the reproduction of his own body through the appropriation  of ready-made objects prepared by nature for consumption? But even where  these have merely to be _found_ and _discovered_, effort, labor -- as in  hunting, fishing, the care of flocks -- and the production (i.e., the  development) of certain capacities by the subject, are soon required.   Moreover, conditions in which man need merely reach for what is already  available, without any tools (i.e., without products of labor already  designed for production), et., are very transitory, and can nowhere be  regarded as normal; not even as normal in the most primitive state.  In  addition, the original conditions of production automatically include  matter directly consumable without labor, such as fruit, animals, etc.;  consequently, the fund of consumption itself appears as a part of the  _original fund of production_.      The fundamental condition of property based on tribalism (which is  originally formed out of the community) is to be a member of the tribe.   Consequently, a tribe conquered and subjugated by another becomes  _propertyless_ and part of the _inorganic conditions_ of the conquering  tribe's reproduction, which that community regards as its own.  Slavery  and serfdom are therefore simply further developments of property based  on tribalism.  They necessarily modify all its forms.  This they are  least able to do in the Asiatic form.  In the self-sustaining unity of  and agriculture on which this form is based, conquest is not so  essential a condition as where _landed property_, _agriculture_,  predominate exclusively.  On the other hand, since the individual in  this form never becomes an owner but only a possessor, he is at bottom  himself the property, the slave of that which embodies the unity of the  community.  Here slavery neither puts an end to the conditions of labor,  nor does it modify the essential relationship.      It is, therefore, now evident that:     Insofar as property is merely a conscious attitude to the conditions of  production as to _one's own_ -- an attitude established by the community  for the individual, proclaimed and guaranteed as law; insofar as the  existence of the producer therefore appears as an existence within the  objective conditions _belonging to him_, it is realized only through  production.  Actual appropriation takes place not through the  relationship to these conditions as expressed in thought, but through  the active, real relationship to them; in the process of positing them  as the conditions of man's subjective activity.      But this also clearly means that _these conditions change_.  What makes  a region of the earth into a hunting ground, is being hunted over by  tribes; what turns the soil into a prolongation of the body of the  individual is agriculture.  Once the _city of Rome_ had been built and  its surrounding land cultivated by its citizens, the conditions of the  community were different from what they had been before.  The object of  all these communities is preservation -- i.e., the production of the  individuals which constitute them as proprietors, i.e., in the same  objective mode of existence, which also forms the relationship of the  members to each other, and therefore forms the community itself.  But  this reproduction is at the same time necessarily new production and the  destruction of the old form.     For instance, where each individual is supposed to possess so many acres  of land, the mere increase in population constitutes an obstacle.  If  this is to be overcome, colonization will develop and this necessitates  wars of conquest.  This leads to slavery, etc., also, e.g., the  enlargement of the ager publicus, and hence to the rise of the  Patricians, who represent the community, etc.  Thus the reservation of  the ancient community implies the destruction of the conditions upon  which it rests, and turns into its opposite.  Suppose, for instance,  that productivity could be increased without increase in territory, by  means of a development of the forces of production (which in  agriculture, a most traditional occupation, are the slowest of all).   This would imply new methods and combinations of labor, the high  proportion of the day which would then have to be devoted to  agriculture, etc., and once again the old economic conditions of the  community would cease to operate.  The act of reproduction itself  changes not only the objective conditions -- e.g., transforming village  into town, the wilderness into agricultural clearings, etc.  -- but the  producers change with it, by the emergence of new qualities, by  transforming and developing themselves in production, forming new powers  and new conceptions, new modes of intercourse, new needs, and new  speech.     The more traditional the mode of production itself, i.e., the more the  _real process_ of appropriation remains the same, the more unchanging  will the ancient forms of property be and therefore also the community  as a whole.  (Note that the traditional mode persists for a long time in  agriculture and even longer in the oriental combination of agriculture  and manufacture.) Where the members of the community have already  acquired separate existence as private proprietors from their collective  existence as an urban community and owners of the urban territory,  conditions already arise which allow the individual to _lose_ his  property -- i.e., the double relationship which makes him both a citizen  with equal status, a member of the community, and a _proprietor_.  In  the central form this _loss_ is hardly possible, except as a result of  entirely external influences, for the individual member of the community  never establishes so independent a relation to it as to enable him to  lose his (objective, economic) tie with it.  He is firmly rooted.  This  is also an aspect of the union of manufacture and agriculture, of town  (in this instance the village) and country.  Among the ancients,  manufacture already appears as corruption (fit business for freedmen,  clients, and foreigners), etc.  Productive labor is freed from its pure  subordination to agriculture, where it is the domestic labor of free  persons, destined only for the purpose of farming, and war or religious  observance and communal tasks such as the construction of houses, roads,  or temples.  This development, which necessarily arises from intercourse  with foreigners, from slaves, the desire to exchange the surplus  product, etc., dissolves the mode of production upon which the community  rests, and with it the _objectively individual man_ -- i.e., the  individual determined as a Greek, a Roman, etc.  Exchange has the same  effect, and so has indebtedness, etc.      We have an original unity between a specific form of community or  tribal unit and the property in nature connected with it, or the  relation to the objective conditions of production as naturally  existing, as the objective being of the individual by means of the  community.  Now this unity, which in one sense appears as the particular  form of property, has its living reality in a specific _mode of  production_ itself, and this mode appears equally as the relationship of  the individuals to one another and as their specific daily behavior  towards inorganic nature, their specific mode of labor (which is always  family labor and often communal labor).  The community itself appears as  the first great force of production; special kinds of conditions of  production (e.g., animal husbandry, agriculture) lead to the evolution  of a special mode of production and special forces of production, both  objective and subjective, the latter appearing as qualities of the  individuals.      In the last instance, the community and the property resting upon it  can be reduced to a specific stage in the development of the forces of  production of the laboring subjects -- to which correspond specific  relations of these subjects with each other and with nature.  Up to a  certain point, reproduction.  Thereafter, it turns into dissolution.      _Property_ -- and this applies to its Asiatic, Slavonic ancient  classical and Germanic forms -- therefore originally signifies a  relation of the working (producing) subject (or a subject reproducing  himself) to the conditions of his production or reproduction as his own.   Hence, according to the conditions of production, property will take  different forms.  The object of production itself is to reproduce the  producer in and together with these objective conditions of his  existence.  This behavior as a proprietor -- which is not the result but  the precondition of labor, i.e., of production -- assumes a specific  existence of the individual as part of a tribal or communal entity  (whose property he is himself up to a certain point).  Slavery, serfdom,  etc., where the laborer himself appears among the natural conditions of  production for a third individual or community -- and where property  therefore is no longer the relationship of the independently laboring  individual to the objective conditions of labor -- is always secondary,  never primary, although it is the necessary and logical result of  property founded upon the community and upon labor in the community.   (This character of slavery does _not_ apply to the general slavery of  the orient, which is so considered _only_ from the European point of  view.)    It is of course easy to imagine a powerful, physically superior person,  who first captures animals and them captures men in order to make them  catch animals for him; in brief, one who uses man as a naturally  occurring condition for his reproduction like any other living natural  thing; his own labor being exhausted in the act of domination.  But such  a view is stupid, though it may be correct from the point of view of a  given tribal or communal entity; for it takes the _isolated_ man as its  starting-point.  But man is only individualized through the process of  history.  He originally appears as a _generic being, a tribal being, a  herd animal_ -- though by no means as a "political animal" in the  political sense.  Exchange itself is a major agent of this  individualization.  It makes the herd animal superfluous and dissolves  it.  Once the situation is such, that man as an isolated person has  relation only to himself, the means of establishing himself as an  isolated individual have become what gives him his general communal  character [sein Sich-Allgemein-und-Gemeinmachen].  In such a community,  the objective existence of the individual as a proprietor -- say a  landed proprietor -- is presupposed, though he is a proprietor under  certain conditions which chain him to the community, or rather  constitute a link in his chain.  In bourgeois society, e.g., the worker  exists purely subjectively, without object; but the thing which  _confronts_ him has now become the _true common entity_ which he seeks  to devour and which devours him.      All the forms in which the community imputes to the subjects a specific  objective unity with the conditions of their production, or in which a  specific subjective existence imputes the community itself as condition  of production, necessarily correspond only to a development of the  forces of production which is limited both in fact and in principle.   (These forms are of course more or less naturally evolved, but at the  same time also the results of a historic process.) The evolution of the  forces of production dissolves them, and their dissolution is itself an  evolution of the human forces of production.  Labor is initially  undertaken on a certain basis -- first primitive -- then historical.   [Es wird erst gearbeitet von gewisser Grundlage aus -- erst naturwuchsig  -- dann historische Voraussetzung_.  The sentence is elliptic and open  to various possible interpretations.] Later, however, this basis or  presupposition is itself cancelled, or tends to disappear, having become  too narrow for the development of the progressive human horde.      Insofar as the landed property of classical antiquity reappears in  modern allotment property, it belongs to political economy and we shall  deal with it in the section on landed property.      (All this is to be analyzed again more deeply and in greater detail  later.)      What we are concerned with here is this: the relationship of labor to  capital or to the objective conditions of labor as capital, presupposes  a historical process which dissolves the different forms, in which the  laborer is an owner and the owner labors.  This means first and  foremost:    (1) a _dissolution_ of the relation to the earth -- to land or soil --      as a natural condition of production which man treats as his own      inorganic being, the laboratory of his forces and the domain of his      will.  All forms in which this property is found, assume a _communal      entity_ whose members, whatever the formal distinctions between      them, are _proprietors_ by virtue of being its members.  Hence, the      original form of this property is _direct communal property_ (the      _oriental form_, modified among the Slavs; developed to the point of      contradictions in classical antiquity and Germanic property, though      still the hidden, if antagonistic, foundation).     (2) _Dissolution of the relations_ in which man appears as the      _proprietor of the instrument_.  As the above form of landed      property assumes a _real community_, so this ownership of the tool      by the laborer assumes a particular form of development of      manufacture -- namely, in the form of _handicraft labor_.  Gild and      corporative institutions are bound up with this.  (The manufacturing      activities of the ancient orient may be included under our heading      (1) above.) here, labor itself is still half the expression of      artistic creation, half its own reward, etc.  [Hier die Arbeit      selbst noch halb kunstlerisch, halb Selbstzweck.] The institution of      the "master craftsman".  The capitalist himself still a master      craftsman.  Special craft skill itself ensures the ownership of the      instrument, etc., etc.  In a sense, the mode of labor becomes      hereditary together with the organization of labor and its      instrument.  Medieval town life.  Labor still belongs to a man; a      certain self-sufficient development of specialized [einseitige]      capacities, etc.     (3) Included in both is the fact that man possesses means of consumption      prior to production, necessary in order to enable him to keep alive      as producer -- i.e., in the course of production, _before_ its      completion.  As a landowner, he appears to be directly provided with      the necessary fund for consumption.  As a master artisan, he had      inherited, earned or saved this fund, and as a youngster, he is      still an _apprentice_, he does not yet appear as an independent      worker in the strict sense, but shared the master's food in the      patriarchal manner.  As a (genuine) journeyman, there is a certain      common utilization of the fund of consumption which is in the      master's possession.  Though this is not the journeyman's      _property_, the laws and customs, etc., of the gild at least make      him into a co-possessor.  (This point to be elaborated.)    (4) On the other hand, _dissolution_ both of the relations under which      the _laborers themselves_, the _living units of labor power_ are      still a _direct part of the objective conditions of production_ and      are appropriated as such -- and are therefore slaves or serfs.  For      capital, the worker does not constitute a condition of production,      but only labor.  If this can be performed by machinery, or even by      water or air, so much the better.  And what capital appropriates is      not the laborer, but his labor -- and not directly, but by means of      exchange.      These, then, on the one hand, are historic prerequisites without which  the laborer cannot occur as free laborer, as objectiveless, purely  subjective capacity for laboring, confronting the objective conditions  of production as his _non-property_, as _someone else's property_, as  _value_ existing for itself, as capital.  On the other hand, we must now  ask what conditions are necessary if he is to confront _capital_.       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                                             