                                Karl Marx 
                   PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC FORMATIONS 
 
                                 1857-58 
 
                          
 
 
          As these note were not intended for publication, rather  
          Marx's self-clarification, no care was given to the 
          construction of paragraphs.  Rather than leave such 
          interminable paragraphs intact -- and which are even  
          harder to read on a computer screen -- they have been 
          broken up.  They can be reassembled as follows --  
          consider a one-space indent a Marx paragraph, all  
          others soft paragraphs.  
 
 
                                   II       The formula "capital", in which living labor stands in the relation of  non-property to raw material, instrument and the means of subsistence  required during the period of production, implies in the first instance  _non-property in land_ -- i.e., the absence of a state in which the  working individual regards the land, the soil, as his own and labor as  its proprietor.  In the most favorable case, he stands both in relation  of landowner to himself in his capacity as a laboring subject.   Potentially, the ownership of land includes both property in raw  materials, and in the original instrument of labor, the soil, as well as  in its spontaneous fruits.  In the most original form, this means that  the individual regards the soil as belonging to him, and finds in it raw  material, instrument, and means of subsistence not created by labor but  by earth itself.  Once this relationship is reproduced, then secondary  instruments and fruits of the earth produced by labor immediately appear  included in the primitive form of landownership.  It is this historic  situation which is in the first instance negated by the more complete  property-relationship involved in the relation of the worker to the  conditions of labor as capital.  This is historic situation No.  1 which  is negated in the new relationship, or assumed to have been dissolved by  history.     A second historical step is implied in _property in the instrument_ --  i.e., in the relation of the laborer to the instruments as to his own,  in which he labors as the owner of the instrument (which assumes that  the instrument is subsumed in his individual labor, i.e., which assumes  a special and limited phase of development of the productive force of  labor).  We are considering a situation in which the laborer not only  owns the instrument, but in which this form of the _laborer as  proprietor_ or of the _laboring proprietor_ is already distinct and  separate from _landed property_, and not, as in the first case, an  accident of landed property and subsumed under it: in other words, the  artisan and urban development of labor.  Hence, also, we here find raw  material and means of subsistence _mediated_ as the property of the  artisan, mediated through his craft, through his property in the  instrument.  This second historic step now exists distinct and separate  from the first, which in turn will appear considerably modified by the  mere fact that _this second type of property_ or of _working proprietor_  has established its independent existence.     Since the instrument itself is already the product of labor -- i.e., the  element which constitutes property is already established by labor --  the community can here no longer appear, as it can in the first case, in  its primitive form.  The community on which this form of property is  based already appears as something produced, secondary, something which  has come into being, a community produced by the laborer himself.  It is  clear that where ownership of the instrument is the relationship to the  conditions of labor as property, in actual labor the instrument appears  merely as _a means_ of individual labor, and the art of really  appropriating the instrument, to employ it as a means of labor, appears  as a special skill of the laborer, which makes him the owner of his  tools.  In short, the essential character character of gild or  corporative systems (artisan labor as its subject and the constituent  element of ownership) is analyzable in terms of a relation to the  instrument of production: the tool as property.  This differs from the  relations to the earth, tot he land as one's own, which is rather that  of the raw material as property.  In this historic state No.2 property  is thus constituted by the laboring subject's relation to this single  element of the conditions of production, which makes him into a laboring  proprietor; and this state may exist only as contradiction of state  No.1, or, if you like, as supplementary to a modified state No.1.  The  first formula of capital negates this historic state also.     There is a third _possible form_ which is to act as proprietor neither  of the land nor of the instrument (i.e., nor of labor itself), but only  of the means of subsistence, which are then found as the natural  condition of the laboring subject.  This is at bottom the formula of  slavery and serfdom, which is also negated, or assumed to have been  historically dissolved, in the relation of the worker to the conditions  of production as capital.     The primitive forms of property necessarily dissolve into the relation  of property to the different objective elements conditioning production;  they are the economic basis of different forms of community, and in turn  presuppose forms of community.  These forms are significantly modified  once labor itself is placed among the _objective conditions of  production_ (as in slavery and serfdom), as a result of which the simple  affirmative character of all forms of property embraced in No.1 is lost  and modified.  All of these include potential slavery, and therefore  their own abolition.  So far as No.2 is concerned, in which the  particular kind of labor -- i.e., its craft mastery and consequently  property in the instrument of labor -- equals property in the conditions  of production, this admittedly excludes slavery and serfdom.  However,  it may lead to an analogous negative development in the form of a caste  system.     The third form, of property in the means of subsistence, cannot contain  any relationship of the _laboring_ individual to the conditions of  production, and therefore of existence, unless it is dissolved into  slavery and serfdom.  It can only be the relation of the member of the  primitive community founded upon landed property, who happens to have  lost his ownership of land without as yet having advanced to property  No.2, as in the case of the Roman plebs at the time of "bread and  circuses" [that is, of a propertyless mass living on a public dole].   The relation of retainers to their lords, or that of personal service,  is essentially different.  For it (personal service) forms at bottom  merely the mode of existence of the landowner, who no longer labors  himself, but whose property includes the laborers themselves as serfs,  etc., among the conditions of production.  What we have here as an  essential relation of appropriation is the _relationship of domination_.   Appropriation can create no such relation to animal, the soil, etc.,  even though the animal serves its master.  The appropriation of  another's _will_ is presupposed in the relationship of domination.   Beings without will, like animals, may indeed render services, but their  owner is not thereby _lord and master_.  However, what we see here is,  how the _relations of domination and servitude_ also enter into this  formula of the appropriation of the instruments of production; and they  constitute a necessary ferment of the development and decay of all  primitive relations of property and production.  At the same time, they  express their limitations.  To be sure, they are also reproduced in  capital, though in an indirect (mediated) form, and hence they also  constitute a ferment in its dissolution, and are the emblems of its  limitations.           "The right to sell oneself and one's dependence in times of       distress, was unfortunately general; it prevailed both in the       North, among the Greeks and in Asia.  The right of the creditor to       take the defaulting debtor into servitude, and to redeem the debt       either by his labor or by the sale of his person, was almost       equally widespread."                                                         (Neibuhr, I, 600)    [In another passage, Niebuhr explains the difficulties and  misunderstandings of Greek writers of the Augustan period over the  relationship between Patricians and Plebians and their confusion of this  relationship with that between Patrons and Clients, as being due to the  fact that         "they were writing at a time when rich and poor constituted the       only real classes of citizens; where the man in need, no matter how       noble his origins, required a Patron and the millionaire, even       though only a freedman, was sough after as a Patron.  They could       find scarcely a trace of inherited relations of attachment".        (I.620)]         "Artisans were to be found in both classes (resident aliens and       freedmen together with their descendants), and plebians who       abandoned agriculture passed into the limited citizen status       enjoyed by these.  Nor did they lack the honor of legally       recognized gilds, and these were so highly respected that Numa was       supposed to have been their founder.  There were nine such gilds;       pipers, goldsmiths, carpenters, dyers, harness-makers, tanners,       saddlers, coppersmiths, and potters, the ninth corporation       embracing the rest of the crafts....  Those among them were       independent citizens, or who enjoyed a status equivalent to       citizenship, independent of any patron (supposing such status was       recognized); or those who were descendants of dependent men whose       bond had lapsed with the extinction of their patrons' families:       these undoubtedly remained as remote from the quarrels of ancient       citizens and the commons [der Gemeinde] as the Florentine gilds       remained outside the feuds of the Guelf and Ghibelline families.        It is probable that the population in servitude were still as a       whole at the disposal of the patricians." (I,623)     On the one hand, we presuppose historical processes which transform a  mass of individuals of a nation, if not perhaps immediately into genuine  free laborers, then at any rate into potential free laborers, whose  property is their labor-power and the possibility of exchanging it for  the existing values.  Such individuals confront all objective conditions  of production as _alien property_, as their own _non-property_, but at  the same time as something which can be exchanged as _values_ and  therefore to some extent appropriated by living labor.     Such historic processes of dissolution are the following:    -- the dissolution of the servile relationship which binds the laborer  to the soil, and to the lord of the soil, but in fact assumes his  property in the means of subsistence (which amounts in truth to his  reparation from the soil);    -- the dissolution of relations of property which constitute a laborer  as yeoman, or free, working, petty landowner or tenant (colonus), or  free peasant [note by Marx: We take for granted the dissolution of the  even more ancient forms of communal property and real community];    -- the dissolution of gild relations which presuppose the laborer's  property in the instrument of production and labor itself, as a certain  form of craft skill [handwerksmassig bestimmte Geschicklichkeit] not  merely as the source of property but as property itself;    -- also the dissolution of the relation of clientship in its different  types, in which _non-proprietors_ appear as co-consumers of the surplus  produce in the retinue of their lord, and in return wear his livery,  take part in his feuds, perform real or imaginary acts of personal  service, etc.     Closer analysis will show that what is dissolved in all these processes  of dissolution are relations of production in which use-value  predominates; production for immediate use.  Exchange-value and its  production presuppose the predominance of the other form.  Thus in all  the above circumstances, deliveries in kind and labor services  [Naturaldienste] predominate over money payments and services  remunerated by money.  But this is only incidental [or this could be  translated as "But this observation is by the way"].  Again, closer  examination will also reveal that all the dissolved relations were  rendered possible only by a certain degree of development of the  material (and therefore also of the mental) productive forces.      What concerns us at this point is the following.  The process of  dissolution which turns a mass of individuals in a nation, etc., into  potential free wage-laborers -- individuals obliged merely by their lack  of property to labor and to sell their labor -- does _not_ presuppose  the _disappearance_ of the previous sources of income or (in part) of  the previous conditions of property of these individuals.  On the  contrary, it assumes that _only_ their use has been altered, that their  mode of existence has been transformed, that they have passed into other  people's hands as a _free fund_, or perhaps that they have partly  remained in _the same hands_.  But this much is evident.  The process  which has in one way or another separated a mass of individuals from its  previous affirmative relations to the _objective conditions of labor_,  which negated these relations and thereby transformed these individuals  into _free laborers_, is also the same process which has liberated these  _objective conditions of labor_ potentially from _their previous ties_  to the individuals which are now separated from them.  (These conditions  of labor comprise land, raw material, means of subsistence, instruments  of labor, money or all of these.) They are still _present_, but present  in a different form, as a _free fund_, one in which all the old  political, etc., relations are obliterated, and which now confront those  separated, propertyless individuals merely in the form of _values_, of  values maintaining themselves and each other [an sich festhaltenden  Werten].  The same process which counterposes the masses of free  laborers to the _objective conditions of labor_, has also counterposed  these conditions to them as _capital_.  The historic process was one of  the separation of hitherto combined elements; its results is therefore  not the disappearance of one of these elements, but a situation in which  each of them appears negatively related to the other: the (potentially)  free laborer on one hand, (potential) capital on the other.  The  separation of the objective conditions from the classes which are now  transformed into free laborers, must equally appear at the opposite pole  as the establishment of independence by these very conditions.      Let us consider the relationship of capital and wage labor not as  something which has already reached decisive importance, and encroaches  on production as a whole (Marx note: For in this case capital,  presupposed as the condition of wage-labor, is the product of labor, and  established as condition by labor itself, created by labor as its own  presupposition), but as something which is still in the process of  historical formation.  We consider the original transformation of money  into capital, the process of exchange between capital existing only  potentially on one hand, and the free laborers existing potentially on  the other.  We then find ourselves naturally making the simple  observation, with which the economists make great play -- namely, that  the side which appears as capital must possess raw materials, tools, and  food enough to enable the worker to live before production is completed.   Moreover, it would appear that accumulation -- an accumulation prior to  labor and not arising from labor -- must have taken place on the part of  the capitalist, which enables him to set the laborer to work and to  maintain him in activity, as living labor power.     (Marx note: Once capital and wage labor have been established as their  own prerequisites, i.e., as a base presupposed for production, the  following state of affairs appears to exist: In the first instance, it  seems that the capitalist must possess not only a fund of raw materials  and means of subsistence sufficient for the laborer to reproduce  himself, to produce the necessary means of subsistence, to realize  _necessary labor_; but also a fund of raw material and instruments of  production, by means of which the laborer realizes his surplus labor,  i.e., the capitalist's profit.  Further analysis will reveal that the  laborer is constantly creating a double fund for the capitalist, or in  the form of capital.  One part of this fund constantly fulfils the  conditions of his own existence, the other part, the conditions of  existence of capital.  As we have seen, surplus capital -- and surplus  capital in its relation to its prehistoric relation to labor -- includes  the _appropriation_ of all _real, present capital_, and of each element  of such capital, which is appropriated uniformly as _alien labor_  transformed into an object and appropriated by capital, without  exchange, without the transfer of an equivalent for it.)    This action of capital, which is independent and not established by  labor, is then transferred from this history of its origin into the  present, and transformed into a factor of its reality and effectiveness,  of its self-creation [Selbstformation].  Finally, the eternal right of  capital to the fruit of other men's labor is derived from this state of  affairs, or rather what happens is, that the mode of acquisition of  capital is derived from the simple and "just" laws of the exchange of  equivalents.      Wealth occurring in the form of money can only be realized against the  objective conditions of labor, because and if these have been separated  from labor itself.  We have seen that money can in part be accumulated  by the sheer exchange of equivalents; however, this is so insignificant  a source that it is not worth mention historically -- assuming, that is,  that we suppose this money to have been earned by the exchange of one's  own labor.  It is rather money accumulated by usury -- especially usury  on landed property -- and mobile (monetary) wealth accumulated through  mercantile profits, that turns into capital in the strictest sense, into  industrial capital.  We will have occassion to deal with both forms  below -- that is, insofar as they themselves appear not as forms of  capital but as prior forms of wealth which are the prerequisites for  capital.      As we have seen, the concept -- the origin -- of capital implies  _money_ as its starting point, and therefore it implies a derivation  from circulation; capital appears as the _product_ of circulation.   Capital formation does not therefore arise from landed property (though  it might arise from the agricultural tenant insofar as he is also a  trader in farm products), nor from the gild (though this provides a  possibility) but from mercantile and usurious wealth.  But the merchant  and usurer only encounter the conditions which permit the purchase of  free labor, once free labor has been detached from the objective  conditions of its existence as a result of a historical process.  At  this point, it also becomes possible to buy these _conditions_  themselves.  Under gild conditions, for instance, mere money (unless it  is the money of gild masters) cannot purchase looms in order to put men  to work on them; there are regulations determining how many looms a man  may employ, etc.  In short, the instrument of labor is still so  intimately merged with living labor, appearing as the domain of living  labor, that is does not truly circulate.  What enable monetary wealth to  run into capital is, on the one hand, that it finds free laborers, and  on the other hand, it finds means of subsistence, materials, etc., which  would otherwise be in one form or another the _property_ of the now  objectiveless masses, and are also _free_ and available for sale.     However, the other condition of labor -- a certain craft skill, the  existence of the instrument as a means of labor, etc.  -- is found  _ready to hand_ by capital in this preparatory or first period of  capital.  This is partly the result of the urban gild system, partly of  domestic industry, or such industry as exists as an accessory to  agriculture.  The historic process is not the result of capital, but its  prerequisite.  By means of this process, the capitalist then inserts  himself as a (historical) middleman between landed property and labor.   History ignores the sentimental illusions about capitalist and laborer  forming an association, etc.; nor is there a trace of such illusions in  the development of the concept of capital.  Sporadically, _manufacture_  may develop locally in a framework belonging to quite a different  period, as in the Italian cities _side by side_ with the gilds.  But if  capital is to be the generally dominant form of an epoch, its conditions  must be developed not merely locally, but on a large scale.  (This is  compatible with the possibility that during the dissolution of the gilds  individual gild-masters may turn into industrial capitalists; however,  in the nature of the phenomenon, this happens rarely.  All in all, the  entire gild system -- both master and journeyman -- dies out, where the  capitalist and laborer emerge.)     However, it is evident, and borne out by closer analysis of the  historic epoch which we are now discussing, that the _age of  dissolution_ of the earlier modes of production and relations of the  worker to the objective conditions of labor, is _simultaneously an age_  in which _monetary wealth_ has already developed to a certain extent,  and also one in which it is rapidly growing and expanding, by means of  the circumstances which accelerate this dissolution.  Just as it is  itself an agent of that dissolution, so that dissolution is the  condition of its transformation into capital.  But the _mere existence  of monetary wealth_, even its conquest of a sort of supremacy, is not  sufficient for this _dissolution to result in capital_.  If it were,  then ancient Rome, Byzantium, etc., would have concluded their history  with free labor and capital, or rather, would have entered upon a new  history.  There the dissolution of the old relations of property was  also tied to the development of monetary wealth -- of commerce, etc.   However, in fact the result of this dissolution was not industry, but  the domination of countryside over city.     The _original formations of capital_ does not, as is often supposed,  proceed by the _accumulation_ of food, tools, raw materials or in short,  of the _objective_ conditions of labor detached from the soil and  already fused with human labor.     [Marx note: Nothing is more obviously and superficially circular than  the reasoning which argues (a) that the _workers_ who must be employed  by capital if capital is to exist as such, must first be _created_ and  called into life by _its_ accumulation (waiting, as it were, on its "Let  there be labor"); while (b) capital could not accumulate without alien  labor, except perhaps its own labor.  I.e., that capital might itself  exist in the form of _non-capital_ and _non-money_, for prior to the  existence of capital, labor can only realize its value in the form of  handicraft work, of petty agriculture, etc.; in short, of forms, all of  which permit little or _no accumulation_, allow for only a small surplus  produce, and _consume_ the greater part of that.  We shall have to  return to the concept of "accumulation" later.]    Not by means of capital creating the objective conditions of labor.  Its  _original formation_ occurs simply because the historic process of the  dissolution of an old mode of production, allows value, existing in the  form of _monetary wealth_ to _buy_ the objective conditions of labor on  one hand, to exchange the _living_ labor o the now free workers for  money, on the other.  All these elements are already in existence.  What  separates them out is a historical process, a process of dissolution, nd  it is _this_ which enables money to turn into _capital_.  Insofar as  money itself plays a part here, it is only to the extent that it is  itself an extremely powerful agent of dissolution which intervenes in  the process, and hence contributes to the creation of the _plucked_,  objectiveless, _free laborers_.  It is certainly not by _creating_ the  objective conditions of such laborers' existence, but rather by  accelerating their separation from them -- i.e., by accelerating their  loss of property.     For instance, when the great English landowners dismissed their  retainers, who had consumed a share of their surplus produce of their  land; when their farmers drove out the small cottagers, etc., then a  doubly free mass of living labor power was thrown on to the _labor  market_: free from the old relation of clientship, villeinage, or  service, but also free from all goods or chattels, from every real and  objective form of existence, _free from all property_.  Such a mass  would be reduced either to the sale of its labor power or to beggary,  vagabondage, or robbery as its only source of income.  History records  the fact that it first tried beggary, vagabondage, and crime, but was  herded off this road on to the narrow path which led to the labor market  by means of the gallows, pillory, and whip.  (Hence the _governments_ of  Henry VII, VIII, etc., also appear as conditions of the historic process  of dissolution and as creators of the conditions for the existence of  capital.) Conversely, the means of subsistence formerly consumed by the  lords and their retainers, were now available for purchase by money, and  money wished to purchase them in order through their instrumentality to  purchase labor.  Money had neither created nor accumulated these means  of subsistence.  They were already present, consumed, and reproduced,  before they were consumed and reproduced through the intervention of  money.  The only change was that these means of production were now  thrown on to the _exchange-market_.  They had now been detached from  their immediate connection with the mouths of the retainers, etc., and  transformed from use-values into exchange-values, thus falling under the  government and sovereignty of monetary wealth.  The same applies to the  instruments of labor.  Monetary wealth neither invented nor manufactured  spinning wheel and loom.  But once spinners and weavers had been  separated from their land, they and their wheels and looms came under  the sway of monetary wealth, etc.     _Capital unites the masses of hands and instruments which are already  there.  This and only this is what characterizes it.  It brings them  together under its sway._    This is its _real accumulation_; the accumulation of laborers plus their  instruments at given points.  We shall have to go into this more deeply  when we come to the so-called accumulation of capital.     Admittedly, monetary wealth in the form of merchants' wealth had helped  to accelerate and dissolve the old relations of production, and had,  e.g., enabled the landowner to exchange his corn, cattle, etc., for  imported use-values, instead of squandering his own production with his  retainers, whose number, indeed, was to a large extent taken as the  measure of his wealth.  (This point has already been neatly made by A.   Smith.) Monetary wealth had given greater significance to the  exchange-value of his retinue.  This was also true of his tenants, who  were already semi-capitalists, though in a rather disguised manner.  The  evolution of exchange-value is favored by the existence of _money_ in  the form of a social order of merchants.  It dissolves a production  whose object is primarily immediate use-value, and the forms of property  which correspond to such production -- the relations of labor to its  objective conditions -- thus giving an impetus to the creation of a  _labor market_ (not to be confused with a slave market).  However, even  this effect of money is possible only if we presuppose the existence of  _urban craft activity_, which rests _not_ on capital and wage-labor, but  on the organization of labor in gilds, etc.  Urban labor itself had  created the means of production, for which the gilds became as great an  embarrassment as were the old relations of landed property in an  improved agriculture, which was in turn partly the consequence of the  greater sale of agricultural products to the cities, etc.     Other circumstances assisted the dissolution of the old relations of  production, accelerated the separation of the laborer or the non-laborer  capable of work, from the objective conditions of his reproduction, and  thus advanced the transformation of money into capital.  Such were,  e.g., the factors which in the 16th century increased the mass of  commodities in circulation, the mass of currency in circulation,  creating new needs and consequently raising the exchange value of native  products, raising prices, etc.  Nothing can therefore be more foolish  than to conceive the _original formation_ of capital as if it meant the  accumulation and creation of the _objective conditions of production_ --  food, raw materials, instruments -- which were then offered to the  _dispossessed_ workers.  What happened was rather that monetary wealth  partly helped to detach the labor power of the individuals capable of  work from these conditions.  The rest of this process of separation  proceeded without the intervention of monetary wealth.  Once the  original formation of capital had reached a certain level, monetary  wealth could insert itself as an intermediary between the objective  conditions of life, now "liberated" and the equally liberated, but now  also _unfettered and footloose_, living labor powers, buying the one  with the other.  As to the _formation of monetary wealth_ itself, before  its transformation into capital: this belongs to the prehistory of the  bourgeois economy.  Usury, trade, the cities and government finance  which arise with them, play the chief parts in it.  Also _hoarding_ by  tenant farmers, peasants, etc., though to a smaller extent.     Trade is everywhere the intermediary for exchange value, or  alternatively, the transfer of exchange value can be described as trade  -- for just as circulation acquires an independent existence in  commerce, so does money in the social stratum of the merchants.  We may  see that the development of exchange and exchange-value brings about  both the dissolution of labor's relations of property in its conditions  of existence and also of labor as something which is itself part of the  objective conditions of production.  All these are relations which  express both a predominance of use-value and of production directed  towards immediate consumption, and also the predominance of a real  community which is still present as an immediate prerequisite of  production.  Production based on exchange-value and a community based on  the exchange of these exchange-values, and labor as the general  condition of wealth, all presuppose and produce the separation of labor  from its objective conditions.  Though, as we saw in the last chapter on  money, production for exchange and community based on exchange may  appear to posit property as deriving solely from _labor_, and private  property in the production of one's labor as a precondition, this  appearance is deceptive.  The exchange of equivalents occurs (but it is  merely) the surface layer of a production which rests on the  appropriation of other people's labor _without exchange_, but under the  _guise of exchange_.  This system of exchange has _capital_ as its  basis.  If we consider it in isolation from capital, as it appears on  the surface, as an _independent_ system, this is mere _illusion_, though  a _necessary illusion_.  It is therefore no longer surprising to find  that the system of exchange-values -- the exchange of equivalents  measured in labor -- turns into the _appropriation of other people's  labor without exchange_, the total separation of labor and property, or  rather that it reveals this appropriation as its concealed background.   For the rule of exchange-values, and of production producing  exchange-values, _presupposes_ alien labor power as itself an  exchange-value.  I.e., it presupposes the separation of living labor  power from its objective conditions; a relationship to these -- or to  its own objectivity -- as someone else's property; in a word, a relation  to them as _capital_.     The golden age of labor emancipating itself occurred only in those  periods when feudalism was in decay, but still engaged in internecine  conflict -- as in England in the 14th and the first-half of the 15th  centuries.  If labor is once again to be related to its objective  conditions as to its property, another system must replace that of  private exchange, for as we have seen private exchange assumes the  exchange of labor transformed into objects against labor-power, and  thereby the appropriation of living labor without exchange.     Historically, money is often transformed into capital in quite simple  and obvious ways.  Thus, the merchant sets to work a number of spinners  and weavers, who formerly engaged in these activities as subsidiary  occupations to their agricultural work, and turns a subsidiary  occupation into a principal one, after which he has them under his  control and sway as wage-laborers.  The next step is to remove them from  their homes and to assemble them in a single house if labor.  In this  simple process, it is evident that the merchant has prepared neither raw  materials nor instruments nor means of subsistence for the weaver or the  spinner.  All he has done is gradually to confine them to one sort of  labor, in which they are dependent on the _buyer_, the _merchant_, and  thus eventually find themselves producing solely _for_ and _by means of_  him.  Originally, he has bought their labor merely by the purchase of  their product.  As soon as they confine themselves to the production of  this exchange-value, and are therefore obliged to produce immediate  _exchange-values_, and to exchange their labor entirely for money in  order to go on living, they come under his domination.  Finally, even  the illusion of _selling_ him their products, disappears.  He purchases  their labor and takes away first their property in the product, soon  also their ownership of the instrument, unless he allows them the  _illusions of ownership_ in order to diminish his costs of production.     The original historical forms in which capital appears at first  sporadically or _locally, side by side_ with the old modes of  production, but gradually bursting them asunder, make up _manufacture_  in the proper sense of the word (not yet the factory).  This arises,  where there is mass-production for export -- hence on the basis of  large-scale maritime and overland trade, and in the centres of such  trade, as in the Italian cities, Constantinople, the Flemish, Dutch  cities, some Spanish ones such as Barcelona, etc.  Manufacture does not  initially capture the so-called urban crafts, but the rural subsidiary  occupations, spinning and weaving, the sort of work which least requires  craft skill, technical training.  Apart from those great emporia, in  which it finds the basis of an _export_ market, and where production is,  as it were _by its spontaneous nature_, directed towards exchange-value  -- i.e., manufactures directly connected with shipping, including  shipbuilding itself, etc.  The rural subsidiary occupations contain the  broad basis of manufactures, whereas a high degree of progress in  production is required in order to carry on the urban crafts as factory  industries.  Such branches of production as glassworks, metal factories,  sawmills, etc., which from the start demand a greater concentration of  labor-power, utilize more natural power, and demand both mass-production  and a concentration of the means of production, etc.: these also lend  themselves to manufacture.  Similarly, paper mills, etc.     The other aspect of this process is the appearance of the tenant farmer  and the transformation of the agricultural population into free  day-laborers.  Though the last place where this transformation triumphs  in its purest and most logical forms, is the countryside, some of its  earliest developments occur there.  Hence the ancients, who never  advanced beyond specifically urban craft kill and application, were  never able to achieve large-scale industry.  For its first prerequisite  is the involvement of the entire countryside in the production, not of  use-values, but of exchange values.  Glassworks, papermills, ironworks,  etc., cannot be conducted on gild principles.  They require  mass-production, sales to a general market, _monetary wealth_ on the  part of the entrepreneur.  Not that he creates the subjective or  objective conditions; but under the old relations of property and  production these conditions cannot be brought together.  (After this,  the dissolution of the relations of serfdom and the rise of manufacture  gradually transform all branches of production into branches operated by  capital.) However, the towns themselves contain an element for the  formation of genuine wage-labor -- namely, day-laborers outside the gild  system, unskilled laborers, etc.      We thus see that the transformation of money into capital presupposes a  historic process which separates the objective conditions of labor, and  makes them independent of and sets them against the laborers.  However,  once capital and its process have come into being, they conquer all  production and everywhere bring about and accentuate the separation  between labor and property, labor and the objective conditions of labor.   Subsequent development will show in what ways capital destroys artisan  labor, small working landownership, etc., and also itself in those forms  in which it does _not_ appear in contradiction to labor: _petty  capital_, and intermediate or hybrid types between the classic, adequate  mode of production of capital itself, and the old modes of production  (in their original form), or as renewed on the basis of capital.      The only accumulation which is a prerequisite for the rise of capital,  is that of _monetary wealth_, which, when considered in isolation, is  entirely unproductive, emerges only from circulation and belongs only to  circulation.  Capital rapidly creates itself an internal market by  destroying all rural subsidiary crafts -- i.e., by spinning and weaving  for all, providing clothing for all, etc.; in short, by turning the  commodities formerly produced as immediate use-values into  exchange-values.  This process is the automatic result of the separation  of the laborers from the soil and from their property (though even only  serf property) in the conditions of production.       Though urban crafts are based substantially on exchange and the  creation of exchange-values, the main object of production is not  _enrichment_ or _exchange-value as exchange-values_, but the  _subsistence of man as an artisan, as a master-craftsman_, and  consequently use-value.  Production is therefore everywhere subordinate  to a presupposed consumption, supply to demand, and its expansion is  slow.      _The production of capitalists and wage-laborers is therefore a major  product of the process by which capital turns itself into values_.   Ordinary political economy, which concentrates only on the objects  produced, forgets this entirely.  Inasmuch as this process establishes  reified labor as what is simultaneously the _non-reification_ of the  laborer, as the reification of a subjectivity opposed to the laborer, as  the _property_ of someone else's will, capital is necessarily also a  _capitalist_.  The idea of some socialists, that we need capital but not  capitalists, is completely false.  The concept of capital implies that  the objective conditions of labor -- and these are its own product --  acquire a _personality_ as against labor, or what amounts to the same  thing, that they are established as the property of a personality other  than the worker's.  The concept of capital implies the capitalist.   However, this error is certainly no greater than that of, e.g., all  philologists who speak of the existence of _capital_ in classical  antiquity, and of Roman or Greek capitalists.  This is merely another  way of saying that in Rome and Greece labor was _free_, an assertion  which these gentlemen would hardly make.  If we now talk of  plantation-owners in America as capitalists, if they _are_ capitalists,  this is due to the fact that they exist as anomolies within a world  market based upon free labor.  Were the term capital to be applicable to  classical antiquity -- though the word does not actually occur among the  ancients (but among the Greeks the word _arkhais_ is used for what the  Roman's called the _principalis summa reicreditae_, the principal of a  loan) -- then the nomadic hordes with their flocks on the steppes of  Central Asia would be the greatest capitalists, for the original meaning  of the word capital is cattle.  Hence the contract of _metairie_  (crop-sharing) which is frequent in the South of France, because of  capital shortage, is still sometimes called "bail de bestes a cheptel"  (contract of leasing cattle).  If we permit ourselves a little bad  Latin, then our capitalists or _Capitales Homines_ (headmen) would be  those "qui debent censum de capite" (who pay a head tax).      Difficulties which do not arise in the conceptual analysis of money do  arise in that of capital.  Capital is essentially a _capitalist_; but at  the same time production in general is _capital_, as an element in the  existence of the capitalist quite distinct from him.  Thus we shall  later find that in the term _capital_ much is subsumed that does not  apparently belong to the concept.  E.g., capital is loaned.  It is  accumulated, etc.  In all these relations it appears to be a mere  object, and entirely to coincide with the matter of which it consists.   However, further analysis will clarify this and other problems.  (In  passing, the following amusing observation: The good Adam Mueller, who  takes all figurative phrases in a mystical sense, had also heard about  _living capital_ in ordinary life, as opposed to _dead_ capital, and  dresses up the notion theosophically.  King Atheistan could have taught  him a thing or two about this:         "Reddam de meo propio decimas Deo tam in _Vivente Capitale_ quam       in _mortuis fructuis terrae_."         (I shall give a tithe of my property to God, both in living        cattle and in the dead fruits of the soil.)    Money always retains the same form in the same substratum, and is  therefore more readily conceived as an object.  But the same thing,  commodity, money, etc., can represent capital or revenue, etc.  Thus  even the economists recognize that money is nothing tangible, but that  the same thing can be subsumed now under the heading capital, now under  some other and quite contrary term, and accordingly that it _is_ or _is  not_ capital.  It is evidently _a relation and can only be a relation of  production_.       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                                              