




Personal Memoirs of P.H.Sheridan V1 of 2


by Philip Henry Sheridan









PREFACE



When, yielding to the solicitations of my friends, I finally decided

to write these Memoirs, the greatest difficulty which confronted me

was that of recounting my share in the many notable events of the

last three decades, in which I played a part, without entering too

fully into the history of these years, and at the same time without

giving to my own acts an unmerited prominence.  To what extent I have

overcome this difficulty I must leave the reader to judge.



In offering this record, penned by my own hand, of the events of my

life, and of my participation in our great struggle for national

existence, human liberty, and political equality, I make no

pretension to literary merit; the importance of the subject-matter of

my narrative is my only claim on the reader's attention.



Respectfully dedicating this work to my comrades in arms during the

War of the Rebellion, I leave it as a heritage to my children, and as

a source of information for the future historian.



P. H. SHERIDAN.



Nonguitt, Mass., August 2, 1888









PERSONAL MEMOIRS



P. H. SHERIDAN.













VOLUME I.



CHAPTER I.



ANCESTRY--BIRTH--EARLY EDUCATION--A CLERK IN A GROCERY STORE--

APPOINTMENT--MONROE SHOES--JOURNEY TO WEST POINT--HAZING--A FISTICUFF

BATTLE--SUSPENDED--RETURNS TO CLERKSHIP--GRADUATION.



My parents, John and Mary Sheridan, came to America in 1830, having

been induced by the representations of my father's uncle, Thomas

Gainor, then living in Albany, N. Y., to try their fortunes in the

New World: They were born and reared in the County Cavan, Ireland,

where from early manhood my father had tilled a leasehold on the

estate of Cherrymoult; and the sale of this leasehold provided him

with means to seek a new home across the sea.  My parents were

blood relations--cousins in the second degree--my mother, whose

maiden name was Minor, having descended from a collateral branch of

my father's family.  Before leaving Ireland they had two children,

and on the 6th of March, 1831, the year after their arrival in this

country, I was born, in Albany, N. Y., the third child in a family

which eventually increased to six--four boys and two girls.



The prospects for gaining a livelihood in Albany did not meet the

expectations which my parents had been led to entertain, so in 1832

they removed to the West, to establish themselves in the village of

Somerset, in Perry County, Ohio, which section, in the earliest days

of the State; had been colonized from Pennsylvania and Maryland.  At

this period the great public works of the Northwest--the canals and

macadamized roads, a result of clamor for internal improvements--were

in course of construction, and my father turned his attention to

them, believing that they offered opportunities for a successful

occupation.  Encouraged by a civil engineer named Bassett, who had

taken a fancy to him, he put in bids for a small contract on the

Cumberland Road, known as the "National Road," which was then being

extended west from the Ohio River.  A little success in this first

enterprise led him to take up contracting as a business, which he

followed on various canals and macadamized roads then building in

different parts of the State of Ohio, with some good fortune for

awhile, but in 1853 what little means he had saved were swallowed up

--in bankruptcy, caused by the failure of the Sciota and Hocking

Valley Railroad Company, for which he was fulfilling a contract at

the time, and this disaster left him finally only a small farm, just

outside the village of Somerset, where he dwelt until his death in

1875.



My father's occupation kept him away from home much of the time

during my boyhood, and as a consequence I grew up under the sole

guidance and training of my mother, whose excellent common sense and

clear discernment in every way fitted her for such maternal duties.

When old enough I was sent to the village school, which was taught by

an old-time Irish "master"--one of those itinerant dominies of the

early frontier--who, holding that to spare the rod was to spoil the

child, if unable to detect the real culprit when any offense had been

committed, would consistently apply the switch to the whole school

without discrimination.  It must be conceded that by this means he

never failed to catch the guilty mischief-maker.  The school-year was

divided into terms of three months, the teacher being paid in each

term a certain sum--three dollars, I think, for each pupil-and having

an additional perquisite in the privilege of boarding around at his

option in the different families to which his scholars belonged.

This feature was more than acceptable to the parents at times, for

how else could they so thoroughly learn all the neighborhood gossip?

But the pupils were in almost unanimous opposition, because Mr.

McNanly's unheralded advent at any one's house resulted frequently in

the discovery that some favorite child had been playing "hookey,"

which means (I will say to the uninitiated, if any such there be)

absenting one's self from school without permission, to go on a

fishing or a swimming frolic.  Such at least was my experience more

than once, for Mr. McNanly particularly favored my mother's house,

because of a former acquaintanceship in Ireland, and many a time a

comparison of notes proved that I had been in the woods with two

playfellows, named Binckly and Greiner, when the master thought I was

home, ill, and my mother, that I was at school, deeply immersed in

study.  However, with these and other delinquencies not uncommon

among boys, I learned at McNanly's school, and a little later, under

a pedagogue named Thorn, a smattering of geography and history, and

explored the mysteries of Pike's Arithmetic and Bullions' English

Grammar, about as far as I could be carried up to the age of

fourteen.  This was all the education then bestowed upon me, and

this--with the exception of progressing in some of these branches by

voluntary study, and by practical application in others, supplemented

by a few months of preparation after receiving my appointment as a

cadet--was the extent of my learning on entering the Military

Academy.



When about fourteen years old I began to do something for myself; Mr.

John Talbot, who kept a country store in the village, employing me to

deal out sugar, coffee, and calico to his customers at the munificent

salary of twenty-four dollars a year.  After I had gained a twelve-

months' experience with Mr. Talbot my services began to be sought by,

others, and a Mr. David Whitehead secured them by the offer of sixty

dollars a year--Talbot refusing to increase my pay, but not objecting

to my advancement.  A few months later, before my year was up,

another chance to increase my salary came about; Mr. Henry Dittoe,

the enterprising man of the village, offering me one hundred and

twenty dollars a year to take a position in the dry-goods store of

Fink & Dittoe.  I laid the matter before Mr. Whitehead, and he

frankly advised me to accept, though he cautioned me that I might

regret it, adding that he was afraid Henry (referring to Mr. Dittoe)

"had too many irons in the fire." His warning in regard to the

enterprising merchant proved a prophecy, for " too many irons in the

fire" brought about Mr. Dittoe's bankruptcy, although this misfortune

did not befall him till long after I had left his service.  I am glad

to say, however, that his failure was an exceptionally honest one,

and due more to the fact that he was in advance of his surroundings

than to any other cause.



I remained with Fink & Dittoe until I entered the Military Academy,

principally in charge of the book-keeping, which was no small work

for one of my years, considering that in those days the entire

business of country stores in the West was conducted on the credit

system; the customers, being mostly farmers, never expecting to pay

till the product of their farms could be brought to market; and even

then usually squared the book-accounts by notes of hand, that were

often slow of collection.



>From the time I ceased to attend school my employment had

necessitated, to a certain degree, the application of what I had

learned there, and this practical instruction I reinforced somewhat

by doing considerable reading in a general way, until ultimately I

became quite a local authority in history, being frequently chosen as

arbiter in discussions and disputes that arose in the store.  The

Mexican War, then going on, furnished, of course, a never-ending

theme for controversy, and although I was too young to enter the

military service when volunteers were mustering in our section, yet

the stirring events of the times so much impressed and absorbed me

that my sole wish was to become a soldier, and my highest aspiration

to go to West Point as a Cadet from my Congressional district.  My

chances for this seemed very remote, however, till one day an

opportunity was thrown in my way by the boy who then held the place

failing to pass his examination.  When I learned that by this

occurrence a vacancy existed, I wrote to our representative in

Congress, the Hon. Thomas Ritchey, and asked him for the appointment,

reminding him that we had often met in Fink & Dittoe's store, and

that therefore he must know something of my qualifications.  He

responded promptly by enclosing my warrant for the class of 1848; so,

notwithstanding the many romances that have been published about the

matter, to Mr. Ritchey, and to him alone, is due all the credit--if

my career justifies that term--of putting me in the United States

Army.



At once I set about preparing for the examination which precedes

admission to the Military Academy, studying zealously under the

direction of Mr. William Clark; my old teachers, McNanly and Thorn,

having disappeared from Somerset and sought new fields of usefulness.

The intervening months passed rapidly away, and I fear that I did not

make much progress, yet I thought I should be able to pass the

preliminary examination.  That which was to follow worried me more

and gave me many sleepless nights; but these would have been less in

number, I fully believe, had it not been for one specification of my,

outfit which the circular that accompanied my appointment demanded.

This requirement was a pair of "Monroe shoes."  Now, out in Ohio,

what "Monroe shoes" were was a mystery--not a shoemaker in my section

having so much as an inkling of the construction of the perplexing

things, until finally my eldest brother brought an idea of them from

Baltimore, when it was found that they were a familiar pattern under

another name.



At length the time for my departure came, and I set out for West

Point, going by way of Cleveland and across Lake Erie to Buffalo.  On

the steamer I fell in with another appointee en route to the academy,

David S. Stanley, also from Ohio; and when our acquaintanceship had

ripened somewhat, and we had begun to repose confidence in each

other, I found out that he had no "Monroe shoes," so I deemed myself

just that much ahead of my companion, although my shoes might not

conform exactly to the regulations in Eastern style and finish.  At

Buffalo, Stanley and I separated, he going by the Erie Canal and I by

the railroad, since I wanted to gain time on account of commands to

stop in Albany to see my father's uncle.  Here I spent a few days,

till Stanley reached Albany, when we journeyed together down the

river to West Point.  The examination began a few days after our

arrival, and I soon found myself admitted to the Corps of Cadets, to

date from July 1, 1848, in a class composed of sixty-three members,

many of whom--for example, Stanley, Slocum, Woods, Kautz, and Crook-

-became prominent generals in later years, and commanded divisions,

corps, and armies in the war of the rebellion.



Quickly following my admission I was broken in by a course of hazing,

with many of the approved methods that the Cadets had handed down

from year to year since the Academy was founded; still, I escaped

excessive persecution, although there were in my day many occurrences

so extreme as to call forth condemnation and an endeavor to suppress

the senseless custom, which an improved civilization has now about

eradicated, not only at West Point, but at other colleges.



Although I had met the Academic board and come off with fair success,

yet I knew so little of Algebra or any of the higher branches of

mathematics that during my first six months at the Academy I was

discouraged by many misgivings as to the future, for I speedily

learned that at the January examination the class would have to stand

a test much severer than that which had been applied to it on

entering.  I resolved to try hard, however, and, besides, good

fortune gave me for a room-mate a Cadet whose education was more

advanced than mine, and whose studious habits and willingness to aid

others benefited me immensely.  This room-mate was Henry W. Slocum,

since so signally distinguished in both military and civil capacities

as to win for his name a proud place in the annals of his country.

After taps--that is, when by the regulations of the Academy all the

lights were supposed to be extinguished, and everybody in bed--Slocum

and I would hang a blanket over the one window of our room and

continue our studies--he guiding me around scores of stumbling-blocks

in Algebra and elucidating many knotty points in other branches of

the course with which I was unfamiliar.  On account of this

association I went up before the Board in January with less

uneasiness than otherwise would have been the case, and passed the

examination fairly well.  When it was over, a self-confidence in my

capacity was established that had not existed hitherto, and at each

succeeding examination I gained a little in order of merit till my

furlough summer came round--that is, when I was half through the

four-year course.



My furlough in July and August, 1850, was spent at my home in Ohio,

with the exception of a visit or two to other Cadets on furlough in

the State, and at the close of my leave I returned to the Academy in

the full expectation of graduating with my class in 1852.



A quarrel of a belligerent character in September, ,1851, with Cadet

William R. Terrill, put an end to this anticipation, however, and

threw me back into the class which graduated in 1853.  Terrill was a

Cadet Sergeant, and, while my company was forming for parade, having,

given me an order, in what I considered an improper tone, to "dress"

in a certain direction, when I believed I was accurately dressed, I

fancied I had a grievance, and made toward him with a lowered

bayonet, but my better judgment recalled me before actual contact

could take place.  Of course Terrill reported me for this, and my ire

was so inflamed by his action that when we next met I attacked him,

and a fisticuff engagement in front of barracks followed, which was

stopped by an officer appearing on the scene.  Each of us handed in

an explanation, but mine was unsatisfactory to the authorities, for I

had to admit that I was the assaulting party, and the result was that

I was suspended by the Secretary of War, Mr. Conrad, till August 28,

1852--the Superintendent of the Academy, Captain Brewerton, being

induced to recommend this milder course, he said, by my previous good

conduct.  At the time I thought, of course, my suspension a very

unfair punishment, that my conduct was justifiable and the

authorities of the Academy all wrong, but riper experience has led me

to a different conclusion, and as I look back, though the

mortification I then endured was deep and trying, I am convinced that

it was hardly as much as I deserved for such an outrageous breach of

discipline.



There was no question as to Terrill's irritating tone, but in giving

me the order he was prompted by the duty of his position as a file

closer, and I was not the one to remedy the wrong which I conceived

had been done me, and clearly not justifiable in assuming to correct

him with my own hands.  In 1862, when General Buell's army was

assembling at Louisville, Terrill was with it as a brigadier-general

(for, although a Virginian, he had remained loyal), and I then took

the initiative toward a renewal of our acquaintance.  Our renewed

friendship was not destined to be of long duration, I am sorry to

say, for a few days later, in the battle of Perryville, while

gallantly fighting for his country, poor Terrill was killed.



My suspension necessitated my leaving the Academy, and I returned

home in the fall of 1851, much crestfallen.  Fortunately, my good

friend Henry Dittoe again gave me employment in keeping the books of

his establishment, and this occupation of my time made the nine

months which were to elapse before I could go back to West Point pass

much more agreeably than they would have done had I been idle.  In

August, 1852, I joined the first class at the Academy in accordance

with the order of the War Department, taking my place at the foot of

the class and graduating with it the succeeding June, number thirty-

four in a membership of fifty-two.  At the head of this class

graduated James B. McPherson, who was killed in the Atlanta campaign

while commanding the Army of the Tennessee.  It also contained such

men as John M. Schofield, who commanded the Army of the Ohio; Joshua

W. Sill, killed as a brigadier in the battle of Stone River; and many

others who, in the war of the rebellion, on one side or the other,

rose to prominence, General John B. Hood being the most distinguished

member of the class among the Confederates.



At the close of the final examination I made no formal application

for assignment to any particular arm of the service, for I knew that

my standing would not entitle me to one of the existing vacancies,

and that I should be obliged to take a place among the brevet second

lieutenants.  When the appointments were made I therefore found

myself attached to the First Infantry, well pleased that I had

surmounted all the difficulties that confront the student at our

national school, and looking forward with pleasant anticipation to

the life before me.









CHAPTER II.



ORDERED TO FORT DUNCAN, TEXAS--"NORTHERS"--SCOUTING DUTY--HUNTING--

NEARLY CAUGHT BY THE INDIANS--A PRIMITIVE HABITATION--A BRAVE

DRUMMERBOYS DEATH--A MEXICAN BALL.



On the 1st day of July, 1853, I was commissioned a brevet second

lieutenant in the First Regiment of United States Infantry, then

stationed in Texas.  The company to which I was attached was

quartered at Fort Duncan, a military post on the Rio Grande opposite

the little town of Piedras Negras, on the boundary line between the

United States and the Republic of Mexico.



After the usual leave of three months following graduation from the

Military Academy I was assigned to temporary duty at Newport

Barracks, a recruiting station and rendezvous for the assignment of

young officers preparatory to joining their regiments.  Here I

remained from September, 1853, to March, 1854, when I was ordered to

join my company at Fort Duncan.  To comply with this order I

proceeded by steamboat down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to New

Orleans, thence by steamer across the Gulf of Mexico to Indianola,

Tex., and after landing at that place, continued in a small schooner

through what is called the inside channel on the Gulf coast to Corpus

Christi, the headquarters of Brigadier-General Persifer F. Smith, who

was commanding the Department of Texas.  Here I met some of my old

friends from the Military Academy, among them Lieutenant Alfred

Gibbs, who in the last year of the rebellion commanded under me a

brigade of cavalry, and Lieutenant Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte, of the

Mounted Rifles, who resigned in 1854 to accept service in the French

Imperial army, but to most of those about headquarters I was an

entire stranger.  Among the latter was Captain Stewart Van Vliet, of

the Quartermaster's Department, now on the retired list.  With him I

soon came in frequent contact, and, by reason of his connection with

the Quartermaster's Department, the kindly interest he took in

forwarding my business inaugurated between us--a lasting friendship.



A day or two after my arrival at Corpus Christi a train of Government

wagons, loaded with subsistence stores and quartermaster's supplies,

started for Laredo, a small town on the Rio Grande below Fort Duncan.

There being no other means of reaching my station I put my small

personal possessions, consisting of a trunk, mattress, two blankets,

and a pillow into one of the heavily loaded wagons and proceeded to

join it, sitting on the boxes or bags of coffee and sugar, as I might

choose.  The movement of the train was very slow, as the soil was

soft on the newly made and sandy roads.  We progressed but a few

miles on our first day's journey, and in the evening parked our train

at a point where there was no wood, a scant supply of water--and that

of bad quality--but an abundance of grass.  There being no

comfortable place to sleep in any of the wagons, filled as they were

to the bows with army supplies, I spread my blankets on the ground

between the wheels of one of them, and awoke in the morning feeling

as fresh and bright as would have been possible if all the comforts

of civilization had been at my command.



It took our lumbering train many days to reach Laredo, a distance of

about one hundred and sixty miles from Corpus Christi.  Each march

was but a repetition of the first day's journey, its monotony

occasionally relieved, though, by the passage of immense flocks of

ducks and geese, and the appearance at intervals of herds of deer,

and sometimes droves of wild cattle, wild horses and mules.  The

bands of wild horses I noticed were sometimes led by mules, but

generally by stallions with long wavy manes, and flowing tails which

almost touched the ground.



We arrived at Laredo during one of those severe storms incident to

that section, which are termed "Northers" from the fact that the

north winds culminate occasionally in cold windstorms, frequently

preceded by heavy rains.  Generally the blow lasts for three days,

and the cold becomes intense and piercing.  While the sudden

depression of the temperature is most disagreeable, and often causes

great suffering, it is claimed that these "Northers" make the climate

more healthy and endurable.  They occur from October to May, and in

addition to the destruction which, through the sudden depression of

the temperature, they bring on the herds in the interior, they are

often of sufficient violence to greatly injure the harbors on the

coast.



The post near Laredo was called Fort McIntosh, and at this period the

troops stationed there consisted of eight companies of the Fifth

Infantry and two of the First, one of the First Artillery, and three

of the Mounted Rifles.  Just before the "Norther" began these troops

had completed a redoubt for the defense of the post, with the

exception of the ditches, but as the parapet was built of sand--the

only material about Laredo which could be obtained for its

construction--the severity of the winds was too much for such a

shifting substance, and the work was entirely blown away early in the

storm.



I was pleasantly and hospitably welcomed by the officers at the post,

all of whom were living in tents, with no furniture except a cot and

trunk, and an improvised bed for a stranger, when one happened to

come along.  After I had been kindly taken in by one of the younger

officers, I reported to the commanding officer, and was informed by

him that he would direct the quartermaster to furnish me, as soon as

convenient, with transportation to Fort Duncan, the station of my

company.



In the course of a day or two, the quartermaster notified me that a

Government six-mule wagon would be placed at my disposal to proceed

to my destination.  No better means offering, I concluded to set out

in this conveyance, and, since it was also to carry a quantity of

quartermaster's property for Fort Duncan, I managed to obtain room

enough for my bed in the limited space between the bows and load,

where I could rest tolerably well, and under cover at night, instead

of sleeping on the ground under the wagon, as I had done on the road

from Corpus Christi to Laredo.



I reached Fort Duncan in March, 1854., and was kindly received by the

commanding officer of the, regiment, Lieutenant-Colonel Thompson

Morris,and by the captain of my company ("D"), Eugene E. McLean, and

his charming wife the only daughter of General E. V. Sumner, who was

already distinguished in our service, but much better known in after

years in the operations ofthe Army of the Potomac, during its early

campaigns in Virginia.  Shortly after joining company "D" I was sent

out on scouting duty with another company of the regiment to Camp La

Pena, about sixty or seventy miles east of Fort Duncan, in a section

of country that had for some time past been subjected to raids by the

Lipan and Comanche Indians.  Ournoutpost at La Pena was intended as a

protection against the predatory incursions of these savages, so

almost constant scouting became a daily occupation.  This enabled me

soon to become familiar with and make maps of the surrounding

country, and, through constant association with our Mexican guide, to

pick up in a short time quite a smattering of the Spanish language,

which was very useful to one serving on that frontier.



At that early day western Texas was literally filled with game, and

the region in the immediate vicinity of La Pena contained its full

proportion of deer, antelope, and wild turkeys.  The temptation to

hunt was therefore constantly before me, and a desire to indulge in

this pastime, whenever free from the legitimate duty of the camp,

soon took complete possession of me, so expeditions in pursuit of

game were of frequent occurrence.  In these expeditions I was always

accompanied by a soldier named Frankman, belonging to " D " company,

who was a fine sportsman, and a butcher by trade.  In a short period

I learned from Frankman how to approach and secure the different

species of game, and also how to dress and care for it when killed.

Almost every expedition we made was rewarded with a good supply of

deer, antelope, and wild turkeys, and we furnished the command in

camp with such abundance that it was relieved from the necessity of

drawing its beef ration, much to the discomfiture of the disgruntled

beef contractor.



The camp at La Pena was on sandy ground, unpleasant for men and

animals, and by my advice it was moved to La Pendencia, not far from

Lake Espantosa.  Before removal from our old location, however, early

one bright morning Frankman and I started on one of our customary

expeditions, going down La Pena Creek to a small creek, at the head

of which we had established a hunting rendezvous.  After proceeding

along the stream for three or four miles we saw a column of smoke on

the prairie, and supposing it arose from a camp of Mexican rancheros

catching wild horses or wild cattle, and even wild mules, which were

very numerous in that section of country along the Nueces River, we

thought we would join the party and see how much success they were

having, and observe the methods employed in this laborious and

sometimes dangerous vocation.  With this object in view, we continued

on until we found it necessary to cross to the other side of the

creek to reach the point indicated by the smoke.  Just before

reaching the crossing I discovered moccasin tracks near the water's

edge, and realizing in an instant that the camp we were approaching

might possibly be one of hostile Indians--all Indians in that country

at that time were hostile--Frankman and I backed out silently, and

made eager strides for La Pena, where we had scarcely arrived when

Captain M. E. Van Buren, of the Mounted Rifle regiment, came in with

a small command, and reported that he was out in pursuit of a band of

Comanche Indians, which had been committing depredations up about

Fort Clark, but that he had lost the trail.  I immediately informed

him of what had occurred to me during the morning, and that I could

put him on the trail of the Indians he was desirous of punishing.



We hurriedly supplied with rations his small command of thirteen,

men, and I then conducted him to the point where I had seen the

smoke, and there we found signs indicating it to be the recently

abandoned camp of the Indians he was pursuing, and we also noticed

that prairie rats had formed the principal article of diet at the

meal they had just completed.  As they had gone, I could do no more

than put him on the trail made in their departure, which was well

marked; for Indians, when in small parties, and unless pressed,

usually follow each other in single file.  Captain Van Buren followed

the trail by Fort Ewell, and well down toward Corpus Christi, day and

night, until the Indians, exhausted and used up, halted, on an open

plain, unsaddled their horses, mounted bareback, and offered battle.

Their number was double that of Van Buren's detachment, but he

attacked them fearlessly, and in the fight was mortally wounded by an

arrow which entered his body in front, just above the sword belt, and

came through the belt behind.  The principal chief of the Indians was

killed, and the rest fled.  Captain Van Buren's men carried him to

Corpus Christi, where in a few days he died.



After our removal to La Pendencia a similar pursuit of savages

occurred, but with more fortunate results.  Colonel John H. King, now

on the retired list, then a captain in the First Infantry, came to

our camp in pursuit of a marauding band of hostile Indians, and I was

enabled to put him also on the trail.  He soon overtook them, and

killing two without loss to himself, the band dispersed like a flock

of quail and left him nothing to follow.  He returned to our camp

shortly after, and the few friendly Indian scouts he had with him

held a grand pow-wow and dance over the scalps of the fallen braves.



Around La Pendencia, as at La Pena, the country abounded in deer,

antelope, wild turkeys, and quail, and we killed enough to supply

abundantly the whole command with the meat portion of the ration.

Some mornings Frankman and I would bring in as many as seven deer,

and our hunting expeditions made me so familiar with the region

between our camp arid Fort Duncan, the headquarters of the regiment,

that I was soon enabled to suggest a more direct route of

communication than the circuitous one then traversed, and in a short

time it was established.



Up to this time I had been on detached duty, but soon my own company

was ordered into the field to occupy a position on Turkey Creek,

about ten or twelve miles west of the Nueces River, on the road from

San Antonio to Fort Duncan, and I was required to join the company.

Here constant work and scouting were necessary, as our camp was

specially located with reference to protecting from Indian raids the

road running from San Antonio to Fort Duncan, and on to the interior

of Mexico.  In those days this road was the great line of travel, and

Mexican caravans were frequently passing over it, to and fro, in such

a disorganized condition as often to invite attack from marauding

Comanches and Lipans.  Our time, therefore, was incessantly occupied

in scouting, but our labors were much lightened because they were

directed with intelligence and justice by Captain McLean, whose

agreeable manners and upright methods are still so impressed on my

memory that to this day I look back upon my service with "D" Company

of the First Infantry as among those events which I remember with

most pleasure.



In this manner my first summer of active field duty passed rapidly

away, and in the fall my company returned to Fort Duncan to go into

winter quarters.  These quarters, when constructed, consisted of "A"

tents pitched under a shed improvised by the company.  With only

these accommodations I at first lived around as best I could until

the command was quartered, and then, requesting a detail of wagons

from the quartermaster, I went out some thirty miles to get poles to

build a more comfortable habitation for myself.  In a few days enough

poles for the construction of a modest residence were secured and

brought in, and then the building of my house began.  First, the

poles were cut the proper length, planted in a trench around four

sides of a square of very small proportions, and secured at the top

by string-pieces stretched from one angle to another, in which

half-notches hack been made at proper intervals to receive the

uprights.  The poles were then made rigid by strips nailed on

half-way to the ground, giving the sides of the structure firmness,

but the interstices were large and frequent; still, with the aid of

some old condemned paulins obtained from the quartermaster, the walls

were covered and the necessity for chinking obviated.  This method of

covering the holes in the side walls also possessed the advantage of

permitting some little light to penetrate to the interior of the

house, and avoided the necessity of constructing a window, for which,

by the way, no glass could have been obtained.  Next a good large

fire-place and chimney were built in one corner by means of stones

and mud, and then the roof was put on--a thatched one of prairie

grass.  The floor was dirt compactly tamped.



My furniture was very primitive: a chair or two, with about the same

number of camp stools, a cot, and a rickety old bureau that I

obtained in some way not now remembered.  My washstand consisted of a

board about three feet long, resting on legs formed by driving sticks

into the ground until they held it at about the proper height from

the floor.  This washstand was the most expensive piece of furniture

I owned, the board having cost me three dollars, and even then I

obtained it as a favor, for lumber on the Rio Grande was so scarce in

those days that to possess even the smallest quantity was to indulge

in great luxury.  Indeed, about all that reached the post was what

came in the shape of bacon boxes, and the boards from these were

reserved for coffins in which to bury our dead.



In this rude habitation I spent a happy winter, and was more

comfortably off than many of the officers, who had built none, but

lived in tents and took the chances of "Northers." During this period

our food was principally the soldier's ration: flour, pickled pork,

nasty bacon--cured in the dust of ground charcoal--and fresh beef, of

which we had a plentiful supply, supplemented with game of various

kinds.  The sugar, coffee, and smaller parts of the ration were good,

but we had no vegetables, and the few jars of preserves and some few

vegetables kept by the sutler were too expensive to be indulged in.

So during all the period I lived at Fort Duncan and its sub-camps,

nearly sixteen months, fresh vegetables were practically

unobtainable.  To prevent scurvy we used the juice of the maguey

plant, called pulque, and to obtain a supply of this anti-scorbutic I

was often detailed to march the company out about forty miles, cut

the plant, load up two or three wagons with the stalks, and carry

them to camp.  Here the juice was extracted by a rude press, and put

in bottles until it fermented and became worse in odor than

sulphureted hydrogen.  At reveille roll-call every morning this

fermented liquor was dealt out to the company, and as it was my duty,

in my capacity of subaltern, to attend these roll-calls and see that

the men took their ration of pulque, I always began the duty by

drinking a cup of the repulsive stuff myself.  Though hard to

swallow, its well-known specific qualities in the prevention and cure

of scurvy were familiar to all, so every man in the command gulped

down his share notwithstanding its vile taste and odor.



Considering our isolation, the winter passed very pleasantly to us

all.  The post was a large one, its officers congenial, and we had

many enjoyable occasions.  Dances, races, and horseback riding filled

in much of the time, and occasional raids from Indians furnished more

serious occupation in the way of a scout now and then.  The proximity

of the Indians at times rendered the surrounding country somewhat

dangerous for individuals or small parties at a distance from the

fort; but few thought the savages would come near, so many risks were

doubtless run by various officers, who carried the familiar

six-shooter as their only weapon while out horseback riding, until

suddenly we were awakened to the dangers we had been incurring.



About mid-winter a party of hostile Lipans made a swoop around and

skirting the garrison, killing a herder--a discharged drummer-boy--in

sight of the flag-staff.  Of course great excitement followed.

Captain J. G. Walker, of the Mounted Rifles, immediately started with

his company in pursuit of the Indians, and I was directed to

accompany the command.  Not far away we found the body of the boy

filled with arrows, and near him the body of a fine looking young

Indian, whom the lad had undoubtedly killed before he was himself

overpowered.  We were not a great distance behind the Indians when

the boy's body was discovered, and having good trailers we gained on

them rapidly, with the prospect of overhauling them, but as soon as

they found we were getting near they headed for the Rio Grande, made

the crossing to the opposite bank, and were in Mexico before we could

overtake them.  When on the other side of the boundary they grew very

brave, daring us to come over to fight them, well aware all the time

that the international line prevented us from continuing the pursuit.

So we had to return to the post without reward for our exertion

except the consciousness of having made the best effort we could to

catch the murderers.  That night, in company with Lieutenant Thomas

G. Williams, I crossed over the river to the Mexican village of

Piedras Negras, and on going to a house where a large baille, or

dance, was going on we found among those present two of the Indians

we had been chasing.  As soon as they saw us they strung their bows

for a fight, and we drew our sixshooters, but the Mexicans quickly

closed in around the Indians and forced them out of the house--or

rude jackal--where the "ball" was being held, and they escaped.  We

learned later something about the nature of the fight the drummer had

made, and that his death had cost them dear, for, in addition to the

Indian killed and lying by his side, he had mortally wounded another

and seriously wounded a third, with the three shots that he had

fired.



At this period I took up the notion of making a study of ornithology,

incited to it possibly by the great number of bright-colored birds

that made their winter homes along the Rio Grande, and I spent many a

leisure hour in catching specimens by means of stick traps, with

which I found little difficulty in securing almost every variety of

the feathered tribes.  I made my traps by placing four sticks of a

length suited to the size desired so as to form a square, and

building up on them in log-cabin fashion until the structure came

almost to a point by contraction of the corners.  Then the sticks .

were made secure, the trap placed at some secluded spot, and from the

centre to the outside a trench was dug in the ground, and thinly

covered when a depth had been obtained that would leave an aperture

sufficiently large to admit the class of birds desired.  Along this

trench seeds and other food were scattered, which the birds soon

discovered, and of course began to eat, unsuspectingly following the

tempting bait through the gallery till they emerged from its farther

end in the centre of the trap, where they contentedly fed till the

food was all gone.  Then the fact of imprisonment first presented

itself, and they vainly endeavored to escape through the interstices

of the cage, never once guided by their instinct to return to liberty

through the route by which they had entered.



Among the different kinds of birds captured in this way, mocking-

birds, blue-birds, robins, meadow larks, quail, and plover were the

most numerous.  They seemed to have more voracious appetites than

other varieties, or else they were more unwary, and consequently more

easily caught.  A change of station, however, put an end to my

ornithological plans, and activities of other kinds prevented me from

resuming them in after life.



There were quite a number of young officers at the post during the

winter, and as our relations with the Mexican commandant at Piedras

Negras were most amicable, we were often invited to dances at his

house.  He and his hospitable wife and daughter drummed up the female

portion of the elite of Piedras Negras and provided the house, which

was the official as well as the personal residence of the commandant,

while we--the young officers--furnished the music and such

sweetmeats, candies, &c., for the baille as the country would afford.



We generally danced in a long hall on a hard dirt floor.  The girls

sat on one side of the hall, chaperoned by their mothers or some old

duennas, and the men on the other.  When the music struck up each man

asked the lady whom his eyes had already selected to dance with him,

and it was not etiquette for her to refuse--no engagements being

allowed before the music began.  When the dance, which was generally

a long waltz, was over, he seated his partner, and then went to a

little counter at the end of the room and bought his dulcinea a plate

of the candies and sweetmeats provided.  Sometimes she accepted them,

but most generally pointed to her duenna or chaperon behind, who held

up her apron and caught the refreshments as they were slid into it

from the plate.  The greatest decorum was maintained at these dances,

primitively as they were conducted; and in a region so completely cut

off from the world, their influence was undoubtedly beneficial to a

considerable degree in softening the rough edges in a half-breed

population.



The inhabitants of this frontier of Mexico were strongly marked with

Indian characteristics, particularly with those of the Comanche type,

and as the wild Indian blood predominated, few of the physical traits

of the Spaniard remained among them, and outlawry was common.  The

Spanish conquerors had left on the northern border only their

graceful manners and their humility before the cross.  The sign of

Christianity was prominently placed at all important points on roads

or trails, and especially where any one had been killed; and as the

Comanche Indians, strong and warlike, had devastated northeastern

Mexico in past years, all along the border, on both sides of the Rio

Grande, the murderous effects of their raids were evidenced by

numberless crosses.  For more than a century forays had been made on

the settlements and towns by these bloodthirsty savages, and, the

Mexican Government being too weak to afford protection, property was

destroyed, the women and children carried off or ravished, and the

men compelled to look on in an agony of helplessness till relieved by

death.  During all this time, however, the forms and ceremonials of

religion, and the polite manners received from the Spaniards, were

retained, and reverence for the emblems of Christianity was always

uppermost in the mind of even the most ignorant.









CHAPTER III.



ORDERED TO FORT READING, CAL.--A DANGEROUS UNDERTAKING--A RESCUED

SOLDIER--DISCOVERING INDIANS--PRIMITIVE FISHING--A DESERTED

VILLAGE--CAMPING OPPOSITE FORT VANCOUVER.



In November, 1854, I received my promotion to a second lieutenancy in

the Fourth Infantry, which was stationed in California and Oregon. In

order to join my company at Fort Reading, California, I had to go to

New York as a starting point, and on arrival there, was placed on

duty, in May, 1855, in command of a detachment of recruits at

Bedloe's Island, intended for assignment to the regiments on the

Pacific coast.  I think there were on the island (now occupied by the

statue of Liberty Enlightening the World) about three hundred

recruits.  For a time I was the only officer with them, but shortly

before we started for California, Lieutenant Francis H. Bates, of the

Fourth Infantry, was placed in command. We embarked for the Pacific

coast in July, 1855, and made the journey without incident via the

Isthmus of Panama, in due time landing our men at Benecia Barracks,

above San Francisco.



>From this point I proceeded to join my company at Fort Reading, and

on reaching that post, found orders directing me to relieve

Lieutenant John B. Hood--afterward well known as a distinguished

general in the Confederate service.  Lieutenant Hood was in command

of the personal mounted escort of Lieutenant R. S. Williamson, who

was charged with the duty of making such explorations and surveys as

would determine the practicability of connecting, by railroad, the

Sacramento Valley in California with the Columbia River in Oregon

Territory, either through the Willamette Valley, or (if this route

should prove to be impracticable) by the valley of the Des Chutes

River near the foot-slopes of the Cascade chain.  The survey was

being made in accordance with an act of Congress, which provided both

for ascertaining the must practicable and economical route for a

railroad between the Mississippi River and the Pacific Ocean, and for

military and geographical surveys west of the Mississippi River.



Fort Reading was the starting-point for this exploring expedition,

and there I arrived some four or five days after the party under

Lieutenant Williamson had begun its march.  His personal escort

numbered about sixty mounted men, made up of detachments from

companies of the First Dragoons, under command of Lieutenant Hood,

together with about one hundred men belonging to the Fourth Infantry

arid Third Artillery, commanded by Lieutenant Horatio Gates Gibson,

the present colonel of the Third United States Artillery.  Lieutenant

George Crook--now major-general--was the quartermaster and commissary

of subsistence of the expedition.



The commanding officer at Fort Reading seemed reluctant to let me go

on to relieve Lieutenant Hood, as the country to be passed over was

infested by the Pit River Indians, known to be hostile to white

people and especially to small parties.  I was very anxious to

proceed, however, and willing to take the chances; so, consent being

finally obtained, I started with a corporal and two mounted men,

through a wild and uninhabited region, to overtake if possible

Lieutenant Williamson.  Being on horseback, and unencumbered by

luggage of any kind except blankets and a little hard bread, coffee

and smoking-tobacco, which were all carried on our riding animals, we

were sanguine of succeeding, for we traversed in one day fully the

distance made in three by Lieutenant Williamson's party on foot.



The first day we reached the base of Lassan's Butte, where I

determined to spend the night near an isolated cabin, or dugout, that

had been recently constructed by a hardy pioneer.  The wind was

blowing a disagreeable gale, which had begun early in the day.  This

made it desirable to locate our camp under the best cover we could

find, and I spent some little time in looking about for a

satisfactory place, but nothing better offered than a large fallen

tree, which lay in such a direction that by encamping on its lee side

we would be protected from the fury of the storm.  This spot was

therefore fixed upon, and preparation made for spending the night as

comfortably as the circumstances would permit.



After we had unsaddled I visited the cabin to inquire in regard to

the country ahead, and there found at first only a soldier of

Williamson's party; later the proprietor of the ranch appeared.  The

soldier had been left behind by the surveying party on account of

illness, with instructions to make his way back to Fort Reading as

best he could when he recovered.  His condition having greatly

improved, however, since he had been left, he now begged me in

beseeching terms to take him along with my party, which I finally

consented to do, provided that if he became unable to keep up with

me, and I should be obliged to abandon him, the responsibility would

be his, not mine.  This increased my number to five, and was quite a

reinforcement should we run across any hostile Indians; but it was

also certain to prove an embarrassment should the man again fall ill.



During the night, notwithstanding the continuance of the storm, I had

a very sound and refreshing sleep behind the protecting log where we

made our camp, and at daylight next morning we resumed our journey,

fortified by a breakfast of coffee and hard bread.  I skirted around

the base of Lassan's Butte, thence down Hat Creek, all the time

following the trail made by Lieutenant Williamson's party.  About

noon the soldier I had picked up at my first camp gave out, and could

go no farther.  As stipulated when I consented to take him along, I

had the right to abandon him, but when it came to the test I could

not make up my mind to do it.  Finding a good place not far off the

trail, one of my men volunteered to remain with him until he died;

and we left them there, with a liberal supply of hard bread and

coffee, believing that we would never again see the invalid.  My

reinforcement was already gone, and another man with it.



With my diminished party I resumed the trail and followed it until

about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, when we heard the sound of voices,

and the corporal, thinking we were approaching Lieutenant

Williamson's party, was so overjoyed in anticipation of the junction,

that he wanted to fire his musket as an expression of his delight.

This I prevented his doing, however, and we continued cautiously and

slowly on to develop the source of the sounds in front.  We had not

gone far before I discovered that the noise came from a band of Pit

River Indians, who had struck the trail of the surveying expedition,

and were following it up, doubtless with evil intent.  Dismounting

from my horse I counted the moccasin tracks to ascertain the number

of Indians, discovered it to be about thirty, and then followed on

behind them cautiously, but with little difficulty, as appearances of

speed on their part indicated that they wished to overtake Lieutenant

Williamson's party, which made them less on the lookout than usual

for any possible pursuers.  After following the trail until nearly

sundown, I considered it prudent to stop for the night, and drew off

some little distance, where, concealed in a dense growth of timber,

we made our camp.



As I had with me now only two men, I felt somewhat nervous, so I

allowed no fires to be built, and in consequence our supper consisted

of hard bread only.  I passed an anxious night, but beyond our own

solicitude there was nothing to disturb us, the Indians being too

much interested in overtaking the party in front to seek for victims

in the rear, After a hard-bread breakfast we started again on the

trail, and had proceeded but a short distance when, hearing the

voices of the Indians, we at once slackened our speed so as not to

overtake them.



Most of the trail on which we traveled during the morning ran over an

exceedingly rough lava formation--a spur of the lava beds often

described during the Modoc war of 1873 so hard and flinty that

Williamson's large command made little impression on its surface,

leaving in fact, only indistinct traces of its line of march.  By

care and frequent examinations we managed to follow his route through

without much delay, or discovery by the Indians, and about noon,

owing to the termination of the lava formation, we descended into the

valley of Hat Greek, a little below where it emerges from the second

canon and above its confluence with Pit River.  As soon as we reached

the fertile soil of the valley, we found Williamson's trail well

defined, deeply impressed in the soft loam, and coursing through

wild-flowers and luxuriant grass which carpeted the ground on every

hand.



When we struck this delightful locality we traveled with considerable

speed, and after passing over hill and vale for some distance, the

trail becoming more and more distinct all the time, I suddenly saw in

front of me the Pit River Indians.



This caused a halt, and having hurriedly re-capped our guns and

six-shooters, thus preparing for the worst, I took a look at the band

through my field-glass.  They were a half-mile or more in our front

and numbered about thirty individuals, armed with bows and arrows

only.  Observing us they made friendly demonstrations, but I had not

implicit faith in a Pit River Indian at that period of the settlement

of our country, and especially in that wild locality, so after a

"council of war" with the corporal and man, I concluded to advance to

a point about two hundred yards distant from the party, when, relying

on the speed of our horses rather than on the peaceable intentions of

the savages, I hoped to succeed in cutting around them and take the

trail beyond.  Being on foot they could not readily catch us, and

inasmuch as their arrows were good for a range of only about sixty

yards, I had no fear of any material damage on that score.



On reaching the place selected for our flank movement we made a dash

to the left of the trail, through the widest part of the valley, and

ran our horses swiftly by, but I noticed that the Indians did not

seem to be disturbed by the manoeuvre and soon realized that this

indifference was occasioned by the knowledge that we could not cross

Hat Creek, a deep stream with vertical banks, too broad to be leaped

by our horses.  We were obliged, therefore, to halt, and the Indians

again made demonstrations of friendship, some of them even getting

into the stream to show that they were at the ford.  Thus reassured,

we regained our confidence and boldly crossed the river in the midst

of them.  After we had gained the bluff on the other side of the

creek, I looked down into the valley of Pit River, and could plainly

see the camp of the surveying party.  Its proximity was the influence

which had doubtless caused the peaceable conduct of the Indians.

Probably the only thing that saved us was their ignorance of our

being in their rear, until we stumbled on them almost within sight of

the large party under Williamson.



The Pit River Indians were very hostile at that time, and for many

succeeding years their treachery and cruelty brought misfortune and

misery to the white settlers who ventured their lives in search of

home and fortune in the wild and isolated section over which these

savages roamed.  Not long after Williamson's party passed through

their country, the Government was compelled to send into it a

considerable force for the purpose of keeping them under control.

The outcome of this was a severe fight--resulting in the loss of a

good many lives--between the hostiles and a party of our troops under

Lieutenant George Crook.  It finally ended in the establishment of a

military post in the vicinity of the battle-ground, for the permanent

occupation of the country.



A great load was lifted from my heart when I found myself so near

Williamson's camp, which I joined August 4, 1855, receiving a warm

welcome from the officers.  During the afternoon I relieved

Lieutenant Hood of the command of the personal escort, and he was

ordered to return, with twelve of the mounted men, over the trail I

had followed.  I pointed out to him on the map the spot where he

would find the two men left on the roadside, and he was directed to

take them into Fort Reading.  They were found without difficulty, and

carried in to the post.  The sick man--Duryea--whom I had expected

never to see again, afterward became the hospital steward at Fort

Yamhill, Oregon, when I was stationed there.



The Indians that I had passed at the ford came to the bluff above the

camp, and arranging themselves in a squatting posture, looked down

upon Williamson's party with longing eyes, in expectation of a feast.

They were a pitiable lot, almost naked, hungry and cadaverous.

Indians are always hungry, but these poor creatures were particularly

so, as their usual supply of food had grown very scarce from one

cause and another.



In prosperity they mainly subsisted on fish, or game killed with the

bow and arrow.  When these sources failed they lived on grasshoppers,

and at this season the grasshopper was their principal food.  In

former years salmon were very abundant in the streams of the

Sacramento Valley, and every fall they took great quantities of these

fish and dried them for winter use, but alluvial mining had of late

years defiled the water of the different streams and driven the fish

out.  On this account the usual supply of salmon was very limited.

They got some trout high up on the rivers, above the sluices and

rockers of the miners, but this was a precarious source from which to

derive food, as their means of taking the trout were very primitive.

They had neither hooks nor lines, but depended entirely on a

contrivance made from long, slender branches of willow, which grew on

the banks of most of the streams.  One of these branches would be

cut, and after sharpening the butt-end to a point, split a certain

distance, and by a wedge the prongs divided sufficiently to admit a

fish between.  The Indian fisherman would then slyly put the forked

end in the water over his intended victim, and with a quick dart

firmly wedge him between the prongs.  When secured there, the work of

landing him took but a moment.  When trout were plentiful this

primitive mode of taking them was quite successful, and I have often

known hundreds of pounds to be caught in this way, but when they were

scarce and suspicious the rude method was not rewarded with good

results.



The band looking down on us evidently had not had much fish or game

to eat for some time, so when they had made Williamson understand

that they were suffering for food he permitted them to come into

camp, and furnished them with a supply, which they greedily swallowed

as fast as it was placed at their service, regardless of possible

indigestion.  When they had eaten all they could hold, their

enjoyment was made complete by the soldiers, who gave them a quantity

of strong plug tobacco.  This they smoked incessantly, inhaling all

the smoke, so that none of the effect should be lost.  When we

abandoned this camp the next day, the miserable wretches remained in

it and collected the offal about the cooks' fires to feast still

more, piecing out the meal, no doubt, with their staple article of

food--grasshoppers.



On the morning of August 5 Lieutenant Hood started back to Fort

Reading, and Lieutenant Williamson resumed his march for the Columbia

River.  Our course was up Pit River, by the lower and upper canons,

then across to the Klamath Lakes, then east, along their edge to the

upper lake.  At the middle Klamath Lake, just after crossing Lost

River and the Natural Bridge, we met a small party of citizens from

Jacksonville, Oregon, looking for hostile Indians who had committed

some depredations in their neighborhood.  From them we learned that

the Rogue River Indians in southern Oregon were on the war-path, and

that as the "regular troops up there were of no account, the citizens

had taken matters in hand, and intended cleaning up the hostiles."

They swaggered about our camp, bragged a good deal, cursed the

Indians loudly, and soundly abused the Government for not giving them

better protection.  It struck me, however, that they had not worked

very hard to find the hostiles; indeed, it could plainly be seen that

their expedition was a town-meeting sort of affair, and that anxiety

to get safe home was uppermost in their thoughts.  The enthusiasm

with which they started had all oozed out, and that night they

marched back to Jacksonville.  The next day, at the head of the lake,

we came across an Indian village, and I have often wondered since

what would have been the course pursued by these valiant warriors

from Jacksonville had they gone far enough to get into its vicinity.



When we reached the village the tepees--made of grass--were all

standing, the fires burning and pots boiling--the pots filled with

camas and tula roots--but not an Indian was to be seen.  Williamson

directed that nothing in the village should be disturbed; so guards

were placed over it to carry out his instructions and we went into

camp just a little beyond.  We had scarcely established ourselves

when a very old Indian rose up from the high grass some distance off,

and with peaceable signs approached our camp, evidently for the

purpose of learning whether or not our intentions were hostile.

Williamson told him we were friendly; that we had passed through his

village without molesting it, that we had put a guard there to secure

the property his people had abandoned in their fright, and that they

might come back in safety.  The old man searchingly eyed everything

around for some little time, and gaining confidence from the

peaceable appearance of the men, who were engaged in putting up the

tents and preparing their evening meal, he concluded to accept our

professions of friendship, and bring his people in.  Going out about

half a mile from the village he gave a peculiar yell, at which

between three and four hundred Indians arose simultaneously from the

ground, and in answer to his signal came out of the tall grass like a

swarm of locusts and soon overran our camp in search of food, for

like all Indians they were hungry.  They too, proved to be Pit

Rivers, and were not less repulsive than those of their tribe we had

met before.  They were aware of the hostilities going on between the

Rogue Rivers and the whites, but claimed that they had not taken any

part in them.  I question if they had, but had our party been small,

I fear we should have been received at their village in a very

different manner.



>From the upper Klamath Lake we marched over the divide and down the

valley of the Des Chutes River to a point opposite the mountains

called the Three Sisters.  Here, on September 23, the party divided,

Williamson and I crossing through the crater of the Three Sisters and

along the western slope of the Cascade Range, until we struck the

trail on McKenzie River, which led us into the Willamette Valley not

far from Eugene City.  We then marched down the Willamette Valley to

Portland, Oregon, where we arrived October 9, 1855



The infantry portion of the command, escorting Lieutenant Henry L.

Abbot, followed farther down the Des Chutes River, to a point

opposite Mount Hood, from which it came into the Willamette Valley

and then marched to Portland.  At Portland we all united, and moving

across the point between the Willamette and Columbia rivers, encamped

opposite Fort Vancouver, on the south bank of the latter stream, on

the farm of an old settler named Switzler, who had located there many

years before.









CHAPTER IV.



"OLD RED"--SKILLFUL SHOOTING--YAKIMA--WAR--A LUDICROUS MISTAKE--

"CUT-MOUTH JOHN'S" ENCOUNTER--FATHER PANDOZA'S MISSION--A SNOW-STORM-

-FAILURE OF THE EXPEDITION.



Our camp on the Columbia, near Fort Vancouver, was beautifully

situated on a grassy sward close to the great river; and--as little

duty was required of us after so long a journey, amusement of one

kind or another, and an interchange of visits with the officers at

the post, filled in the time acceptably.  We had in camp an old

mountaineer guide who had accompanied us on the recent march, and who

had received the sobriquet of "Old Red," on account of the shocky and

tangled mass of red hair and beard, which covered his head and face

so completely that only his eyes could be seen.  His eccentricities

constantly supplied us with a variety of amusements.  Among the

pastimes he indulged in was one which exhibited his skill with the

rifle, and at the same time protected the camp from the intrusions

and ravages of a drove of razor-backed hogs which belonged to Mr.

Switzler.  These hogs were frequent visitors, and very destructive to

our grassy sward, rooting it up in front of our tents and all about

us; in pursuit of bulbous roots and offal from the camp.  Old Red

conceived the idea that it would be well to disable the pigs by

shooting off the tips of their snouts, and he proceeded to put his

conception into execution, and continued it daily whenever the hogs

made their appearance.  Of course their owner made a row about it;

but when Old Red daily settled for his fun by paying liberally with

gold-dust from some small bottles of the precious metal in his

possession, Switzler readily became contented, and I think even

encouraged the exhibitions--of skill.



It was at this period (October, 1855) that the Yakima Indian war

broke out, and I was detached from duty with the exploring party and

required by Major Gabriel J. Rains, then commanding the district, to

join an expedition against the Yakimas.  They had some time before

killed their agent, and in consequence a force under Major Granville

O. Haller had been sent out from the Dalles of the Columbia to

chastise them; but the expedition had not been successful; in fact,

it had been driven back, losing a number of men and two mountain

howitzers.



The object of the second expedition was to retrieve this disaster.

The force was composed of a small body of regular troops, and a

regiment of Oregon mounted volunteers under command of Colonel James

W. Nesmith--subsequently for several years United States Senator from

Oregon.  The whole force was under the command of Major Rains, Fourth

Infantry, who, in order that he might rank Nesmith, by some

hocus-pocus had been made a brigadier-general, under an appointment

from the Governor of Washington Territory.



We started from the Dalles October 30, under conditions that were not

conducive to success.  The season was late for operations; and worse

still, the command was not in accord with the commanding officer,

because of general belief in his incompetency, and on account of the

fictitious rank he assumed.  On the second day out I struck a small

body of Indians with my detachment of dragoons, but was unable to do

them any particular injury beyond getting possession of a large

quantity of their winter food, which their hurried departure

compelled them to abandon.  This food consisted principally of dried

salmon-pulverized and packed in sacks made of grass-dried

huckleberries, and dried camas; the latter a bulbous root about the

size of a small onion, which, when roasted and ground, is made into

bread by the Indians and has a taste somewhat like cooked chestnuts.



Our objective point was Father Pandoza's Mission, in the Yakima

Valley, which could be reached by two different routes, and though

celerity of movement was essential, our commanding officer

"strategically" adopted the longer route, and thus the Indians had

ample opportunity to get away with their horses, cattle, women and

children, and camp property.



After the encounter which I just now referred to, the command, which

had halted to learn the results of my chase, resumed its march to and

through the Klikitat canon, and into the lower Yakima Valley, in the

direction of the Yakima River.  I had charge at the head of the

column as it passed through the canon, and on entering the valley

beyond, saw in the distance five or six Indian scouts, whom I pressed

very closely, until after a run of several miles they escaped across

the Yakima River.



The soil in the valley was light and dry, and the movement of animals

over it raised great clouds of dust, that rendered it very difficult

to distinguish friend from foe; and as I was now separated from the

main column a considerable distance, I deemed it prudent to call a

halt until we could discover the direction taken by the principal

body of the Indians.  We soon learned that they had gone up the

valley, and looking that way, we discovered a column of alkali dust

approaching us, about a mile distant, interposing between my little

detachment and the point where I knew General Rains intended to

encamp for the night.  After hastily consulting with Lieutenant

Edward H. Day, of the Third United States Artillery, who was with me,

we both concluded that the dust was caused by a body of the enemy

which had slipped in between us and our main force.  There seemed no

alternative left us but to get back to our friends by charging

through these Indians; and as their cloud of dust was much larger

than ours, this appeared a desperate chance.  Preparations to charge

were begun, however, but, much to our surprise, before they were

completed the approaching party halted for a moment and then

commenced to retreat.  This calmed the throbbing of our hearts, and

with a wild cheer we started in a hot pursuit, that continued for

about two miles, when to our great relief we discovered that we were

driving into Rains's camp a squadron of Nesmith's battalion of Oregon

volunteers that we had mistaken for Indians, and who in turn believed

us to be the enemy.  When camp was reached, we all indulged in a

hearty laugh ovor the affair, and at the fright each party had given

the other.  The explanations which ensued proved that the squadron of

volunteers had separated from the column at the same time that I had

when we debouched from the canon, and had pursued an intermediate

trail through the hills, which brought it into the valley of the

Yakima at a point higher up the river than where I had struck it.



Next day we resumed our march up the valley, parallel to the Yakima.

About 1 o'clock we saw a large body of Indians on the opposite side

of the river, and the general commanding made up his mind to cross

and attack them.  The stream was cold, deep, and swift, still I

succeeded in passing my dragoons over safely, but had hardly got them

well on the opposite bank when the Indians swooped down upon us.

Dismounting my men, we received the savages with a heavy fire, which

brought them to a halt with some damage and more or less confusion.



General Rains now became very much excited and alarmed about me, and

endeavored to ford the swift river with his infantry and artillery,

but soon had to abandon the attempt, as three or four of the poor

fellows were swept off their feet and drowned.  Meantime Nesmith came

up with his mounted force, crossed over, and joined me.



The Indians now fell back to a high ridge, on the crest of which they

marched and countermarched, threatening to charge down its face.

Most of them were naked, and as their persons were painted in gaudy

colors and decorated with strips of red flannel, red blankets and gay

war-bonnets, their appearance presented a scene of picturesque

barbarism, fascinating but repulsive.  As they numbered about six

hundred, the chances of whipping them did not seem overwhelmingly in

our favor, yet Nesmith and I concluded we would give them a little

fight, provided we could engage them without going beyond the ridge.

But all our efforts were in vain, for as we advanced they retreated,

and as we drew back they reappeared and renewed their parade and

noisy demonstrations, all the time beating their drums and yelling

lustily.  They could not be tempted into a fight where we desired it,

however, and as we felt unequal to any pursuit beyond the ridge

without the assistance of the infantry and artillery, we re-crossed

the river and encamped with Rains.  It soon became apparent that the

noisy demonstrations of the Indians were intended only as a blind to

cover the escape of their women and children to a place of safety in

the mountains.



Next morning we took up our march without crossing the river; and as

our route would lead us by the point on the opposite bank where the

Indians had made their picturesque display the day before, they at an

early hour came over to our side, and rapidly moved ahead of us to

some distant hills, leaving in our pathway some of the more

venturesome young braves, who attempted , to retard our advance by

opening fire at long range from favorable places where they lay

concealed.  This fire did us little harm, but it had the effect of

making our progress so slow that the patience of every one but

General Rains was well-nigh exhausted.



About 2 o'clock in the afternoon we arrived well up near the base of

the range of hills, and though it was growing late we still had time

to accomplish something, but our commanding officer decided that it

was best to go into camp, and make a systematic attack next morning.

I proposed that he let me charge with my dragoons through the narrow

canon where the river broke through the range, while the infantry

should charge up the hill and drive the enemy from the top down on

the other side.  In this way I thought we might possibly catch some

of the fugitives, but his extreme caution led him to refuse the

suggestion, so we pitched our tents out of range of their desultory

fire, but near enough to observe plainly their menacing and

tantalizing exhibitions of contempt.



In addition to firing occasionally, they called us all sorts of bad

names, made indecent gestures, and aggravated us, so that between 3

and 4 o'clock in the afternoon, by an inexplicable concert of action,

and with a serious breach of discipline, a large number of the men

and many of the officers broke en masse from the camp with loud yells

and charged the offending savages.  As soon as this mob got within

musket-shot they opened fire on the Indians, who ran down the other

face of the ridge without making the slightest resistance.  The hill

was readily taken by this unmilitary proceeding, and no one was hurt

on either side, but as Rains would not permit it to be held, a large

bonfire was lighted on the crest in celebration of the victory, and

then all hands marched back to camp, where they had no sooner arrived

and got settled down than the Indians returned to the summit of the

ridge, seemingly to enjoy the fire that had been so generously built

for their benefit, and with renewed taunts and gestures continued to

insult us.



Our camp that night was strongly picketed, and when we awoke in the

morning the Indians still occupied their position on the hill.  At

daylight we advanced against them, two or three companies of infantry

moving forward to drive them from the summit, while our main column

passed through the canon into the upper Yakima Valley led by my

dragoons, who were not allowed to charge into the gorge, as the

celerity of such a movement might cause the tactical combination to

fail.



As we passed slowly and cautiously through the canon the Indians ran

rapidly away, and when we reached the farther end they had entirely

disappeared from our front, except one old fellow, whose lame horse

prevented him keeping up with the main body.  This presented an


opportunity for gaining results which all thought should not be lost,

so our guide, an Indian named "Cut-mouth John," seized upon it, and

giving hot chase, soon, overtook the poor creature, whom he speedily

killed without much danger to himself, for the fugitive was armed

with only an old Hudson's Bay flint-lock horse-pistol which could not

be discharged.



"Cut-mouth John's" engagement began and ended all the fighting that

took place on this occasion, and much disappointment and discontent

followed, Nesmith's mounted force and my dragoons being particularly

disgusted because they had not been "given a chance."  During the

remainder of the day we cautiously followed the retreating foe, and

late in the evening went into camp a short distance from Father

Pandoza's Mission; where we were to await a small column of troops

under command of Captain Maurice Maloney, of the Fourth Infantry,

that was to join us from Steilicom by way of the Natchez Pass, and

from which no tidings had as yet been received.



Next morning the first thing I saw when I put my head out from my

blankets was "Cut-mouth John," already mounted and parading himself

through the camp.  The scalp of the Indian he had despatched the day

before was tied to the cross-bar of his bridle bit, the hair dangling

almost to the ground, and John was decked out in the sacred vestments

of Father Pandoza, having, long before any one was stiring in camp,

ransacked the log-cabin at the Mission in which the good man had

lived.  John was at all times a most repulsive looking individual, a

part of his mouth having been shot away in a fight with Indians near

Walla Walla some years before, in which a Methodist missionary had

been killed; but his revolting personal appearance was now worse than

ever, and the sacrilegious use of Father Pandoza's vestments, coupled

with the ghastly scalp that hung from his bridle, so turned opinion

against him that he was soon captured, dismounted, and his parade

brought to an abrupt close, and I doubt whether he ever after quite

reinstated himself in the good graces of the command.



In the course of the day nearly all the men visited the Mission, but

as it had been plundered by the Indians at the outbreak of

hostilities, when Father Pandoza was carried off, little of value was

left about it except a considerable herd of pigs, which the father

with great difficulty had succeeded in accumulating from a very small

beginning.  The pigs had not been disturbed by the Indians, but the

straggling troops soon disposed of them, and then turned their

attention to the cabbages and potatoes in the garden, with the

intention, no doubt, of dining that day on fresh pork and fresh

vegetables instead of on salt junk and hard bread, which formed their

regular diet on the march.  In digging up the potatoes some one

discovered half a keg of powder, which had been buried in the garden

by the good father to prevent the hostile Indians from getting it to

use against the whites.  As soon as this was unearthed wild

excitement ensued, and a cry arose that Father Pandoza was the person

who furnished powder to the Indians; that here was the proof; that at

last the mysterious means by which the Indians obtained ammunition

was explained--and a rush was made for the mission building. This was

a comfortable log-house of good size, built by the Indians for a

school and church, and attached to one end was the log-cabin

residence of the priest.  Its destruction was a matter of but a few

moments.  A large heap of dry wood was quickly collected and piled in

the building, matches applied, and the whole Mission, including the

priest's house, was soon enveloped in flames, and burned to the

ground before the officers in camp became aware of the disgraceful

plundering in which their men were engaged.



The commanding officer having received no news from Captain Maloney

during the day, Colonel Nesmith and I were ordered to go to his

rescue, as it was concluded that he had been surrounded by Indians in

the Natchez Pass.  We started early the next morning, the snow

falling slightly as we set out, and soon arrived at the eastern mouth

of the Natchez Pass.  On the way we noticed an abandoned Indian

village, which had evidently not been occupied for some time.  As we

proceeded the storm increased, and the snow-fall became deeper and

deeper, until finally our horses could not travel through it.  In

consequence we were compelled to give up further efforts to advance,

and obliged to turn back to the abandoned village, where we encamped

for the night.  Near night-fall the storm greatly increased, and our

bivouac became most uncomfortable; but spreading my blankets on the

snow and covering them with Indian matting, I turned in and slept

with that soundness and refreshment accorded by nature to one

exhausted by fatigue.  When I awoke in the morning I found myself

under about two feet of snow, from which I arose with difficulty, yet

grateful that it had kept me warm during the night.



After a cup of coffee and a little hard bread, it was decided we

should return to the main camp near the Mission, for we were now

confident that Maloney was delayed by the snow, and safe enough on

the other side of the mountains.  At all events he was beyond aid

from us, for the impassable snowdrifts could not be overcome with the

means in our possession.  It turned out that our suppositions as to

the cause of his delay were correct.  He had met with the same

difficulties that confronted us, and had been compelled to go into

camp.



Meanwhile valuable time had been lost, and the Indians, with their

families and stock, were well on their way to the Okenagan country, a

region into which we could not penetrate in the winter season.  No

other course was therefore left but to complete the dismal failure of

the expedition by returning home, and our commander readily gave the

order to march back to the Dalles by the "short" route over the

Yakima Mountains.



As the storm was still unabated, it was evident our march home would

be a most difficult one, and it was deemed advisable to start back at

once, lest we should be blocked up in the mountains by the snows for

a period beyond which our provisions would not last.  Relying on the

fact that the short route to the Dalles would lead us over the range

at its most depressed point, where it was hoped the depth of snow was

not yet so great as to make the route impassable, we started with

Colonel Nesmith's battalion in advance to break the road, followed by

my dragoons.  In the valley we made rapid progress, but when we

reached the mountain every step we took up its side showed the snow

to be growing deeper and deeper.  At last Nesmith reached the summit,

and there found a depth of about six feet of snow covering the

plateau in every direction, concealing all signs of the trail so

thoroughly that his guides became bewildered and took the wrong

divide.  The moment I arrived at the top my guide--Donald Mc Kay--who

knew perfectly the whole Yakima range, discovered Nesmith's mistake.

Word was sent to bring him back, but as he had already nearly crossed

the plateau, considerable delay occurred before he returned.  When he

arrived we began anew the work of breaking a road for the foot troops

behind us, my detachment now in advance.  The deep snow made our work

extremely laborious, exhausting men and horses almost to the point of

relinquishing the struggle, but our desperate situation required that

we should get down into the valley beyond, or run the chance of

perishing on the mountain in a storm which seemed unending.  About

midnight the column reached the valley, very tired and hungry, but

much elated over its escape.  We had spent a day of the most intense

anxiety, especially those who had had the responsibility of keeping

to the right trail, and been charged with the hard work of breaking

the road for the infantry and artillery through such a depth of snow.



Our main difficulties were now over, and in due time we reached the

Dalles, where almost everyone connected with the expedition voted it

a wretched failure; indeed, General Rains himself could not think

otherwise, but he scattered far and wide blame for the failure of his

combinations.  This, of course, led to criminations and

recriminations, which eventuated in charges of incompetency preferred

against him by Captain Edward O. C. Ord, of the Third Artillery.

Rains met the charges with counter-charges against Ord, whom he

accused of purloining Father Pandoza's shoes, when the soldiers in

their fury about the ammunition destroyed the Mission.  At the time

of its destruction a rumor of this nature was circulated through

camp, started by some wag, no doubt in jest; for Ord, who was

somewhat eccentric in his habits, and had started on the expedition

rather indifferently shod in carpet-slippers, here came out in a

brand-new pair of shoes.  Of course there was no real foundation for

such a report, but Rains was not above small things, as the bringing

of this petty accusation attests.  Neither party was ever tried, for

General John E. Wool the department commander, had not at command a

sufficient number of officers of appropriate rank to constitute a

court in the case of Rains, and the charges against Ord were very

properly ignored on account of their trifling character.



Shortly after the expedition returned to the Dalles, my detachment

was sent down to Fort Vancouver, and I remained at that post during

the winter of 1855-'56, till late in March.









CHAPTER V.



AN INDIAN CONFEDERATION--MASSACRE AT THE CASCADES OF THE COLUMBIA-

-PLAN TO RELIEVE THE BLOCKHOUSE--A HAZARDOUS FLANK MOVEMENT--A NEW

METHOD OF ESTABLISHING GUILT--EXECUTION OF THE INDIAN MURDERERS.



The failure of the Haller expedition from lack of a sufficient force,

and of the Rains expedition from the incompetency of its commander,

was a great mortification to the officers and men connected with

them, and, taken together, had a marked effect upon the Indian

situation in Oregon and Washington Territories at that particular

era.  Besides, it led to further complications and troubles, for it

had begun to dawn upon the Indians that the whites wanted to come in

and dispossess them of their lands and homes, and the failures of

Haller and Rains fostered the belief with the Indians that they could

successfully resist the pressure of civilization.



Acting under these influences, the Spokanes, Walla Wallas, Umatillas,

and Nez Perces cast their lot with the hostiles, and all the savage

inhabitants of the region east of the Cascade Range became involved

in a dispute as to whether the Indians or the Government should

possess certain sections of the country, which finally culminated in

the war of 1856.



Partly to meet the situation that was approaching, the Ninth Infantry

had been sent out from the Atlantic coast to Washington Territory,

and upon its arrival at Fort Vancouver encamped in front of the

officers' quarters, on the beautiful parade-ground of that post, and

set about preparing for the coming campaign.  The commander, Colonel

George Wright, who had been promoted to the colonelcy of the regiment

upon its organization the previous year, had seen much active duty

since his graduation over thirty years before, serving with credit in

the Florida and Mexican wars.  For the three years previous to his

assignment to the Ninth Infantry he had been stationed on the Pacific

coast, and the experience he had there acquired, added to his

excellent soldierly qualities, was of much benefit in the active

campaigns in which, during the following years, he was to

participate.  Subsequently his career was brought to an untimely

close when, nine years after this period, as he was returning to the

scene of his successes, he, in common with many others was drowned by

the wreck of the ill-fated steamer Brother Jonathan.  Colonel Wright

took command of the district in place of Rains, and had been at

Vancouver but a short time before he realized that it would be

necessary to fight the confederated tribes east of the Cascade Range

of mountains, in order to disabuse them of the idea that they were

sufficiently strong to cope with the power of the Government.  He

therefore at once set about the work of organizing and equipping his

troops for a start in the early spring against the hostile Indians,

intending to make the objective point of his expedition the heart of

the Spokane country on the Upper Columbia River, as the head and

front of the confederation was represented in the person of old

Cammiackan, chief of the Spokanes.



The regiment moved from Fort Vancouver by boat, March 25, 1856, and

landed at the small town called the Dalles, below the mouth of the

Des Chutes River at the eastern base of the Cascade Range, and just

above where the Columbia River enters those mountains.  This

rendezvous was to be the immediate point of departure, and all the

troops composing the expedition were concentrated there.



On the morning of March 26 the movement began, but the column had

only reached Five Mile Creek when the Yakimas, joined by many young

warriors-free lances from other tribes, made a sudden and unexpected

attack at the Cascades of the Columbia, midway between Vancouver and

the Dalles, killed several citizens, women and children, and took

possession of the Portage by besieging the settlers in their cabins

at the Upper Cascades, and those who sought shelter at the Middle

Cascades in the old military block-house, which had been built some

years before as a place of refuge under just such circumstances.

These points held out, and were not captured, but the landing at the

Lower Cascades fell completely into the hands of the savages.

Straggling settlers from the Lower Cascades made their way down to

Fort Vancouver, distant about thirty-six miles, which they reached

that night; and communicated the condition of affairs.  As the

necessity for early relief to the settlers and the re-establishment

of communication with the Dalles were apparent, all the force that

could be spared was ordered out, and in consequence I immediately

received directions to go with my detachment of dragoons, numbering

about forty effective men, to the relief of the middle blockhouse,

which really meant to retake the Cascades.  I got ready at once, and

believing that a piece of artillery would be of service to me, asked

for one, but as there proved to be no guns at the post, I should have

been obliged to proceed without one had it not been that the regular

steamer from San Francisco to Portland was lying at the Vancouver

dock unloading military supplies, and the commander, Captain Dall,

supplied me with the steamer's small iron cannon, mounted on a wooden

platform, which he used in firing salutes at different ports on the

arrival and departure of the vessel.  Finding at the arsenal a supply

of solid shot that would fit the gun, I had it put upon the steamboat

Belle, employed to carry my command to the scene of operations, and

started up the Columbia River at 2 A.M. on the morning of the 27th.

We reached the Lower Cascades early in the day, where, selecting a

favorable place for the purpose, I disembarked my men and gun on the

north bank of the river, so that I could send back the steamboat to

bring up any volunteer assistance that in the mean time might have

been collected at Vancouver.



The Columbia River was very high at the time, and the water had

backed up into the slough about the foot of the Lower Cascades to

such a degree that it left me only a narrow neck of firm ground to

advance over toward the point occupied by the Indians.  On this neck

of land the hostiles had taken position, as I soon learned by

frequent shots, loud shouting, and much blustering; they, by the most

exasperating yells and indecent exhibitions, daring me to the

contest.



After getting well in hand everything connected with my little

command, I advanced with five or six men to the edge of a growth of

underbrush to make a reconnoissance.  We stole along under cover of

this underbrush until we reached the open ground leading over the

causeway or narrow neck before mentioned, when the enemy opened fire

and killed a soldier near my side by a shot which, just grazing the

bridge of my nose, struck him in the neck, opening an artery and

breaking the spinal cord.  He died instantly.  The Indians at once

made a rush for the body, but my men in the rear, coming quickly to

the rescue, drove them back; and Captain Doll's gun being now brought

into play, many solid shot were thrown into the jungle where they lay

concealed, with the effect of considerably moderating their

impetuosity.  Further skirmishing at long range took place at

intervals during the day, with little gain or loss, however, to

either side, for both parties held positions which could not be

assailed in flank, and only the extreme of rashness in either could

prompt a front attack.  My left was protected by the back water

driven into the slough by the high stage of the river, and my right

rested secure on the main stream.  Between us was only the narrow

neck of land, to cross which would be certain death.  The position of

the Indians was almost the exact counterpart of ours.



In the evening I sent a report of the situation back to Vancouver by

the steamboat, retaining a large Hudson's Bay bateau which I had

brought up with me.  Examining this I found it would carry about

twenty men, and made up my mind that early next morning I would cross

the command to the opposite or south side of the Columbia River, and

make my way up along the mountain base until I arrived abreast the

middle blockhouse, which was still closely besieged, and then at some

favorable point recross to the north bank to its relief, endeavoring

in this manner to pass around and to the rear of the Indians, whose

position confronting me was too strong for a direct attack.  This

plan was hazardous, but I believed it could be successfully carried

out if the boat could be taken with me; but should I not be able to

do this I felt that the object contemplated in sending me out would

miserably fail, and the small band cooped up at the block-house would

soon starve or fall a prey to the Indians, so I concluded to risk all

the chances the plan involved.



On the morning of March 28 the savages were still in my front, and

after giving them some solid shot from Captain Dall's gun we slipped

down to the river-bank, and the detachment crossed by means of the

Hudson's Bay boat, making a landing on the opposite shore at a point

where the south channel of the river, after flowing around Bradford's

Island, joins the main stream.  It was then about 9 o'clock, and

everything had thus far proceeded favorably, but examination of the

channel showed that it would be impossible to get the boat up the

rapids along the mainland, and that success could only be assured by

crossing the south channel just below the rapids to the island, along

the shore of which there was every probability we could pull the boat

through the rocks and swift water until the head of the rapids was

reached, from which point to the block-house there was smooth water.

Telling the men of the embarrassment in which I found myself, and

that if I could get enough of them to man the boat and pull it up the

stream by a rope to the shore we would cross to the island and make

the attempt, all volunteered to go, but as ten men seemed sufficient

I selected that number to accompany me.  Before starting, however, I

deemed it prudent to find out if possible what was engaging the

attention of the Indians, who had not yet discovered that we had left

their front.  I therefore climbed up the side of the abrupt mountain

which skirted the water's edge until I could see across the island.

>From this point I observed the Indians running horse-races and

otherwise enjoying themselves behind the line they had held against

me the day before.  The squaws decked out in gay colors, and the men

gaudily dressed in war bonnets, made the scene most attractive, but

as everything looked propitious for the dangerous enterprise in hand

I spent little time watching them.  Quickly returning to the boat, I

crossed to the island with my ten men, threw ashore the rope attached

to the bow, and commenced the difficult task of pulling her up the

rapids.  We got along slowly at first, but soon striking a camp of

old squaws who had been left on the island for safety, and had not

gone over to the mainland to see the races, we utilized them to our

advantage.  With unmistakable threats and signs we made them not only

keep quiet, but also give us much needed assistance in pulling

vigorously on the towrope of our boat.



I was laboring under a dreadful strain of mental anxiety during all

this time, for had the Indians discovered what we were about, they

could easily have come over to the island in their canoes, and, by

forcing us to take up our arms to repel their attack, doubtless would

have obliged the abandonment of the boat, and that essential adjunct

to the final success of my plan would have gone down the rapids.

Indeed, under such circumstances, it would have been impossible for

ten men to hold out against the two or three hundred Indians; but the

island forming an excellent screen to our movements, we were not

discovered, and when we reached the smooth water at the upper end of

the rapids we quickly crossed over and joined the rest of the men,

who in the meantime had worked their way along the south bank of the

river parallel with us.  I felt very grateful to the old squaws for

the assistance they rendered.  They worked well under compulsion, and

manifested no disposition to strike for higher wages.  Indeed, I was

so much relieved when we had crossed over from the island and joined

the rest of the party, that I mentally thanked the squaws one and

all.  I had much difficulty in keeping the men on the main shore from

cheering at our success, but hurriedly taking into the bateau all of

them it could carry, I sent the balance along the southern bank,

where the railroad is now built, until both detachments arrived at a

point opposite the block-house, when, crossing to the north bank, I

landed below the blockhouse some little distance, and returned the

boat for the balance of the men, who joined me in a few minutes.



When the Indians attacked the people at the Cascades on the 26th,

word was sent to Colonel Wright, who had already got out from the

Dalles a few miles on his expedition to the Spokane country.  He

immediately turned his column back, and soon after I had landed and

communicated with the beleaguered block-house the advance of his

command arrived under LieutenantColonel Edward J. Steptoe.  I

reported to Steptoe, and related what had occurred during the past

thirty-six hours, gave him a description of the festivities that were

going on at the lower Cascades, and also communicated the

intelligence that the Yakimas had been joined by the Cascade Indians

when the place was first attacked.  I also told him it was my belief

that when he pushed down the main shore the latter tribe without

doubt would cross over to the island we had just left, while the

former would take to the mountains.  Steptoe coincided with me in

this opinion, and informing me that Lieutenant Alexander Piper would

join my detachment with a mountain' howitzer, directed me to convey

the command to the island and gobble up all who came over to it.



Lieutenant Piper and I landed on the island with the first boatload,

and after disembarking the howitzer we fired two or three shots to

let the Indians know we had artillery with us, then advanced down the

island with the whole of my command, which had arrived in the mean

time; all of the men were deployed as skirmishers except a small

detachment to operate the howitzer.  Near the lower end of the island

we met, as I had anticipated, the entire body of Cascade Indianmen,

women, and children--whose homes were in the vicinity of the

Cascades.  They were very much frightened and demoralized at the turn

events had taken, for the Yakimas at the approach of Steptoe had

abandoned them, as predicted, and fled to the mountians.  The chief

and head-men said they had had nothing to do with the capture of the

Cascades, with the murder of men at the upper landing, nor with the

massacre of men, women, and children near the block-house, and put

all the blame on the Yakimas and their allies.  I did not believe

this, however, and to test the truth of their statement formed them

all in line with their muskets in hand.  Going up to the first man on

the right I accused him of having engaged in the massacre, but was

met by a vigorous denial.  Putting my forefinger into the muzzle of

his gun, I found unmistakable signs of its having been recently

discharged.  My finger was black with the stains of burnt powder, and

holding it up to the Indian, he had nothing more to say in the face

of such positive evidence of his guilt.  A further examination proved

that all the guns were in the same condition.  Their arms were at

once taken possession of, and leaving a small, force to look after

the women and children and the very old men, so that there could be

no possibility of escape, I arrested thirteen of the principal

miscreants, crossed the river to the lower landing, and placed them

in charge of a strong guard.



Late in the evening the steamboat, which I had sent back to

Vancouver, returned, bringing to my assistance from Vancouver,

Captain Henry D. Wallen's company of the Fourth Infantry and a

company of volunteers hastily organized at Portland, but as the

Cascades had already been retaken, this reinforcement was too late to

participate in the affair.  The volunteers from Portland, however,

were spoiling for a fight, and in the absence of other opportunity

desired to shoot the prisoners I held (who, they alleged, had killed

a man named Seymour), and proceeded to make their arrangements to do

so, only desisting on being informed that the Indians were my

prisoners, subject to the orders of Colonel Wright, and would be

protected to the last by my detachment.  Not long afterward Seymour

turned up safe and sound, having fled at the beginning of the attack

on the Cascades, and hid somewhere in the thick underbrush until the

trouble was over, and then made his way back to the settlement.  The

next day I turned my prisoners over to Colonel Wright, who had them

marched to the upper landing of the Cascades, where, after a trial by

a military commission, nine of them were sentenced to death and duly

hanged.  I did not see them executed, but was afterward informed

that, in the absence of the usual mechanical apparatus used on such

occasions, a tree with a convenient limb under which two empty

barrels were placed, one on top of the other, furnished a rude but

certain substitute.  In executing the sentence each Indian in turn

was made to stand on the top barrel, and after the noose was adjusted

the lower barrel was knocked away, and the necessary drop thus

obtained.  In this way the whole nine were punished.  Just before

death they all acknowledged their guilt by confessing their

participation in the massacre at the block-house, and met their doom

with the usual stoicism of their race.









CHAPTER VI.



MISDIRECTED VENGEANCE--HONORABLE MENTION--CHANGE OF COMMAND--EDUCATED

OXEN--FEEDING THE INDIANS--PURCHASING A BURYING-GROUND--KNOWING RATS.



While still encamped at the lower landing, some three or four days

after the events last recounted, Mr. Joseph Meek, an old frontiersman

and guide for emigrant trains through the mountains, came down from

the Dalles, on his way to Vancouver, and stopped at my camp to

inquire if an Indian named Spencer and his family had passed down to

Vancouver since my arrival at the Cascades.  Spencer, the head of the

family, was a very influential, peaceable Chinook chief, whom Colonel

Wright had taken with him from Fort Vancouver as an interpreter and

mediator with the Spokanes and other hostile tribes, against which

his campaign was directed.  He was a good, reliable Indian, and on

leaving Vancouver to join Colonel Wright, took his family along, to

remain with relatives and friends at Fort Dalles until the return of

the expedition.  When Wright was compelled to retrace his steps on

account of the capture of the Cascades, this family for some reason

known only to Spencer, was started by him down the river to their

home at Vancouver.



Meek, on seeing the family leave the Dalles, had some misgivings as

to their safe arrival at their destination, because of the excited

condition of the people about the Cascades; but Spencer seemed to

think that his own peaceable and friendly reputation, which was

widespread, would protect them; so he parted from his wife and

children with little apprehension as to their safety.  In reply to

Meek's question, I stated that I had not seen Spencer's family, when

he remarked, "Well, I fear that they are gone up," a phrase used in

that country in early days to mean that they had been killed.  I

questioned him closely, to elicit further information, but no more

could be obtained; for Meek, either through ignorance or the usual

taciturnity of his class, did not explain more fully, and when the

steamer that had brought the reinforcement started down the river, he

took passage for Vancouver, to learn definitely if the Indian family

had reached that point.  I at once sent to the upper landing, distant

about six miles, to make inquiry in regard to the matter, and in a,

little time my messenger returned with the information that the

family had reached that place the day before, and finding that we had

driven the hostiles off, continued their journey on foot toward my

camp, from which point they expected to go by steamer down the river

to Vancouver.



Their non-arrival aroused in me suspicions of foul play, so with all

the men I could spare, and accompanied by Lieutenant William T.

Welcker, of the Ordnance Corps--a warm and intimate friend--I went in

search of the family, deploying the men as skirmishers across the

valley, and marching them through the heavy forest where the ground

was covered with fallen timber and dense underbrush, in order that no

point might escape our attention.  The search was continued between

the base of the mountain and the river without finding any sign of

Spencer's family, until about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, when we

discovered them between the upper and lower landing, in a small open

space about a mile from the road, all dead--strangled to death with

bits of rope.  The party consisted of the mother, two youths, three

girls, and a baby.  They had all been killed by white men, who had

probably met the innocent creatures somewhere near the blockhouse,

driven them from the road into the timber, where the cruel murders

were committed without provocation, and for no other purpose than the

gratification of the inordinate hatred of the Indian that has often

existed on the frontier, and which on more than one occasion has

failed to distinguish friend from foe.  The bodies lay in a

semicircle, and the bits of rope with which the poor wretches had

been strangled to death were still around their necks.  Each piece of

rope--the unwound strand of a heavier piece--was about two feet long,

and encircled the neck of its victim with a single knot, that must

have been drawn tight by the murderers pulling at the ends.  As there

had not been quite enough rope to answer for all, the babe was

strangled by means of a red silk handkerchief, taken, doubtless, from

the neck of its mother.  It was a distressing sight.  A most cruel

outrage had been committed upon unarmed people--our friends and

allies--in a spirit of aimless revenge.  The perpetrators were

citizens living near the middle block-house, whose wives and children

had been killed a few days before by the hostiles, but who well knew

that these unoffending creatures had had nothing to do with those

murders.



In my experience I have been obliged to look upon many cruel scenes

in connection with Indian warfare on the Plains since that day, but

the effect of this dastardly and revolting crime has never been

effaced from my memory.  Greater and more atrocious massacres have

been committed often by Indians; their savage nature modifies one's

ideas, however, as to the inhumanity of their acts, but when such

wholesale murder as this is done by whites, and the victims not only

innocent, but helpless, no defense can be made for those who

perpetrated the crime, if they claim to be civilized beings.  It is

true the people at the Cascades had suffered much, and that their

wives and children had been murdered before their eyes, but to wreak

vengeance on Spencer's unoffending family, who had walked into their

settlement under the protection of a friendly alliance, was an

unparalleled outrage which nothing can justify or extenuate.  With as

little delay as possible after the horrible discovery, I returned to

camp, had boxes made, and next day buried the bodies of these hapless

victims of misdirected vengeance.



The summary punishment inflicted on the nine Indians, in their trial

and execution, had a most salutary effect on the confederation, and

was the entering wedge to its disintegration; and though Colonel

Wright's campaign continued during the summer and into the early

winter, the subjugation of the allied bands became a comparatively

easy matter after the lesson taught the renegades who were captured

at the Cascades.  My detachment did not accompany Colonel Wright, but

remained for some time at the Cascades, and while still there General

Wool came up from San Francisco to take a look into the condition of

things.  From his conversation with me in reference to the affair at

the Cascades, I gathered that he was greatly pleased at the service I

had performed, and I afterward found that his report of my conduct

had so favorably impressed General Scott that that distinguished

officer complimented me from the headquarters of the army in general

orders.



General Wool, while personally supervising matters on the Columbia

River, directed a redistribution to some extent of the troops in the

district, and shortly before his return to San Francisco I was

ordered with my detachment of dragoons to take station on the Grande

Ronde Indian Reservation in Yamhill County, Oregon, about twenty-five

miles southwest of Dayton, and to relieve from duty at that point

Lieutenant William B. Hazen--late brigadier-general and chief signal

officer--who had established a camp there some time before.  I

started for my new station on April 21, and marching by way of

Portland and Oregon City, arrived at Hazen's camp April 25.  The camp

was located in the Coast range of mountains, on the northeast part of

the reservation, to which last had been added a section of country

that was afterward known as the Siletz reservation.  The whole body

of land set aside went under the general name of the "Coast

reservation," from its skirting the Pacific Ocean for some distance

north of Yaquina Bay, and the intention was to establish within its

bounds permanent homes for such Indians as might be removed to it.

In furtherance of this idea, and to relieve northern California and

southwestern Oregon from the roaming, restless bands that kept the

people of those sections in a state of constant turmoil, many of the

different tribes, still under control but liable to take part in

warfare, were removed to the reservation, so that they might be away

from the theatre of hostilities.



When I arrived I found that the Rogue River Indians had just been

placed upon the reservation, and subsequently the Coquille, Klamath,

Modocs, and remnants of the Chinooks were collected there also, the

home of the latter being in the Willamette Valley.  The number all

told amounted to some thousands, scattered over the entire Coast

reservation, but about fifteen hundred were located at the Grande

Ronde under charge of an agent, Mr. John F. Miller, a sensible,

practical man, who left the entire police control to the military,

and attended faithfully to the duty of settling the Indians in the

work of cultivating the soil.



As the place was to be occupied permanently, Lieutenant Hazen had

begun, before my arrival, the erection of buildings for the shelter

of his command, and I continued the work of constructing the post as

laid out by him.  In those days the Government did not provide very

liberally for sheltering its soldiers; and officers and men were

frequently forced to eke out parsimonious appropriations by toilsome

work or go without shelter in most inhospitable regions.  Of course

this post was no exception to the general rule, and as all hands were

occupied in its construction, and I the only officer present, I was

kept busily employed in supervising matters, both as commandant and

quartermaster, until July, when Captain D. A. Russell, of the Fourth

Infantry, was ordered to take command, and I was relieved from the

first part of my duties.



About this time my little detachment parted from me, being ordered to

join a company of the First Dragoons, commanded by Captain Robert

Williams, as it passed up the country from California by way of

Yamhill.  I regretted exceedingly to see them go, for their faithful

work and gallant service had endeared every man to me by the

strongest ties.  Since I relieved Lieutenant Hood on Pit River,

nearly a twelvemonth before, they had been my constant companions,

and the zeal with which they had responded to every call I made on

them had inspired in my heart a deep affection that years have not

removed.  When I relieved Hood--a dragoon officer of their own

regiment--they did not like the change, and I understood that they

somewhat contemptuously expressed this in more ways than one, in

order to try the temper of the new "Leftenant," but appreciative and

unremitting care, together with firm and just discipline, soon

quieted all symptoms of dissatisfaction and overcame all prejudice.

The detachment had been made up of details from the different

companies of the regiment in order to give Williamson a mounted

force, and as it was usual, under such circumstances, for every

company commander to shove into the detail he was called upon to

furnish the most troublesome and insubordinate individuals of his

company, I had some difficulty, when first taking command, in

controlling such a medley of recalcitrants; but by forethought for

them and their wants, and a strict watchfulness for their rights and

comfort, I was able in a short time to make them obedient and the

detachment cohesive.  In the past year they had made long and

tiresome marches, forded swift mountain streams, constructed rafts of

logs or bundles of dry reeds to ferry our baggage, swum deep rivers,

marched on foot to save their worn-out and exhausted animals, climbed

mountains, fought Indians, and in all and everything had done the

best they could for the service and their commander.  The disaffected

feeling they entertained when I first assumed command soon wore away,

and in its place came a confidence and respect which it gives me the

greatest pleasure to remember, for small though it was, this was my

first cavalry command.  They little thought, when we were in the

mountains of California and Oregon--nor did I myself then dream--that

but a few years were to elapse before it would be my lot again to

command dragoons, this time in numbers so vast as of themselves to

compose almost an army.



Shortly after the arrival of Captain Russell a portion of the Indians

at the Grande Ronde reservation were taken down the coast to the

Siletz reservation, and I was transferred temporarily to Fort

Haskins, on the latter reserve, and assigned to the duty of

completing it and building a blockhouse for the police control of the

Indians placed there.



While directing this work, I undertook to make a road across the

coast mountains from King's Valley to the Siletz, to shorten the haul

between the two points by a route I had explored.  I knew there were

many obstacles in the way, but the gain would be great if we could

overcome them, so I set to work with the enthusiasm of a young path-

finder.  The point at which the road was to cross the range was rough

and precipitous, but the principal difficulty in making it would be

from heavy timber on the mountains that had been burned over years

and years before, until nothing was left but limbless trunks of dead

trees--firs and pines--that had fallen from time to time until the

ground was matted with huge logs from five to eight feet in diameter.

These could not be chopped with axes nor sawed by any ordinary means,

therefore we had to burn them into suitable lengths, and drag the

sections to either side of the roadway with from four to six yoke of

oxen.



The work was both tedious and laborious, but in time perseverance

surmounted all obstacles and the road was finished, though its grades

were very steep.  As soon as it was completed, I wished to

demonstrate its value practically, so I started a Government wagon

over it loaded with about fifteen hundred pounds of freight drawn by

six yoke of oxen, and escorted by a small detachment of soldiers.

When it had gone about seven miles the sergeant in charge came back

to the post and reported his inability to get any further.  Going out

to the scene of difficulty I found the wagon at the base of a steep

hill, stalled.  Taking up a whip myself, I directed the men to lay on

their gads, for each man had supplied himself with a flexible hickory

withe in the early stages of the trip, to start the team, but this

course did not move the wagon nor have much effect on the demoralized

oxen; but following as a last resort an example I heard of on a

former occasion, that brought into use the rough language of the

country, I induced the oxen to move with alacrity, and the wagon and

contents were speedily carried to the summit.  The whole trouble was

at once revealed: the oxen had been broken and trained by a man who,

when they were in a pinch, had encouraged them by his frontier

vocabulary, and they could not realize what was expected of them

under extraordinary conditions until they heard familiar and possibly

profanely urgent phrases.  I took the wagon to its destination, but

as it was not brought back, even in all the time I was stationed in

that country, I think comment on the success of my road is

unnecessary.



I spent many happy months at Fort Haskins, remaining there until the

post was nearly completed and its garrison increased by the arrival

of Captain F. T. Dent--a brother-in-law of Captain Ulysses S. Grant--

with his company of the Fourth Infantry, in April, 1857.  In the

summer of 1856, and while I was still on duty there, the Coquille

Indians on the Siletz, and down near the Yaquina Bay, became, on

account of hunger and prospective starvation, very much excited and

exasperated, getting beyond the control of their agent, and even

threatening his life, so a detachment of troops was sent out to set

things to rights, and I took command of it.  I took with me most of

the company, and arrived at Yaquina Bay in time to succor the agent,

who for some days had been besieged in a log hut by the Indians and

had almost abandoned hope of rescue.



Having brought with me over the mountains a few head of beef cattle

for the hungry Indians, without thinking of running any great

personal risk I had six beeves killed some little distance from my

camp, guarding the meat with four Soldiers, whom I was obliged to

post as sentinels around the small area on which the carcasses lay.

The Indians soon formed a circle about the sentinels, and impelled by

starvation, attempted to take the beef before it could be equally

divided.  This was of course resisted, when they drew their knives--

their guns having been previously taken away from them--and some of

the inferior chiefs gave the signal to attack.  The principal chief,

Tetootney John, and two other Indians joined me in the centre of the

circle, and protesting that they would die rather than that the

frenzied onslaught should succeed, harangued the Indians until the

rest of the company hastened up from camp and put an end to the

disturbance.  I always felt grateful to Tetootney John for his

loyalty on this occasion, and many times afterward aided his family

with a little coffee and sugar, but necessarily surreptitiously, so

as not to heighten the prejudices that his friendly act had aroused

among his Indian comrades.



The situation at Yaquina Bay did not seem very safe, notwithstanding

the supply of beef we brought; and the possibility that the starving

Indians might break out was ever present, so to anticipate any

further revolt, I called for more troops.  The request was complied

with by sending to my assistance the greater part of my own company

("K")from Fort Yamhill.  The men, inspired by the urgency of our

situation, marched more than forty miles a day, accomplishing the

whole distance in so short a period, that I doubt if the record has

ever been beaten.  When this reinforcement arrived, the Indians saw

the futility of further demonstrations against their agent, who they

seemed to think was responsible for the insufficiency of food, and

managed to exist with the slender rations we could spare and such

indifferent food as they could pick up, until the Indian Department

succeeded in getting up its regular supplies.  In the past the poor

things had often been pinched by hunger and neglect, and at times

their only food was rock oysters, clams and crabs.  Great quantities

of these shell-fish could be gathered in the bay near at hand, but

the mountain Indians, who had heretofore lived on the flesh of

mammal, did not take kindly to mollusks, and, indeed, ate the shell-

fish only as a last resort.



Crab catching at night on the Yaquina Bay by the coast Indians was a

very picturesque scene.  It was mostly done by the squaws and

children, each equipped with a torch in one hand, and a sharp-pointed

stick in the other to take and lift the fish into baskets slung on

the back to receive them.  I have seen at times hundreds of squaws

and children wading about in Yaquina Bay taking crabs in this manner,

and the reflection by the water of the light from the many torches,

with the movements of the Indians while at work, formed a weird and

diverting picture of which we were never tired.



Not long after the arrival of the additional troops from Yamhill, it

became apparent that the number of men at Yaquina Bay would have to

be reduced, so in view of this necessity, it was deemed advisable to

build a block-house for the better protection of the agents and I

looked about for suitable ground on which to erect it.  Nearly all

around the bay the land rose up from the beach very abruptly, and the

only good site that could be found was some level ground used as the

burial-place of the Yaquina Bay Indians--a small band of fish-eating

people who had lived near this point on the coast for ages.  They

were a robust lot, of tall and well-shaped figures, and were called

in the Chinook tongue "salt chuck," which means fish-eaters, or

eaters of food from the salt water.  Many of the young men and women

were handsome in feature below the forehead, having fine eyes,

aquiline noses and good mouths, but, in conformity with a long-

standing custom, all had flat heads, which gave them a distorted and

hideous appearance, particularly some of the women, who went to the

extreme of fashion and flattened the head to the rear in a sharp

horizontal ridge by confining it between two boards, one running back

from the forehead at an angle of about forty degrees, and the other

up perpendicularly from the back of the neck.  When a head had been

shaped artistically the dusky maiden owner was marked as a belle, and

one could become reconciled to it after a time, but when carelessness

and neglect had governed in the adjustment of the boards, there

probably was nothing in the form of a human being on the face of the

earth that appeared so ugly.



It was the mortuary ground of these Indians that occupied the only

level spot we could get for the block-house.  Their dead were buried

in canoes, which rested in the crotches of forked sticks a few feet

above-ground.  The graveyard was not large, containing probably from

forty to fifty canoes in a fair state of preservation.  According to

the custom of all Indian tribes on the Pacific coast, when one of

their number died all his worldly effects were buried with him, so

that the canoes were filled with old clothes, blankets, pieces of

calico and the like, intended for the use of the departed in the

happy hunting grounds.



I made known to the Indians that we would have to take this piece of

ground for the blockhouse.  They demurred at first, for there is

nothing more painful to an Indian than disturbing his dead, but they

finally consented to hold a council next day on the beach, and thus

come to some definite conclusion.  Next morning they all assembled,

and we talked in the Chinook language all day long, until at last

they gave in, consenting, probably, as much because they could not

help themselves, as for any other reason.  It was agreed that on the

following day at 12 o'clock, when the tide was going out, I should

take my men and place the canoes in the bay, and let them float out

on the tide across the ocean to the happy hunting-grounds:



At that day there existed in Oregon in vast numbers a species of

wood-rat, and our inspection of the graveyard showed that the canoes

were thickly infested with them.  They were a light gray animal,

larger than the common gray squirrel, with beautiful bushy tails,

which made them strikingly resemble the squirrel, but in cunning and

deviltry they were much ahead of that quick-witted rodent.  I have

known them to empty in one night a keg of spikes in the storehouse in

Yamhill, distributing them along the stringers of the building, with

apparently no other purpose than amusement.  We anticipated great fun

watching the efforts of these rats to escape the next day when the

canoes should be launched on the ocean, and I therefore forbade any

of the command to visit the graveyard in the interim, lest the rats

should be alarmed.  I well knew that they would not be disturbed by

the Indians, who held the sacred spot in awe.  When the work of

taking down the canoes and carrying them to the water began,

expectation was on tiptoe, but, strange as it may seem, not a rat was

to be seen.  This unexpected development was mystifying.  They had

all disappeared; there was not one in any of the canoes, as

investigation proved, for disappointment instigated a most thorough

search.  The Indians said the rats understood Chinook, and that as

they had no wish to accompany the dead across the ocean to the happy

hunting-grounds, they took to the woods for safety.  However that may

be, I have no doubt that the preceding visits to the burial-ground,

and our long talk of the day before, with the unusual stir and

bustle, had so alarmed the rats that, impelled, by their suspicious

instincts, they fled a danger, the nature of which they could not

anticipate, but which they felt to be none the less real and

impending.









CHAPTER VII.



LEARNING THE CHINOOK LANGUAGE--STRANGE INDIAN CUSTOMS--THEIR DOCTORS-

-SAM PATCH--THE MURDER OF A WOMAN--IN A TIGHT PLACE--SURPRISING THE

INDIANS--CONFLICTING REPORTS OF THE BATTLE OF BULL RUN--SECESSION

QUESTION IN CALIFORNIA--APPOINTED A CAPTAIN--TRANSFERRED TO THE EAST.



The troubles at the Siletz and Yaquina Bay were settled without

further excitement by the arrival in due time of plenty of food, and

as the buildings, at Fort Haskins were so near completion that my

services as quartermaster were no longer needed, I was ordered to

join my own company at Fort Yamhill, where Captain Russell was still

in command.  I returned to that place in May, 1857, and at a period a

little later, in consequence of the close of hostilities in southern

Oregon, the Klamaths and Modocs were sent back to their own country,

to that section in which occurred, in 1873, the disastrous war with

the latter tribe.  This reduced considerably the number of Indians at

the Grande Ronde, but as those remaining were still somewhat unruly,

from the fact that many questions requiring adjustment were

constantly arising between the different bands, the agent and the

officers at the post were kept pretty well occupied.  Captain Russell

assigned to me the special work of keeping up the police control, and

as I had learned at an early day to speak Chinook (the "court

language" among the coast tribes) almost as well as the Indians

themselves, I was thereby enabled to steer my way successfully on

many critical occasions.



For some time the most disturbing and most troublesome element we had

was the Rogue River band.  For three or four years they had fought

our troops obstinately, and surrendered at the bitter end in the

belief that they were merely overpowered, not conquered.  They openly

boasted to the other Indians that they could whip the soldiers, and

that they did not wish to follow the white man's ways, continuing

consistently their wild habits, unmindful of all admonitions.

Indeed, they often destroyed their household utensils, tepees and

clothing, and killed their horses on the graves of the dead, in the

fulfillment of a superstitious custom, which demanded that they

should undergo, while mourning for their kindred, the deepest

privation in a property sense.  Everything the loss of which would

make them poor was sacrificed on the graves of their relatives or

distinguished warriors, and as melancholy because of removal from

their old homes caused frequent deaths, there was no lack of occasion

for the sacrifices.  The widows and orphans of the dead warriors were

of course the chief mourners, and exhibited their grief in many

peculiar ways.  I remember one in particular which was universally

practiced by the near kinsfolk.  They would crop their hair very

close, and then cover the head with a sort of hood or plaster of

black pitch, the composition being clay, pulverized charcoal, and the

resinous gum which exudes from the pine-tree.  The hood, nearly an

inch in thickness, was worn during a period of mourning that lasted

through the time it would take nature, by the growth of the hair,

actually to lift from the head the heavy covering of pitch after it

had become solidified and hard as stone.  It must be admitted that

they underwent considerable discomfort in memory of their relatives.

It took all the influence we could bring to bear to break up these

absurdly superstitious practices, and it looked as if no permanent

improvement could be effected, for as soon as we got them to discard

one, another would be invented.  When not allowed to burn down their

tepees or houses, those poor souls who were in a dying condition

would be carried out to the neighboring hillsides just before

dissolution, and there abandoned to their sufferings, with little or

no attention, unless the placing under their heads of a small stick

of wood--with possibly some laudable object, but doubtless great

discomfort to their victim--might be considered such.



To uproot these senseless and monstrous practices was indeed most

difficult.  The most pernicious of all was one which was likely to

bring about tragic results.  They believed firmly in a class of

doctors among their people who professed that they could procure the

illness of an individual at will, and that by certain incantations

they could kill or cure the sick person.  Their faith in this

superstition was so steadfast that there was no doubting its

sincerity, many indulging at times in the most trying privations,

that their relatives might be saved from death at the hands of the

doctors.  I often talked with them on the subject, and tried to

reason them out of the superstitious belief, defying the doctors to

kill me, or even make me ill; but my talks were unavailing, and they

always met my arguments with the remark that I was a white man, of a

race wholly different from the red man, and that that was the reason

the medicine of the doctors would not affect me.  These villainous

doctors might be either men or women, and any one of them finding an

Indian ill, at once averred that his influence was the cause,

offering at the same time to cure the invalid for a fee, which

generally amounted to about all the ponies his family possessed.  If

the proposition was accepted and the fee paid over, the family, in

case the man died, was to have indemnity through the death of the

doctor, who freely promised that they might take his life in such

event, relying on his chances of getting protection from the furious

relatives by fleeing to the military post till time had so assuaged

their grief that matters could be compromised or settled by a

restoration of a part of the property, when the rascally leeches

could again resume their practice.  Of course the services of a

doctor were always accepted when an Indian fell ill; otherwise the

invalid's death would surely ensue, brought about by the evil

influence that was unpropitiated.  Latterly it had become quite the

thing, when a patient died, for the doctor to flee to our camp--it

was so convenient and so much safer than elsewhere--and my cellar was

a favorite place of refuge from the infuriated friends of the

deceased.



Among the most notable of these doctors was an Indian named Sam

Patch, who several times sought asylum in any cellar, and being a

most profound diplomat, managed on each occasion and with little

delay to negotiate a peaceful settlement and go forth in safety to

resume the practice of his nefarious profession.  I often hoped he

would be caught before reaching the post, but he seemed to know

intuitively when the time had come to take leg-bail, for his advent

at the garrison generally preceded by but a few hours the death of

some poor dupe.



Finally these peculiar customs brought about the punishment of a

noted doctress of the Rogue River tribe, a woman who was constantly

working in this professional way, and who had found a victim of such

prominence among the Rogue Rivers that his unlooked for death brought

down on her the wrath of all.  She had made him so ill, they

believed, as to bring him to death's door notwithstanding the many

ponies that had been given her to cease the incantations, and it was

the conviction of all that she had finally caused the man's death

from some ulterior and indiscernible motive.  His relatives and

friends then immediately set about requiting her with the just

penalties of a perfidious breach of contract.  Their threats induced

her instant flight toward my house for the usual protection, but the

enraged friends of the dead man gave hot chase, and overtook the

witch just inside the limits of the garrison, where, on the parade-

ground, in sight of the officers' quarters, and before any one could

interfere, they killed her.  There were sixteen men in pursuit of the

doctress, and sixteen gun-shot wounds were found in her body when

examined by the surgeon of the post.  The killing of the woman was a

flagrant and defiant outrage committed in the teeth of the military

authority, yet done so quickly that we could not prevent it.  This

necessitated severe measures, both to allay the prevailing excitement

and to preclude the recurrence of such acts.  The body was cared for,

and delivered to the relatives the next day for burial, after which

Captain Russell directed me to take such steps as would put a stop to

the fanatical usages that had brought about this murderous

occurrence, for it was now seen that if timely measures were not

taken to repress them, similar tragedies would surely follow.



Knowing all the men of the Rogue River tribe, and speaking fluently

the Chinook tongue, which they all understood, I went down to their

village the following day, after having sent word to the tribe that I

wished to have a council with them.  The Indians all met me in

council, as I had desired, and I then told them that the men who had

taken part in shooting the woman would have to be delivered up for

punishment.  They were very stiff with me at the interview, and with

all that talent for circumlocution and diplomacy with which the

Indian is lifted, endeavored to evade my demands and delay any

conclusion.  But I was very positive, would hear of no compromise

whatever, and demanded that my terms be at once complied with.  No

one was with me but a sergeant of my company, named Miller, who held

my horse, and as the chances of an agreement began to grow remote, I

became anxious for our safety.  The conversation waxing hot and the

Indians gathering close in around me, I unbuttoned the flap of my

pistol holster, to be ready for any emergency.  When the altercation

became most bitter I put my hand to my hip to draw my pistol, but

discovered it was gone--stolen by one of the rascals surrounding me.

Finding myself unarmed, I modified my tone and manner to correspond

with my helpless condition, thus myself assuming the diplomatic side

in the parley, in order to gain time.  As soon as an opportunity

offered, and I could, without too much loss of self-respect, and

without damaging my reputation among the Indians, I moved out to

where the sergeant held my horse, mounted, and crossing the Yamhill

River close by, called back in Chinook from the farther bank that

"the sixteen men who killed the woman must be delivered up, and my

six-shooter also." This was responded to by contemptuous laughter, so

I went back to the military post somewhat crestfallen, and made my

report of the turn affairs had taken, inwardly longing for another

chance to bring the rascally Rogue Rivers to terms.



When I had explained the situation to Captain Russell, he thought

that we could not, under any circumstances, overlook this defiant

conduct of the Indians, since, unless summarily punished, it would

lead to even more serious trouble in the future.  I heartily seconded

this proposition, and gladly embracing the opportunity it offered,

suggested that if he would give me another chance, and let me have

the effective force of the garrison, consisting of about fifty men, I

would chastise the Rogue Rivers without fail, and that the next day

was all the time I required to complete arrangements.  He gave me the

necessary authority, and I at once set to work to bring about a

better state of discipline on the reservation, and to put an end to

the practices of the medicine men (having also in view the recovery

of my sixshooter and self-respect), by marching to the village and

taking the rebellious Indians by force.



In the tribe there was an excellent woman called Tighee Mary (Tighee

in Chinook means chief), who by right of inheritance was a kind of

queen of the Rogue Rivers.  Fearing that the insubordinate conduct of

the Indians would precipitate further trouble, she came early the

following morning to see me and tell me of the situation Mary

informed me that she had done all in her power to bring the Indians

to reason, but without avail, and that they were determined to fight

rather than deliver up the sixteen men who had engaged in the

shooting.  She also apprised me of the fact that they had taken up a

position on the Yamhill River, on the direct road between the post

and village, where, painted and armed for war, they were awaiting

attack.



On this information I concluded it would be best to march to the

village by a circuitous route instead of directly, as at first

intended, so I had the ferry-boat belonging to the post floated about

a mile and a half down the Yamhill River and there anchored.  At 11

o'clock that night I marched my fifty men, out of the garrison, in a

direction opposite to that of the point held by the Indians, and soon

reached the river at the ferryboat.  Here I ferried the party over

with little delay, and marched them along the side of the mountain,

through underbrush and fallen timber, until, just before daylight, I

found that we were immediately in rear of the village, and thence in

rear, also, of the line occupied by the refractory Indians, who were

expecting to meet me on the direct road from the post.  Just at break

of day we made a sudden descent upon the village and took its

occupants completely by surprise, even capturing the chief of the

tribe, "Sam," who was dressed in all his war toggery, fully armed and

equipped, in anticipation of a fight on the road where his comrades

were in position.  I at once put Sam under guard, giving orders to

kill him instantly if the Indians fired a shot; then forming my line

on the road beyond the edge of the village, in rear of the force

lying in wait for a front attack, we moved forward.  When the hostile

party realized that they were completely cut off from the village,

they came out from their stronghold on the river and took up a line

in my front, distant about sixty yards with the apparent intention of

resisting to the last.



As is usual with Indians when expecting a fight, they were nearly

naked, fantastically painted with blue clay, and hideously arrayed in

war bonnets.  They seemed very belligerent, brandishing their muskets

in the air, dancing on one foot, calling us ugly names, and making

such other demonstrations of hostility, that it seemed at first that

nothing short of the total destruction of the party could bring about

the definite settlement that we were bent on.  Still, as it was my

desire to bring them under subjection without loss of life, if

possible, I determined to see what result would follow when they

learned that their chief was at our mercy.  So, sending Sam under

guard to the front, where he could be seen, informing them that he

would be immediately shot if they fired upon us, and aided by the

cries and lamentations of the women of the village, who deprecated

any hostile action by either party, I soon procured a parley.



The insubordinate Indians were under command of "Joe," Sam's brother,

who at last sent me word that he wanted to see me, and we met between

our, respective lines.  I talked kindly to him, but was firm in my

demand that the men who killed the woman must be given up and my six-

shooter returned.  His reply was he did not think it could be done,

but he would consult his people.  After the consultation, he returned

and notified me that fifteen would surrender and the six-shooter

would be restored, and further, that we could kill the sixteenth man,

since the tribe wished to get rid of him anyhow, adding that he was a

bad Indian, whose bullet no doubt had given the woman her death

wound.  He said that if I assented to this arrangement, he would

require all of his people except the objectionable man to run to the

right of his line at a preconcerted signal.  The bad Indian would be

ordered to stand fast on the extreme left, and we could open fire on

him as his comrades fell away to the right.  I agreed to the

proposition, and gave Joe fifteen minutes to execute his part of it.

We then returned to our respective forces, and a few minutes later

the fifteen ran to the right flank as agreed upon, and we opened fire

on the one Indian left standing alone, bringing him down in his

tracks severely wounded by a shot through the shoulder.



While all this was going on, the other bands of the reservation,

several thousand strong, had occupied the surrounding hills for the

purpose of witnessing the fight, for as the Rogue Rivers had been

bragging for some time that they could whip the soldiers, these other

Indians had come out to see it done.  The result, however,

disappointed the spectators, and the Rogue Rivers naturally lost

caste.  The fifteen men now came in and laid down their arms

(including my six-shooter) in front of us as agreed, but I compelled

them to take the surrendered guns up again and carry them to the

post, where they were deposited in the block-house for future

security.  The prisoners were ironed with ball and chain, and made to

work at the post until their rebellious spirit was broken; and the

wounded man was correspondingly punished after he had fully

recovered.  An investigation as to why this man had been selected as

the offering by which Joe and his companions expected to gain

immunity, showed that the fellow was really a most worthless

character, whose death even would have been a benefit to the tribe.

Thus it seemed that they had two purposes in view--the one to

propitiate me and get good terms, the other to rid themselves of a

vagabond member of the tribe.



The punishment of these sixteen Indians by ball and chain ended all

trouble with the Rogue River tribe.  The, disturbances arising from

the incantations of the doctors and doctresses, and the practice of

killing horses and burning all worldly property on the graves of

those who died, were completely suppressed, and we made with little

effort a great stride toward the civilization of these crude and

superstitious people, for they now began to recognize the power of

the Government.  In their management afterward a course of justice

and mild force was adopted, and unvaryingly applied.  They were

compelled to cultivate their land, to attend church, and to send

their children to school.  When I saw them, fifteen years later,

transformed into industrious and substantial farmers, with neat

houses, fine cattle, wagons and horses, carrying their grain, eggs,

and butter to market and bringing home flour, coffee, sugar, and

calico in return, I found abundant confirmation of my early opinion

that the most effectual measures for lifting them from a state of

barbarism would be a practical supervision at the outset, coupled

with a firm control and mild discipline.



In all that was done for these Indians Captain Russell's judgment and

sound, practical ideas were the inspiration.  His true manliness,

honest and just methods, together with the warm-hearted interest he

took in all that pertained to matters of duty to his Government,

could not have produced other than the best results, in what position

soever he might have been placed.  As all the lovable traits of his

character were constantly manifested, I became most deeply attached

to him, and until the day of his death in 1864, on the battle-field

of Opequan, in front of Winchester, while gallantly leading his

division under my command, my esteem and affection were sustained and

intensified by the same strong bonds that drew me to him in these

early days in Oregon.



After the events just narrated I continued on duty at the post of

Yamhill, experiencing the usual routine of garrison life without any

incidents of much interest, down to the breaking out of the war of

the rebellion in April, 1861.  The news of the firing on Fort Sumter

brought us an excitement which overshadowed all else, and though we

had no officers at the post who sympathized with the rebellion, there

were several in our regiment--the Fourth Infantry--who did, and we

were considerably exercised as to the course they might pursue, but

naturally far more so concerning the disposition that would be made

of the regiment during the conflict.



In due time orders came for the regiment to go East, and my company

went off, leaving me, however--a second lieutenant--in command of the

post until I should be relieved by Captain James J. Archer, of the

Ninth Infantry, whose company was to take the place of the old

garrison.  Captain Archer, with his company of the Ninth, arrived

shortly after, but I had been notified that he intended to go South,

and his conduct was such after reaching the post that I would not

turn over the command to him for fear he might commit some rebellious

act.  Thus a more prolonged detention occurred than I had at first

anticipated.  Finally the news came that he had tendered his

resignation and been granted a leave of absence for sixty days.  On

July 17 he took his departure, but I continued in command till

September 1, when Captain Philip A. Owen, of the Ninth Infantry,

arrived and, taking charge, gave me my release.



>From the day we received the news of the firing on Sumter until I

started East, about the first of September, 1861, I was deeply

solicitous as to the course of events, and though I felt confident

that in the end the just cause of the Government must triumph, yet

the thoroughly crystallized organization which the Southern

Confederacy quickly exhibited disquieted me very much, for it alone

was evidence that the Southern leaders had long anticipated the

struggle and prepared for it.  It was very difficult to obtain direct

intelligence of the progress of the war.  Most of the time we were in

the depths of ignorance as to the true condition of affairs, and this

tended to increase our anxiety.  Then, too, the accounts of the

conflicts that had taken place were greatly exaggerated by the

Eastern papers, and lost nothing in transition.  The news came by the

pony express across the Plains to San Francisco, where it was still

further magnified in republishing, and gained somewhat in Southern

bias.  I remember well that when the first reports reached us of, the

battle of Bull Run--that sanguinary engagement--it was stated that

each side had lost forty thousand men in killed and wounded, and none

were reported missing nor as having run away.  Week by week these

losses grew less, until they finally shrunk into the hundreds, but

the vivid descriptions of the gory conflict were not toned down

during the whole summer.



We received our mail at Yamhill only once a week, and then had to

bring it from Portland, Oregon, by express.  On the day of the week

that our courier, or messenger, was expected back from Portland, I

would go out early in the morning to a commanding point above the

post, from which I could see a long distance down the road as it ran

through the valley of the Yamhill, and there I would watch with

anxiety for his coming, longing for good news; for, isolated as I had

been through years spent in the wilderness, my patriotism was

untainted by politics, nor had it been disturbed by any discussion of

the questions out of which the war grew, and I hoped for the success

of the Government above all other considerations.  I believe I was

also uninfluenced by any thoughts of the promotion that might result

to me from the conflict, but, out of a sincere desire to contribute

as much as I could to the preservation of the Union, I earnestly

wished to be at the seat of war, and feared it might end before I

could get East.  In no sense did I anticipate what was to happen to

me afterward, nor that I was to gain any distinction from it.  I was

ready to do my duty to the best of my ability wherever I might be

called, and I was young, healthy, insensible to fatigue, and desired

opportunity, but high rank was so distant in our service that not a

dream of its attainment had flitted through my brain.



During the period running from January to September, 1861, in

consequence of resignations and the addition of some new regiments to

the regular army, I had passed through the grade of first lieutenant

and reached that of captain in the Thirteenth United States Infantry,

of which General W. T. Sherman had recently been made the colonel.

When relieved from further duty at Yamhill by Captain Owen, I left

for the Atlantic coast to join my new regiment.  A two days' ride

brought me down to Portland, whence I sailed to San Franciso, and at

that city took passage by steamer for New York via the Isthmus of

Panama, in company with a number of officers who were coming East

under circumstances like my own.



At this time California was much agitated--on the question of

secession, and the secession element was so strong that considerable

apprehension was felt by the Union people lest the State might be

carried into the Confederacy.  As a consequence great distrust

existed in all quarters, and the loyal passengers on the steamer, not

knowing what might occur during our voyage, prepared to meet

emergencies by thoroughly organizing to frustrate any attempt that

might possibly be made to carry us into some Southern port after we

should leave Aspinwall.  However, our fears proved groundless; at all

events, no such attempt was made, and we reached New York in safety

in November, 1861.  A day or two in New York sufficed to replenish a

most meagre wardrobe, and I then started West to join my new

regiment, stopping a day and a night at the home of my parents in

Ohio, where I had not been since I journeyed from Texas for the

Pacific coast.  The headquarters of my regiment were at Jefferson

Barracks, Missouri, to which point I proceeded with no further delay

except a stay in the city of St. Louis long enough to pay my respects

to General H. W. Halleck.









CHAPTER VIII.



AUDITING ACCOUNTS--CHIEF QUARTERMASTER AND COMMISSARY OF THE ARMY OF

SOUTHWEST MISSOURI--PREPARING FOR THE PEA RIDGE CAMPAIGN--A

DIFFERENCE WITH GENERAL CURTIS--ORDERED TO THE FRONT--APPOINTED A

COLONEL.



Some days after I had reached the headquarters of my regiment near

St. Louis, General Halleck sent for me, and when I reported he

informed me that there existed a great deal of confusion regarding

the accounts of some of the disbursing officers in his department,

whose management of its fiscal affairs under his predecessor, General

John C. Fremont, had been very loose; and as the chaotic condition of

things could be relieved only by auditing these accounts, he

therefore had determined to create a board of officers for the

purpose, and intended to make me president of it.  The various

transactions in question covered a wide field, for the department

embraced the States of Missouri, Iowa, Minnesota, Illinois, Arkansas,

and all of Kentucky west of the Cumberland River.



The duty was not distasteful, and I felt that I was qualified to

undertake it, for the accounts to be audited belonged exclusively to

the Quartermaster and Subsistence departments, and by recent

experience I had become familiar with the class of papers that

pertained to those branches of the army.  Indeed, it was my

familiarity with such transactions, returns, etc., that probably

caused my selection as president of the board.



I entered upon the work forthwith, and continued at it until the 26th

of December, 1861.  At that date I was relieved from the auditing

board and assigned to duty as Chief Commissary of the Army of

Southwest Missouri, commanded by General Samuel R. Curtis.  This army

was then organizing at Rolla, Missouri, for the Pea Ridge campaign,

its strength throughout the campaign being in the aggregate about

fifteen thousand men.



As soon as I received information of my selection for this position,

I went to General Halleck and requested him to assign me as Chief

Quartermaster also.  He was reluctant to do so, saying that I could

not perform both duties, but I soon convinced him that I could do

both better than the one, for I reminded him that as Chief

Quartermaster I should control the transportation, and thus obviate

all possible chances of discord between the two staff departments; a

condition which I deemed essential to success, especially as it was

intended that Curtis's army should mainly subsist on the country.

This argument impressed Halleck, and becoming convinced, he promptly

issued the order making me Chief Quartermaster and Chief Commissary

of Subsistence of the Army of Southwest Missouri, and I started for

Rolla to enter upon the work assigned me.



Having reported to General Curtis, I quickly learned that his system

of supply was very defective, and the transportation without proper

organization, some of the regiments having forty to fifty wagon each,

and others only three or four.  I labored day and night to remedy

these and other defects, and with the help of Captain Michael P.

Small, of the Subsistence Department, who was an invaluable

assistant, soon brought things into shape, putting the transportation

in good working order, giving each regiment its proper quota of

wagons, and turning the surplus into the general supply trains of the

army.  In accomplishing this I was several times on the verge of

personal conflict with irate regimental commanders, but Colonel G. M.

Dodge so greatly sustained me with General Curtis by strong moral

support, and by such efficient details from his regiment--the Fourth

Iowa Volunteer Infantry--that I still bear him and it great affection

and lasting gratitude.



On January 26, 1862, General Curtis's army began its march from Rolla

to Springfield, Missouri, by way of Lebanon.  The roads were deep

with mud, and so badly cut up that the supply trains in moving

labored under the most serious difficulties, and were greatly

embarrassed by swollen streams.  Under these circumstances many

delays occurred, and when we arrived at Lebanon nearly all the

supplies with which we had started had been consumed, and the work of

feeding the troops off the country had to begin at that point.  To

get flour, wheat had to be taken from the stacks, threshed, and sent

to the mills to be ground.  Wheat being scarce in this region, corn

as a substitute had to be converted into meal by the same laborious

process.  In addition, beef cattle had to be secured for the meat

ration.



By hard work we soon accumulated a sufficient quantity of flour and

corn meal to justify the resumption of our march on Springfield; at

or near which point the enemy was believed to be awaiting us, and the

order was given to move forward, the commanding general cautioning

me, in the event of disaster, to let no salt fall into General

Price's hands.  General Curtis made a hobby of this matter of salt,

believing the enemy was sadly in need of that article, and he

impressed me deeply with his conviction that our cause would be

seriously injured by a loss which would inure so greatly and

peculiarly to the enemy's benefit; but we afterward discovered, when

Price abandoned his position, that about all he left behind was salt.



When we were within about eight miles of Springfield, General Curtis

decided to put his troops in line of battle for the advance on the

town, and directed me to stretch out my supply trains in a long line

of battle, so that in falling back, in case the troops were repulsed,

he could rally the men on the wagons.  I did not like the tactics,

but of course obeyed the order.  The line moved on Springfield, and

took the town without resistance, the enemy having fled southward, in

the direction of Pea Ridge, the preceding day.  Of course our success

relieved my anxiety about the wagons; but fancy has often pictured

since, the stampede of six mule teams that, had we met with any

reverse, would have taken place over the prairies of southwest

Missouri.



The army set out in pursuit of Price, but I was left at Springfield

to gather supplies from the surrounding country, by the same means

that had been used at Lebanon, and send them forward.  To succeed in

this useful and necessary duty required much hard work.  To procure

the grain and to run the mills in the country, replacing the

machinery where parts had been carried away, or changing the

principle and running the mills on some different plan when

necessary, and finally forward the product to the army, made a task

that taxed the energy of all engaged in it.  Yet, having at command a

very skillful corps of millwrights, machinists, and millers, detailed

principally from the Fourth Iowa and Thirty-sixth Illinois volunteer

regiments, we soon got matters in shape, and were able to send such

large quantities of flour and meal to the front, that only the bacon

and small parts of the ration had to be brought forward from our

depot at Rolla.  When things were well systematized, I went forward

myself to expedite the delivery of supplies, and joined the army at

Cross Hollows, just south of Pea Ridge.



Finding everything working well at Cross Hollows, I returned to

Springfield in a few days to continue the labor of collecting

supplies.  On my way back I put the mills at Cassville in good order

to grind the grain in that vicinity, and perfected there a plan for

the general supply from the neighboring district of both the men and

animals of the army, so that there should, be no chance of a failure

of the campaign from bad roads or disaster to my trains.  Springfield

thus became the centre of the entire supply section.



Just after my return to Springfield the battle of Pea Ridge was

fought.  The success of the Union troops in this battle was

considerable, and while not of sufficient magnitude to affect the

general cause materially, it was decisive as to that particular

campaign, and resulted in driving all organized Confederate forces

out of the State of Missouri.  After Pea Ridge was won, certain

efforts were made to deprive Curtis of the credit due him for the

victory; but, no matter what merit belonged to individual commanders,

I was always convinced that Curtis was deserving of the highest

commendation, not only for the skill displayed on the field, but for

a zeal and daring in campaign which was not often exhibited at that

early period of the war.  Especially should this credit be awarded

him, when we consider the difficulties under which he labored, how he

was hampered in having to depend on a sparsely settled country for

the subsistence of his troops.  In the reports of the battle that

came to Springfield, much glory was claimed for some other general

officers, but as I had control of the telegraph line from Springfield

east, I detained all despatches until General Curtis had sent in his

official report.  He thus had the opportunity of communicating with

his superior in advance of some of his vain subordinates, who would

have laid claim to the credit of the battle had I not thwarted them

by this summary means.



Not long afterward came the culmination of a little difference that

had arisen between General Curtis and me, brought about, I have since

sometimes thought, by an assistant quartermaster from Iowa, whom I

had on duty with me at Springfield.  He coveted my place, and finally

succeeded in getting it.  He had been an unsuccessful banker in Iowa,

and early in the war obtained an appointment as assistant

quartermaster of volunteers with the rank of captain.  As chief

quartermaster of the army in Missouri, there would be opportunities

for the recuperation of his fortunes which would not offer to one in

a subordinate place; so to gain this position he doubtless intrigued

for it while under my eye, and Curtis was induced to give it to him

as soon as I was relieved.  His career as my successor, as well as in

other capacities in which he was permitted to act during the war, was

to say the least not savory.  The war over he turned up in Chicago as

president of a bank, which he wrecked; and he finally landed in the

penitentiary for stealing a large sum of money from the United States

Treasury at Washington while employed there as a clerk.  The chances

that this man's rascality would be discovered were much less when

chief of the departments of transportation and supply of an army than

they afterward proved to be in the Treasury.  I had in my possession

at all times large sums of money for the needs of the army, and among

other purposes for which these funds were to be disbursed was the

purchase of horses and mules.  Certain officers and men more devoted

to gain than to the performance of duty (a few such are always to be

found in armies) quickly learned this, and determined to profit by

it.  Consequently they began a regular system of stealing horses from

the people of the country and proffering them to me for purchase.  It

took but a little time to discover this roguery, and when I became

satisfied of their knavery I brought it to a sudden close by seizing

the horses as captured property, branding them U. S., and refusing to

pay for them.  General Curtis, misled by the misrepresentations that

had been made, and without fully knowing the circumstances, or

realizing to what a base and demoralizing state of things this course

was inevitably tending, practically ordered me to make the Payments,

and I refused.  The immediate result of this disobedience was a

court-martial to try me; and knowing that my usefulness in that army

was gone, no matter what the outcome of the trial might be, I asked

General Halleck to relieve me from duty with General Curtis and order

me to St. Louis.  This was promptly done, and as my connection with

the Army of Southwest Missouri was thus severed before the court

could be convened, my case never came to trial.  The man referred to

as being the cause of this condition of affairs was appointed by

General Curtis to succeed me.  I turned over to the former all the

funds and property for which I was responsible, also the branded

horses and mules stolen from the people of the country, requiring

receipts for everything.  I heard afterward that some of the blooded

stock of southwest Missouri made its way to Iowa in an unaccountable

manner, but whether the administration of my successor was

responsible for it or not I am unable to say.



On my arrival at St. Louis I felt somewhat forlorn and disheartened

at the turn affairs had taken.  I did not know where I should be

assigned, nor what I should be required to do, but these

uncertainties were dispelled in a few days by General Halleck, who,

being much pressed by the Governors of some of the Western States to

disburse money in their sections, sent me out into the Northwest with

a sort of roving commission to purchase horses for the use of the

army.  I went to Madison and Racine, Wis., at which places I bought

two hundred horses, which were shipped to St. Louis.  At Chicago I

bought two hundred more, and as the prices paid at the latter point

showed that Illinois was the cheapest market--it at that time

producing a surplus over home demands--I determined to make Chicago

the centre of my operations.



While occupied in this way at Chicago the battle of Shiloh took

place, and the desire for active service with troops became uppermost

in my thoughts, so I returned to St. Louis to see if I could not get

into the field.  General Halleck having gone down to the Shiloh

battle-field, I reported to his Assistant Adjutant-General, Colonel

John C. Kelton, and told him of my anxiety to take a hand in active

field-service, adding that I did not wish to join my regiment, which

was still organizing and recruiting at Jefferson Barracks, for I felt

confident I could be more useful elsewhere.  Kelton knew that the

purchasing duty was but temporary, and that on its completion,

probably at no distant date, I should have to join my company at the

barracks; so, realizing the inactivity to which that situation of

affairs would subject me, he decided to assume the responsibility of

sending me to report to General Halleck at Shiloh, and gave me an

order to that effect.



This I consider the turning-point in my military career, and shall

always feel grateful to Colonel Kelton for his kindly act which so

greatly influenced my future.  My desire to join the army at Shiloh

had now taken possession of me, and I was bent on getting there by

the first means available.  Learning that a hospital-boat under

charge of Dr. Hough was preparing to start for Pittsburg Landing, I

obtained the Doctor's consent to take passage on it, and on the

evening of April 15, I left St. Louis for the scene of military

operations in northeastern Mississippi.



At Pittsburg Landing I reported to General Halleck, who, after some

slight delay, assigned me to duty as an assistant to Colonel George

Thom, of the topographical engineers.  Colonel Thom put me at the

work of getting the trains up from the landing, which involved the

repair of roads for that purpose by corduroying the marshy places.

This was rough, hard work, without much chance of reward, but it, was

near the field of active operations, and I determined to do the best

I could at it till opportunity for something better might arise.



General Halleck did not know much about taking care of himself in the

field.  His camp arrangements were wholly inadequate, and in

consequence he and all the officers about him were subjected to much

unnecessary discomfort and annoyance.  Someone suggested to him to

appoint me quartermaster for his headquarters, with a view to

systematizing the establishment and remedying the defects complained

of, and I was consequently assigned to this duty.  Shortly after this

assignment I had the satisfaction of knowing that General Halleck was

delighted with the improvements made at headquarters, both in camp

outfit and transportation, and in administration generally.  My

popularity grew as the improvements increased, but one trifling

incident came near marring it.  There was some hitch about getting

fresh beef for General Halleck's mess, and as by this time everybody

had come to look to me for anything and everything in the way of

comfort, Colonel Joe McKibben brought an order from the General for

me to get fresh beef for the headquarters mess.  I was not caterer

for this mess, nor did I belong to it even, so I refused point-blank.

McKibben, disliking to report my disobedience, undertook persuasion,

and brought Colonel Thom to see me to aid in his negotiations, but I

would not give in, so McKibben in the kindness of his heart rode

several miles in order to procure the beef himself, and thus save me

from the dire results which be thought would follow should Halleck

get wind of such downright insubordination.  The next day I was made

Commissary of Subsistence for the headquarters in addition to my

other duties, and as this brought me into the line of fresh beef,

General Halleck had no cause thereafter to complain of a scarcity of

that article in his mess.



My stay at General Halleck's headquarters was exceedingly agreeable,

and my personal intercourse with officers on duty there was not only

pleasant and instructive, but offered opportunities for improvement

and advancement for which hardly any other post could have afforded

like chances.  My special duties did not occupy all my time, and

whenever possible I used to go over to General Sherman's division,

which held the extreme right of our line in the advance on Corinth,

to witness the little engagements occurring there continuously during

the slow progress which the army was then making, the enemy being

forced back but a short distance each day.  I knew General Sherman

very well.  We came from near the same section of country in Ohio,

and his wife and her family had known me from childhood.  I was

always kindly received by the General, and one day he asked me if I

would be willing to accept the colonelcy of a certain Ohio regiment

if he secured the appointment.  I gladly told him yes, if General

Halleck would let me go; but I was doomed to disappointment, for in

about a week or so afterward General Sherman informed me that the

Governor of Ohio would not consent, having already decided to appoint

some one else.



A little later Governor Blair, of Michigan, who was with the army

temporarily in the interest of the troops from his State, and who

just at this time was looking around for a colonel for the Second

Michigan Cavalry, and very anxious to get a regular officer, fixed

upon me as the man.  The regiment was then somewhat run down by

losses from sickness, and considerably split into factions growing

out of jealousies engendered by local differences previous to

organization, and the Governor desired to bridge over all these

troubles by giving the regiment a commander who knew nothing about

them.  I presume that some one said to the Governor about this time,

"Why don't you get Sheridan?"  This, however, is only conjecture.  I

really do not know how my name was proposed to him, but I have often

been told since that General Gordon Granger, whom I knew slightly

then, and who had been the former colonel of the regiment, first

suggested the appointment.  At all events, on the morning of May 27,

1862, Captain Russell A. Alger--recently Governor of Michigan--

accompanied by the quartermaster of the regiment, Lieutenant Frank

Walbridge, arrived at General Halleck's headquarters and delivered to

me this telegram:



(By Telegraph.)

"MILITARY DEPT OF MICHIGAN,

"ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE,

"DETROIT, May 25, 1862.



GENERAL ORDERS NO. 148.



"Captain Philip H. Sheridan, U. S. Army, is hereby appointed

Colonel of the Second Regiment Michigan Cavalry, to rank from

this date.



"Captain Sheridan will immediately assume command of the

regiment.



"By order of the Commander-in-Chief,

"JNO. ROBERTSON,

"Adjutant-General."





I took the order to General Halleck, and said that I would like to

accept, but he was not willing I should do so until the consent of

the War Department could be obtained.  I returned to my tent much

disappointed, for in those days, for some unaccountable reason, the

War Department did not favor the appointment of regular officers to

volunteer regiments, and I feared a disapproval at Washington.  After

a further consultation with Captain Alger and Lieutenant Walbridge, I

determined to go to the General again and further present the case.

Enlarging on my desire for active service with troops, and urging the

utter lack of such opportunity where I was, I pleaded my cause until

General Halleck finally resolved to take the responsibility of

letting me go without consulting the War Department.  When I had

thanked him for the kindness, he said that inasmuch as I was to leave

him, he would inform me that the regiment to which I had just been

appointed was ordered out as part of a column directed to make a raid

to the south of the enemy, then occupying Corinth, and that if I

could turn over my property, it would probably be well for me to join

my command immediately, so that I could go with the expedition.  I

returned to my tent, where Alger and Walbridge were still waiting,

and told them of the success of my interview, at the same time

notifying them that I would join the regiment in season to accompany

the expedition of which Halleck had spoken.



In the course of the afternoon I turned over all my property to my

successor, and about 8 o'clock that evening made my appearance at the

camp of the Second Michigan Cavalry, near Farmington, Mississippi.

The regiment was in a hubbub of excitement making preparations for

the raid, and I had barely time to meet the officers of my command,

and no opportunity at all to see the men, when the trumpet sounded to

horse.  Dressed in a coat and trousers of a captain of infantry, but

recast as a colonel of cavalry by a pair of well-worn eagles that

General Granger had kindly given me, I hurriedly placed on my saddle

a haversack, containing some coffee, sugar, bacon, and hard bread,

which had been prepared, and mounting my horse, I reported my

regiment to the brigade commander as ready for duty.









CHAPTER IX.



EXPEDITION TO BOONEVILLE--DESTROYING SUPPLIES--CONFEDERATE

STRAGGLERS--SUCCESS OF THE EXPEDITION--A RECONNOISSANCE--THE

IMPORTANCE OF BODILY SUSTENANCE--THE BATTLE OF BOONEVILLE--

RECOMMENDED FOR APPOINTMENT AS A BRIGADIER-GENERAL.



The expedition referred to by General Halleck in his parting

conversation was composed of the Second Michigan and Second Iowa

regiments of cavalry, formed into a brigade under command of Colonel

Washington L. Elliott, of the Second Iowa.  It was to start on the

night of the 27th of May at 12 o'clock, and proceed by a circuitous

route through Iuka, Miss., to Booneville, a station on the Mobile and

Ohio Railroad, about twenty-two miles below Corinth, and accomplish

all it could in the way of destroying the enemy's supplies and

cutting his railroad communications.



The weather in that climate was already warm, guides unobtainable,

and both men and horses suffered much discomfort from the heat, and

fatigue from the many delays growing out of the fact that we were in

almost total ignorance of the roads leading to the point that we

desired to reach.  In order that we might go light we carried only

sugar, coffee, and salt, depending on the country for meat and bread.

Both these articles were scarce, but I think we got all there was,

for our advent was so unexpected by the people of the region through

which we passed that, supposing us to be Confederate cavalry, they

often gave us all they had, the women and servants contributing most

freely from their, reserve stores.



Before reaching Booneville I had the advance, but just as we arrived

on the outskirts of the town the brigade was formed with the Second

Iowa on my right, and the whole force moved forward, right in front,

preceded by skirmishers.  Here we encountered the enemy, but forced

him back with little resistance.  When we had gained possession of

the station, Colonel Elliott directed me to take the left wing of my

regiment, pass to the south, and destroy a bridge or culvert supposed

to be at a little distance below the town on the Mobile and Ohio

Railroad.  The right wing, or other half of the regiment, was to be

held in reserve for my support if necessary.  I moved rapidly in the

designated direction till I reached the railroad, and then rode down

it for a mile and a half, but found neither bridge nor culvert.  I

then learned that there was no bridge of any importance except the

one at Baldwin, nine miles farther down, but as I was aware, from

information recently received, that it was defended by three

regiments and a battery, I concluded that I could best accomplish the

purpose for which I had been detached--crippling the road--by tearing

up the track, bending the rails, and burning the cross-ties.  This

was begun with alacrity at four different points, officers and men

vieing with one another in the laborious work of destruction.  We had

but few tools, and as the difficulties to overcome were serious, our

progress was slow, until some genius conceived the idea that the

track, rails and ties, might be lifted from its bed bodily, turned

over, and subjected to a high heat; a convenient supply of dry fence-

rails would furnish ample fuel to render the rails useless.  In this

way a good deal of the track was effectively broken up, and

communication by rail from Corinth to the south entirely cut off.

While we were still busy in wrecking the road, a dash was made at my

right and rear by a squadron of Confederate cavalry.  This was

handsomely met by the reserve under Captain Archibald P. Campbell, of

the Second Michigan, who, dismounting a portion of his command,

received the enemy with such a volley from his Colt's repeating

rifles that the squadron broke and fled in all directions.  We were

not molested further, and resumed our work, intending to extend the

break toward Baldwin, but receiving orders from Elliott to return to

Booneville immediately, the men were recalled, and we started to

rejoin the main command.



In returning to Booneville, I found the railroad track above where I

had struck it blocked by trains that we had thus cut off, and the

woods and fields around the town covered with several thousand

Confederate soldiers.  These were mostly convalescents and

disheartened stragglers belonging to General Beauregard's army, and

from them we learned that Corinth was being evacuated.  I spent some

little time in an endeavor to get these demoralized men into an open

field, with a view to some future disposition of them; but in the

midst of the undertaking I received another order from Colonel

Elliott to join him at once.  The news of the evacuation had also

reached Elliott, and had disclosed a phase of the situation so

different from that under which he had viewed it when we arrived at

Booneville, that he had grown anxious to withdraw, lest we should be

suddenly pounced upon by an overwhelming force from some one of the

columns in retreat.  Under such circumstances my prisoners would

prove a decided embarrassment, so I abandoned further attempts to get

them together--not even paroling them, which I thought might have

been done with but little risk.



In the meantime the captured cars had been fired, and as their

complete destruction was assured by explosions from those containing

ammunition, they needed no further attention, so I withdrew my men

and hastened to join Elliott, taking along some Confederate officers

whom I had retained from among four or five hundred prisoners

captured when making the original dash below the town.



The losses in my regiment, and, in fact, those of the entire command,

were insignificant.  The results of the expedition were important;

the railroad being broken so thoroughly as to cut off all rolling

stock north of Booneville, and to place at the service of General

Halleck's army the cars and locomotives of which the retreating

Confederates were now so much in need.  In addition, we burned

twenty-six cars containing ten thousand stand of small arms, three

pieces of artillery, a great quantity of clothing, a heavy supply of

ammunition, and the personal baggage of General Leonidas Polk.  A

large number of prisoners, mostly sick and convalescent, also fell

into our hands; but as we could not carry them with ussuch a hurried

departure was an immediate necessity, by reason of our critical

situation--the process of paroling them was not completed, and they

doubtless passed back to active service in the Confederacy, properly

enough unrecognized as prisoners of war by their superiors.



In returning, the column marched back by another indirect route to

its old camp near Farmington, where we learned that the whole army

had moved into and beyond Corinth, in pursuit of Beauregard, on the

13th of May, the very day we had captured Booneville.  Although we

had marched about one hundred and eighty miles in four days, we were

required to take part, of course, in the pursuit of the Confederate

army.  So, resting but one night in our old camp, we were early in

the saddle again on the morning of the 2d of June.  Marching south

through Corinth, we passed on the 4th of June the scene of our late

raid, viewing with much satisfaction, as we took the road toward

Blackland, the still smoldering embers of the burned trains.



On the 4th of June I was ordered to proceed with my regiment along

the Blackland road to determine the strength of the enemy in that

direction, as it was thought possible we might capture, by a

concerted movement which General John Pope had suggested to General

Halleck, a portion of Beauregard's rear guard.  Pushing the

Confederate scouts rapidly in with a running fire for a mile or more,

while we were approaching a little stream, I hoped to gobble the main

body of the enemy's pickets.  I therefore directed the sabre

battalion of the regiment, followed by that portion of it armed with

revolving rifles, to dash forward in column, cut off these videttes

before they could cross the stream, and then gather them in.  The

pickets fled hastily, however, and a pell-mell pursuit carried us

over the stream at their heels by a little bridge, with no thought of

halting till we gained a hill on the other side, and suddenly found

ourselves almost in the camp of a strong body of artillery and

infantry.  Captain Campbell being in advance, hurriedly dismounted

his battalion for a further forward movement on foot, but it was

readily seen that the enemy was present in such heavy force as almost

to ensure our destruction, and I gave orders for a hasty withdrawal.

We withdrew without loss under cover of thick woods, aided much,

however, by the consternation of the Confederates, who had hardly

recovered from their surprise at our sudden appearance in their camp

before we had again placed the stream between them and us by

recrossing the bridge.  The reconnoissance was a success in one way--

that is, in finding out that the enemy was at the point supposed by,

General Pope; but it also had a tendency to accelerate Beauregard's

retreat, for in a day or two his whole line fell back as far south as

Guntown, thus rendering abortive the plans for bagging a large

portion of his army.



General Beauregard's evacuation of Corinth and retreat southward were

accomplished in the face of a largely superior force of Union troops,

and he reached the point where he intended to halt for reorganization

without other loss than that sustained in the destruction of the cars

and supplies at Booneville, and the capture of some stragglers and

deserters that fell into our hands while we were pressing his rear

from General Pope's flank.  The number of these was quite large, and

indicated that the enemy was considerably demoralized.  Under such

circumstances, an energetic and skillfully directed pursuit might not

have made certain the enemy's destruction, but it would largely have

aided in disintegrating his forces, and I never could quite

understand why it was not ordered.  The desultory affairs between

rear and advance guards seemed as a general, thing to have no

particular purpose in view beyond finding out where the enemy was,

and when he was found, since no supporting colums were at hand and no

one in supreme control was present to give directions, our

skirmishing was of little avail and brought but small reward.



A short time subsequent to these occurrences, Colonel Elliott was

made a brigadier-general, and as General Pope appointed him his

Chief-of-Staff, I, on the 11th of June, 1862, fell in command of the

brigade by seniority.  For the rest of the month but little of moment

occurred, and we settled down into camp at Booneville on the 26th of

June, in a position which my brigade had been ordered to take up some

twenty miles, in advance of the main army for the purpose of covering

its front.  Although but a few days had elapsed from the date of my

appointment as colonel of the Second Michigan to that of my

succeeding to the command of the brigade, I believe I can say with

propriety that I had firmly established myself in the confidence of

the officers and men of the regiment, and won their regard by

thoughtful care.  I had striven unceasingly to have them well fed and

well clothed, had personally looked after the selection of their

camps, and had maintained such a discipline as to allay former

irritation.



Men who march, scout, and fight, and suffer all the hardships that

fall to the lot of soldiers in the field, in order to do vigorous

work must have the best bodily sustenance, and every comfort that can

be provided.  I knew from practical experience on the frontier that

my efforts in this direction would not only be appreciated, but

requited by personal affection and gratitude; and, further, that such

exertions would bring the best results to me.  Whenever my authority

would permit I saved my command from needless sacrifices and

unnecessary toil; therefore, when hard or daring work was to be done

I expected the heartiest response, and always got it.  Soldiers are

averse to seeing their comrades killed without compensating results,

and none realize more quickly than they the blundering that often

takes place on the field of battle.  They want some tangible

indemnity for the loss of life, and as victory is an offset the value

of which is manifest, it not only makes them content to shed their

blood, but also furnishes evidence of capacity in those who command

them.  My regiment had lost very few men since coming under my

command, but it seemed, in the eyes of all who belonged to it, that

casualties to the enemy and some slight successes for us had repaid

every sacrifice, and in consequence I had gained not only their

confidence as soldiers, but also their esteem and love as men, and to

a degree far beyond what I then realized.



As soon as the camp of my brigade was pitched at Booneville, I began

to scout in every direction, to obtain a knowledge of the enemy's

whereabouts and learn the ground about me.  My standing in drawing at

the Military Academy had never been so high as to warrant the belief

that I could ever prove myself an expert, but a few practical lessons

in that line were impressed on me there, and I had retained enough to

enable me to make rough maps that could be readily understood, and

which would be suitable to replace the erroneous skeleton outlines of

northern Mississippi, with which at this time we were scantily

furnished; so as soon as possible I compiled for the use of myself

and my regimental commanders an information map of the surrounding

country.  This map exhibited such details as country roads, streams,

farmhouses, fields, woods, and swamps, and such other topographical

features as would be useful.  I must confess that my crude sketch did

not evidence much artistic merit, but it was an improvement on what

we already possessed in the way of details to guide the command, and

this was what I most needed; for it was of the first importance that

in our exposed condition we should be equipped with a thorough

knowledge of the section in which we were operating, so as to be

prepared to encounter an enemy already indicating recovery from the

disorganizing effects of his recent retreat.



In the immediate vicinity of Booneville the country was covered with

heavy forests, with here and there clearings or intervening fields

that had been devoted to the cultivation of cotton and corn.  The

ground was of a low character, typical of northeastern Mississippi,

and abounded in small creeks that went almost totally dry even in

short periods of drought, but became flooded with muddy water under

the outpouring of rain peculiar to a semi-tropical climate.  In such

a region there were many chances of our being surprised, especially

by an enemy who knew the country well, and whose ranks were filled

with local guides; and great precautions as well as the fullest

information were necessary to prevent disaster.  I therefore

endeavored to familiarize all with our surroundings, but scarcely had

matters begun to shape themselves as I desired when our annihilation

was attempted by a large force of Confederate cavalry.



On the morning of July 1, 1862, a cavalry command of between five and

six thousand-men, under the Confederate General James R. Chalmers,

advanced on two roads converging near Booneville.  The head of the

enemy's column on the Blackland and Booneville road came in contact

with my pickets three miles and a half west of Booneville.  These

pickets, under Lieutenant Leonidas S. Scranton, of the Second

Michigan Cavalry, fell back slowly, taking advantage of every tree or

other cover to fire from till they arrived at the point where the

converging roads joined.  At this junction there was a strong

position in the protecting timber, and here Scranton made a firm

stand, being reinforced presently by the few men he had out as

pickets on the road to his left, a second company I had sent him from

camp, and subsequently by three companies more, all now commanded by

Captain Campbell.  This force was dismounted and formed in line, and

soon developed that the enemy was present in large numbers.  Up to

this time Chalmers had shown only the heads of his columns, and we

had doubts as to his purpose, but now that our resistance forced him

to deploy two regiments on the right and left of the road, it became

apparent that he meant business, and that there was no time to lose

in preparing to repel his attack.



Full information of the situation was immediately sent me, and I

directed Campbell to hold fast, if possible, till I could support

him, but if compelled to retire he was authorized to do so slowly,

taking advantage of every means that fell in his way to prolong the

fighting.  Before this I had stationed one battalion of the Second

Iowa in Booneville, but Colonel Edward Hatch, commanding that

regiment, was now directed to leave one company for the protection of

our camp a little to the north of the station, and take the balance

of the Second Iowa, with the battalion in Booneville except two sabre

companies, and form the whole in rear of Captain Campbell, to protect

his flanks and support him by a charge should the enemy break his

dismounted line.



While these preparations were being made, the Confederates attempted

to drive Campbell from his position by a direct attack through an

open field.  In this they failed, however, for our men, reserving

their fire until the enemy came within about thirty yards, then

opened on him with such a shower of bullets from our Colt's rifles

that it soon became too hot for him, and he was repulsed with

considerable loss.  Foiled in this move, Chalmers hesitated to attack

again in front, but began overlapping both flanks of Campbell's line

by force of numbers, compelling Campbell to retire toward a strong

position I had selected in his rear for a line on which to make our

main resistance.  As soon as the enemy saw this withdrawing he again

charged in front, but was again as gallantly repelled as in the first

assault, although the encounter was for a short time so desperate as

to have the character of a hand-to-hand conflict, several groups of

friend and foe using on each other the butts of their guns.  At this

juncture the timely arrival of Colonel Hatch with the Second Iowa

gave a breathing-spell to Campbell, and made the Confederates so

chary of further direct attacks that he was enabled to retire; and at

the same time I found opportunity to make disposition of the

reinforcement to the best advantage possible, placing the Second Iowa

on the left of the new line and strengthening Campbell on its right

with all the men available.



In view of his numbers, the enemy soon regained confidence in his

ability to overcome us, and in a little while again began his

flanking movements, his right passing around my left flank some

distance, and approaching our camp and transportation, which I had

forbidden to be moved out to the rear.  Fearing that he would envelop

us and capture the camp and transportation, I determined to take the

offensive.  Remembering a circuitous wood road that I had become

familiar with while making the map heretofore mentioned, I concluded

that the most effective plan would be to pass a small column around

the enemy's left, by way of this road, and strike his rear by a

mounted charge simultaneously with an advance of our main line on his

front.  I knew that the attack in rear would be a most hazardous

undertaking, but in the face of such odds as the enemy had the

condition of affairs was most critical, and could be relieved, only

by a bold and radical change in our tactics; so I at once selected

four sabre companies, two from the Second Michigan and two from the

Second Iowa, and placing Captain Alger, of the former regiment, in

command of them, I informed him that I expected of them the quick and

desperate work that is usually imposed on a forlorn hope.



To carry out the purpose now in view, I instructed Captain Alger to

follow the wood road as it led around the left of the enemy's

advancing forces, to a point where 'it joined the Blackland road,

about three miles from Booneville, and directed him, upon reaching

the Blackland road, to turn up it immediately, and charge the rear of

the enemy's line.  Under no circumstances was he to deploy the

battalion, but charge in column right through whatever he came upon,

and report to me in front of Booneville, if at all possible for him

to get there.  If he failed to break through the enemy's line, he was

to go ahead as far as he could, and then if any of his men were left,

and he was able to retreat, he was to do so by the same route he had

taken on his way out.  To conduct him on this perilous service I sent

along a thin, sallow, tawny-haired Mississippian named Beene, whom I

had employed as a guide and scout a few days before, on account of

his intimate knowledge of the roads, from the public thoroughfares

down to the insignificant by-paths of the neighboring swamps.  With

such guidance I felt sure that the column would get to the desired

point without delay, for there was no danger of its being lost or

misled by taking any of the many by-roads which traversed the dense

forests through which it would be obliged to pass.  I also informed

Alger that I should take the reserve and join the main line in front

of Booneville for the purpose of making an advance of my whole force,

and that as a signal he must have his men cheer loudly when he struck

the enemy's rear, in order that my attack might be simultaneous with

his.



I gave him one hour to go around and come back through the enemy, and

when he started I moved to the front with the balance of the reserve,

to put everything I had into the fight.  This meant an inestimable

advantage to the enemy in case of our defeat, but our own safety

demanded the hazard.  All along our attenuated line the fighting was

now sharp, and the enemy's firing indicated such numerical strength

that fear of disaster to Alger increased my anxiety terribly as the

time set for his cheering arrived and no sound of it was heard.



Relying, however, on the fact that Beene's knowledge of the roads

would prevent his being led astray, and confident of Alger's

determination to accomplish the purpose for which he set out, as soon

as the hour was up I ordered my whole line forward.  Fortunately,

just as this moment a locomotive and two cars loaded with grain for

my horses ran into Booneville from Corinth.  I say fortunately,

because it was well known throughout the command that in the morning,

when I first discovered the large numbers of the enemy, I had called

for assistance; and my troops, now thinking that reinforcements had

arrived by rail from Rienzi, where a division of infantry was

encamped, and inspirated by this belief, advanced with renewed

confidence and wild cheering.  Meantime I had the engineer of the

locomotive blow his whistle loudly, so that the enemy might also

learn that a train had come; and from the fact that in a few moments

he began to give way before our small force, I thought that this

strategem had some effect.  Soon his men broke, and ran in the utmost

disorder over the country in every direction.  I found later,

however, that his precipitous retreat was due to the pressure on his

left from the Second Iowa, in concert with the front attack of the

Second Michigan, and the demoralization wrought in his rear by Alger,

who had almost entirely accomplished the purpose of his expedition,

though he had failed to come through, or so near that I could hear

the signal agreed upon before leaving Booneville.



After Alger had reached and turned up the Blackland road, the first

thing he came across was the Confederate headquarters; the officers

and orderlies about which he captured and sent back some distance to

a farm-house.  Continuing on a gallop, he soon struck the rear of the

enemy's line, but was unable to get through; nor did he get near

enough for me to hear his cheering; but as he had made the distance

he was to travel in the time allotted, his attack and mine were

almost coincident, and the enemy, stampeded by the charges in front

and rear, fled toward Blackland, with little or no attempt to capture

Alger's command, which might readily have been done.  Alger's

troopers soon rejoined me at Booneville, minus many hats, having

returned by their original route.  They had sustained little loss

except a few men wounded and a few temporarily missing.  Among these

was Alger himself, who was dragged from his saddle by the limb of a

tree that, in the excitement of the charge, he was unable to flank.

The missing had been dismounted in one way or another, and run over

by the enemy in his flight; but they all turned up later, none the

worse except for a few scratches and bruises.



My effective strength in this fight was 827 all told, and Alger's

command comprised ninety officers and men.  Chalmers's force was

composed of six regiments and two battalions, and though I have been

unable to find any returns from which to verify his actual numbers,

yet, from the statements of prisoners and from information obtained

from citizens along his line of march, it is safe to say that he had

in the action not less than five-thousand men.  Our casualties were

not many--forty-one in all.  His loss in killed and wounded was

considerable, his most severely wounded--forty men--falling into our

hands, having been left at farm-houses in the vicinity of the

battlefield.



The victory in the face of such odds was most gratifying, and as it

justified my disinclination--in fact, refusal--to retire from

Booneville without fighting (for the purpose of saving my

transportation, as directed by superior authority when I applied in

the morning for reinforcements), it was to me particularly grateful.

It was also very valuable in, view of the fact that it increased the

confidence between the officers and men of my brigade and me, and

gave us for the balance of the month not only comparative rest, but

entire immunity from the dangers of a renewed effort to gobble my

isolated outpost.  In addition to all this, commendation from my

immediate superiors was promptly tendered through oral and written

congratulations; and their satisfaction at the result of the battle

took definite form a few days later, in the following application for

my promotion, when, by an expedition to Ripley, Miss., most valuable

information as to the enemy's location and plans was captured:







"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE MISSISSIPPI,

"JULY 30, 1862.--3.05 P. M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK,

"Washington, D. C.



"Brigadiers scarce; good ones scarce.  Asboth goes on the month's

leave you gave him ten months since; Granger has temporary command.

The undersigned respectfully beg that you will obtain the promotion

of Sheridan.  He is worth his weight in gold.  His Ripley expedition

has brought us captured letters of immense value, as well as

prisoners, showing the rebel plans and dispositions, as you will

learn from District Commander.



"W. S. ROSECRANS, Brigadier-General.

"C. C. SULLIVAN,      "       "

"G. GRANGER,          "       "

"W. L. ELLIOTT,       "       "

"A. ASBOTH,           "       "









CHAPTER X.



IN CAMP NEAR RIENZI--GENERAL GRANGER--A VALUABLE CAPTURE AT RIPLEY--

RAIDING A CORNFIELD--REPULSING AN ATTACK--PRESENTED WITH THE BLACK

HORSE "RIENZI"--MEETING GENERAL GRANT--APPOINTED A BRIGADIER-GENERAL.



After the battle of Booneville, it was decided by General Rosecrans,

on the advice of General Granger, that my position at Booneville was

too much exposed, despite the fact that late on the evening of the

fight my force had been increased by the addition of, a battery of

four guns and two companies of infantry, and by the Third Michigan

Cavalry, commanded by Colonel John K. Mizner; so I was directed to

withdraw from my post and go into camp near Rienzi, Mississippi,

where I could equally well cover the roads in front of the army, and

also be near General Asboth's division of infantry, which occupied a

line in rear of the town.  This section of country, being higher and

more rolling than that in the neighborhood of Booneville, had many

advantages in the way of better camping-grounds, better grazing and

the like, but I moved with reluctance, because I feared that my

proximity to Asboth would diminish to a certain extent my

independence of command.



General Asboth was a tall, spare, handsome man, with gray mustache

and a fierce look.  He was an educated soldier, of unquestioned

courage, but the responsibilities of outpost duty bore rather heavily

on him, and he kept all hands in a state of constant worry in

anticipation of imaginary attacks.  His ideas of discipline were not

very rigid either, and as by this time there had been introduced into

my brigade some better methods than those obtaining when it first

fell to my command, I feared the effect should he, have any control

over it, or meddle with its internal affairs.  However, there was

nothing to do but to move to the place designated, but General

Granger, who still commanded the cavalry division to which the

brigade belonged, so arranged matters with General Rosecrans, who had

succeeded to the command of the Army of the Mississippi, that my

independence was to be undisturbed, except in case of a general

attack by the enemy.



We went into camp near Rienzi, July 22, sending back to the general

field-hospital at Tuscumbia Springs all our sick--a considerable

number--stricken down by the malarial influences around Booneville.

In a few days the fine grazing arid abundance of grain for our

exhausted horses brought about their recuperation; and the many large

open fields in the vicinity gave opportunity for drills and parades,

which were much needed.  I turned my attention to those disciplinary

measures which, on account of active work in the field, had been

necessarily neglected since the brigade had arrived at Pittsburg

Landing, in April; and besides, we had been busy in collecting

information by scouting parties and otherwise, in prosecution of the

purpose for which we were covering the main army.



I kept up an almost daily correspondence with General Granger,

concerning the, information obtained by scouts and reconnoitring

parties, and he came often to Rienzi to see me in relation to this

and other matters.  Previously I had not had much personal

association with Granger.  While I was at Halleck's headquarters we

met on one or two occasions, and the day I joined the Second Michigan

at Farmington I saw him for a few moments, but, with such slight

exception, our intercourse had been almost exclusively official.  He

had suggested my name, I was told, to Governor Blair, when the

Governor was in search of an officer of the regular army to appoint

to the colonelcy of the Second Michigan Cavalry, but his

recommendation must have been mainly based on the favorable opinions

he had heard expressed by General Halleck and by some of the officers

of his staff, rather than from any personal knowledge of my capacity.

Of course I was very grateful for this, but some of his

characteristics did not impress me favorably, and I sometimes wished

the distance between our camps greater.  His most serious failing was

an uncontrollable propensity to interfere with and direct the minor

matters relating to the command, the details for which those under

him were alone responsible.  Ill-judged meddling in this respect

often led to differences between us, only temporary it is true, but

most harassing to the subordinate, since I was compelled by the

circumstances of the situation not only invariably to yield my own

judgment, but many a time had to play peacemaker--smoothing down

ruffled feelings, that I knew had been excited by Granger's freaky

and spasmodic efforts to correct personally some trifling fault that

ought to have been left to a regimental or company commander to

remedy.  Yet with all these small blemishes Granger had many good

qualities, and his big heart was so full of generous impulses and

good motives as to far outbalance his short-comings; and not-

withstanding the friction and occasional acerbity of our official

intercourse, we maintained friendly relations till his death.



In pursuance of the fatal mistake made by dispersing Halleck's forces

after the fall of Corinth, General Don Carlos Buell's Army of the

Ohio had been started some time before on its march eastward toward

Chattanooga; and as this movement would be followed of course by a

manoeuvre on the part of the enemy, now at Tupelo under General

Braxton Bragg, either to meet Buell or frustrate his designs by some

counter-operation, I was expected to furnish, by scouting and all

other means available, information as to what was going on within the

Confederate lines.  To do the work required, necessitated an increase

of my command, and the Seventh Kansas Cavalry was therefore added to

it, and my picket-line extended so as to cover from Jacinto

southwesterly to a point midway between Rienzi and Booneville, and

then northwesterly to the Hatchie River.  Skirmishes between outposts

on this line were of frequent occurrence, with small results to

either side, but they were somewhat annoying, particularly in the

direction of Ripley, where the enemy maintained a considerable

outpost.  Deciding to cripple if not capture this outpost, on the

evening of July 27, I sent out an expedition under Colonel Hatch,

which drove the enemy from the town of Ripley and took a few

prisoners, but the most valuable prize was in the shape of a package

of thirty-two private letters, the partial reading of which disclosed

to me the positive transfer from Mississippi of most of Bragg's army,

for the purpose of counteracting Buell's operations in northern

Alabama and East Tennessee.  This decisive evidence was of the utmost

importance, and without taking time to read all the letters, I

forwarded them to General Granger July 28, in a despatch which

stated: "I deem it necessary to send them at once; the enemy is

moving in large force on Chattanooga."  Other than this the results

of the expedition were few; and the enemy, having fled from Ripley

with but slight resistance, accompanied by almost all the

inhabitants, re-occupied the place next day after our people had

quitted it, and resumed in due time his annoying attacks on our

outposts, both sides trying to achieve something whenever occasion

offered.



The prevalence of a severe drought had resulted in drying up many of

the streams within the enemy's lines, and, in consequence, he was

obliged to shift his camps often, and send his beef-cattle and mules

near his outposts for water.  My scouts kept me well posted in regard

to the movements of both camps and herds; and a favorable opportunity

presenting itself, I sent an expedition on August 14 to gather in

some animals located on Twenty-Mile Creek, a stream always supplied

with water from a source of never-failing, springs.  Our side met

with complete success in this instance, and when the expedition

returned, we were all made happy by an abundance of fresh beef, and

by some two hundred captured mules, that we thus added to our trains

at a time when draft animals were much needed.



Rations for the men were now supplied in fair quantities, and the

only thing required to make us wholly contented was plenty of grain

for our animals.  Because of the large number of troops then in West

Tennessee and about Corinth, the indifferent railroad leading down

from Columbus, Ky., was taxed to its utmost capacity to transport

supplies.  The quantity of grain received at Corinth from the north

was therefore limited, and before reaching the different outposts, by

passing through intermediate depots of supply, it had dwindled to

insignificance.  I had hopes, however, that this condition of things

might be ameliorated before long by gathering a good supply of corn

that was ripening in the neighborhood, and would soon, I thought, be

sufficiently hard to feed to my animals.  Not far from my

headquarters there was a particularly fine field, which, with this

end in view, I had carefully protected through the milky stage, to

the evident disappointment of both Asboth's men and mine.  They bore

the prohibition well while it affected only themselves, but the trial

was too great when it came to denying their horses; and men whose

discipline kept faith with my guards during the roasting-ear period

now fell from grace.  Their horses were growing thin, and few could

withstand the mute appeals of their suffering pets; so at night the

corn, because of individual foraging, kept stealthily and steadily

vanishing, until the field was soon fringed with only earless stalks.

The disappearance was noticed, and the guard increased, but still the

quantity of corn continued to grow less, the more honest troopers

bemoaning the loss, and questioning the honor of those to whose

safekeeping it had been entrusted.  Finally, doubtless under the

apprehension that through their irregularities the corn would all

disappear and find its way to the horses in accordance with the

stealthy enterprise of their owners, a general raid was made on the

field in broad daylight, and though the guard drove off the

marauders, I must admit that its efforts to keep them back were so

unsuccessful that my hopes for an equal distribution of the crop were

quickly blasted.  One look at the field told that it had been swept

clean of its grain.  Of course a great row occurred as to who was to

blame, and many arrests and trials took place, but there had been

such an interchanging of cap numbers and other insignia that it was

next to impossible to identify the guilty, and so much crimination

and acrimony grew out of the affair that it was deemed best to drop

the whole matter.



On August 27 about half of the command was absent reconnoitring, I

having sent it south toward Tupelo, in the hope of obtaining some

definite information regarding a movement to Holly Springs of the

remainder of the Confederate army, under General Price, when about

mid-day I was suddenly aroused by excited cries and sounds of firing,

and I saw in a moment that the enemy was in my camp.  He had come in

on my right flank from the direction of the Hatchie River, pell-mell

with our picket-post stationed about three miles out on the Ripley

road.  The whole force of the enemy comprised about eight hundred,

but only his advance entered with my pickets, whom he had charged and

badly stampeded, without, on their part, the pretense of a fight in

behalf of those whom it was their duty to protect until proper

dispositions for defense could be made.  The day was excessively hot,

one of those sultry debilitating days that had caused the suspending

of all military exercises; and as most of the men were lounging or

sleeping in their tents, we were literally caught napping.  The alarm

spread instantly through the camp, and in a moment the command turned

out for action, somewhat in deshabille it is true, but none the less

effective, for every man had grabbed his rifle and cartridge-box at

the first alarm.  Aided by a few shots from Captain Henry Hescock's

battery, we soon drove the intruders from our camp in about the same

disorder in which they had broken in on us.  By this time Colonel

Hatch and Colonel Albert L. Lee had mounted two battalions each, and

I moved them out at a lively pace in pursuit, followed by a section

of the battery.  No halt was called till we came upon the enemy's

main body, under Colonel Faulkner, drawn up in line of battle near

Newland's store.  Opening on him with the two pieces of artillery, I

hurriedly formed line confronting him, and quickly and with but

little resistance drove him in confusion from the field.  The sudden

turning of the tables dismayed Faulkner's men, and panic seizing

them, they threw away every loose article of arms or clothing of

which they could dismember themselves, and ran in the wildest

disorder in a mad effort to escape.  As the chase went on the panic

increased, the clouds of dust from the road causing an intermingling

of friend and foe.  In a little while the affair grew most ludicrous,

Faulkner's hatless and coatless men taking to the woods in such

dispersed order and so demoralized that a good many prisoners were

secured, and those of the enemy who escaped were hunted until dark.

When the recall was sounded, our men came in loaded down with plunder

in the shape of hats, haversacks, blankets, pistols, and shotguns, in

a quantity which amply repaid for the surprise of the morning, but

did not excuse the delinquent commander of our picket-guard, who a

few days later was brought to a realizing sense of his duty by a

court-martial.



Shortly after this affair Captain Archibald P. Campbell, of the

Second Michigan Cavalry, presented me with the black horse called

Rienzi, since made historical from having been ridden by me in many

battles, conspicuously in the ride from Winchester to Cedar Creek,

which has been celebrated in the poem by T. Buchanan Read.  This

horse was of Morgan stock, and then about three years old.  He was

jet black, excepting three white feet, sixteen hands high, and

strongly built, with great powers of endurance.  He was so active

that he could cover with ease five miles an hour at his natural

walking gait.  The gelding had been ridden very seldom; in fact,

Campbell had been unaccustomed to riding till the war broke out, and,

I think, felt some disinclination to mount the fiery colt.  Campbell

had an affection for him, however, that never waned, and would often

come to my headquarters to see his favorite, the colt being cared for

there by the regimental farrier, an old man named John Ashley, who

had taken him in charge when leaving Michigan, and had been his groom

ever since.  Seeing that I liked the horse--I had ridden him on

several occasions--Campbell presented him to me on one of these

visits, and from that time till the close of the war I rode him

almost continuously, in every campaign and battle in which I took

part, without once finding him overcome by fatigue, though on many

occasions his strength was severely tested by long marches and short

rations.  I never observed in him any vicious habit; a nervousness

and restlessness and switch of the tail, when everything about him

was in repose, being the only indication that he might be

untrustworthy.  No one but a novice could be deceived by this,

however, for the intelligence evinced in every feature, and his

thoroughbred appearance, were so striking that any person accustomed

to horses could not misunderstand such a noble animal.  But Campbell

thought otherwise, at least when the horse was to a certain degree

yet untrained, and could not be pursuaded to ride him; indeed, for

more than a year after he was given to me, Campbell still retained

suspicions of his viciousness, though, along with this mistrust, an

undiminished affection.  Although he was several times wounded, this

horse escaped death in action; and living to a ripe old age, died in

1878, attended to the last with all the care and surrounded with

every comfort due the faithful service he had rendered.



In moving from Corinth east toward Chattanooga, General Buell's army

was much delayed by the requirement that he should repair the Memphis

and Charleston railroad as he progressed.  The work of repair obliged

him to march very slowly, and was of but little use when done, for

guerrillas and other bands of Confederates destroyed the road again

as soon as he had passed on.  But worst of all, the time thus

consumed gave General Bragg the opportunity to reorganize and

increase his army to such an extent that he was able to contest the

possession of Middle Tennessee and Kentucky.  Consequently, the

movement of this army through Tennessee and Kentucky toward the Ohio

River--its objective points being Louisville and Cincinnati--was now

well defined, and had already rendered abortive General Buell's

designs on Chattanooga and East Tennessee.  Therefore extraordinary

efforts on the part of the Government became necessary, and the

concentration of National troops at Louisville and Cincinnati to meet

the contingency of Bragg's reaching those points was an obvious

requirement.  These troops were drawn from all sections in the West

where it was thought they could be spared, and among others I was

ordered to conduct thither--to Louisville or Cincinnati, as

subsequent developments might demand--my regiment, Hescock's battery,

the Second and Fifteenth Missouri, and the Thirty-sixth and Forty-

fourth Illinois regiments of infantry, known as the "Pea Ridge

Brigade." With this column I marched back to Corinth on the 6th of

September, 1862, for the purpose of getting railroad transportation

to Columbus, Kentucky.



At Corinth I met General Grant, who by this time had been

reestablished in favor and command somewhat, General Halleck having

departed for Washington to assume command of the army as General-in-

Chief.  Before and during the activity which followed his

reinstatement, General Grant had become familiar with my services

through the transmission to Washington of information I had furnished

concerning the enemy's movements, and by reading reports of my fights

and skirmishes in front, and he was loth to let me go.  Indeed, he

expressed surprise at seeing me in Corinth, and said he had not

expected me to go; he also plainly showed that he was much hurt at

the inconsiderate way in which his command was being depleted.  Since

I was of the opinion that the chief field of usefulness and

opportunity was opening up in Kentucky, I did not wish him to retain

me, which he might have done, and I impressed him with my conviction,

somewhat emphatically, I fear.  Our conversation ended with my wish

gratified.  I afterward learned that General Granger, whom General

Grant did not fancy, had suggested that I should take to Cincinnati

the main portion of Granger's command--the Pea Ridge Brigade--as well

as the Second Michigan Cavalry, of which I was still colonel.

We started that night, going by rail over the Mobile and Ohio road to

Columbus, Ky., where we embarked on steamboats awaiting us.  These

boats were five in number, and making one of them my flag-ship,

expecting that we might come upon certain batteries reported to be

located upon the Kentucky shore of the Ohio, I directed the rest to

follow my lead.  Just before reaching Caseyville, the captain of a

tin-clad gunboat that was patrolling the river brought me the

information that the enemy was in strong force at Caseyville, and

expressed a fear that my fleet could not pass his batteries.

Accepting the information as correct, I concluded to capture the

place before trying to pass up the river.  Pushing in to the bank as

we neared the town, I got the troops ashore and moved on Caseyville,

in the expectation of a bloody fight, but was agreeably surprised

upon reaching the outskirts of the village by an outpouring of its

inhabitants--men, women, and children--carrying the Stars and

Stripes, and making the most loyal professions.  Similar

demonstrations of loyalty had been made to the panic-stricken captain

of the gunboat when he passed down the river, but he did not stay to

ascertain their character, neither by landing nor by inquiry, for he

assumed that on the Kentucky bank of the river there could be no

loyalty.  The result mortified the captain intensely; and deeming his

convoy of little further use, he steamed toward Cairo in quest of

other imaginary batteries, while I re-embarked at Caseyville, and

continued up the Ohio undisturbed.  About three miles below

Cincinnati I received instructions to halt, and next day I was

ordered by Major-General H. G. Wright to take my troops back to

Louisville, and there assume command of the Pea Ridge Brigade,

composed of the Second and Fifteenth Missouri, Thirty-sixth and

Forty-fourth Illinois infantry, and of such other regiments as might

be sent me in advance of the arrival of General Buell's army.

When I reached Louisville I reported to Major-General William Nelson,

who was sick, and who received me as he lay in bed.  He asked me why

I did not wear the shoulder-straps of my rank.  I answered that I was

the colonel of the Second Michigan cavalry, and had on my appropriate

shoulder-straps.  He replied that I was a brigadier-general for the

Booneville fight, July 1, and that I should wear the shoulder-straps

of that grade.  I returned to my command and put it in camp; and as I

had no reluctance to wearing the shoulder-straps of a brigadier-

general, I was not long in procuring a pair, particularly as I was

fortified next day by receiving from Washington official information

of my appointment as a brigadier-general, to date from July 1, 1862,

the day of the battle of Booneville









CHAPTER XI.



GOOD ADVICE FROM GENERAL NELSON--HIS TRAGIC DEATH--PUTTING LOUISVILLE

IN A STATE OF DEFENSE--ASSIGNED TO THE COMMAND OF THE ELEVENTH

DIVISION--CAPTURE OF CHAPLIN HEIGHTS--BATTLE OF PERRYVILLE--REPORTED

AMONG THE KILLED--A THRILLING INCIDENT--GENERAL BUELL RELIEVED BY

GENERAL ROSECRANS.



I reported to Major-General Nelson at the Galt House in Louisville,

September 14, 1862, who greeted me in the bluff and hearty fashion of

a sailor--for he had been in the navy till the breaking out of the

war.  The new responsibilities that were now to fall upon me by

virtue of increased rank caused in my mind an uneasiness which, I

think, Nelson observed at the interview, and he allayed it by giving

me much good advice, and most valuable information in regard to

affairs in Kentucky, telling me also that he intended I should retain

in my command the Pea Ridge Brigade and Hescock's battery.  This

latter assurance relieved me greatly, for I feared the loss of these

troops in the general redistribution which I knew must soon take

place; and being familiar with their valuable service in Missouri,

and having brought them up from Mississippi, I hoped they would

continue with me.  He directed me to take position just below the

city with the Pea Ridge Brigade, Hescock's battery, and the Second

Michigan Cavalry, informing me, at the same time, that some of the

new regiments, then arriving under a recent call of the President for

volunteers, would also be assigned to my command.  Shortly after the

interview eight new regiments and an additional battery joined me,

thus making good his promise of more troops.



A few days later came Nelson's tragic end, shocking the whole

country.  Those of us in camp outside of the city were startled on

the morning of September 29 by the news that General Jefferson C.

Davis, of the Union Army, had shot General Nelson at the Galt House,

and the wildest rumors in regard to the occurrence came thick and

fast; one to the effect that Nelson was dead, another having it that

he was living and had killed Davis, and still others reflecting on

the loyalty of both, it being supposed by the general public at first

that the difficulty between the two men had grown out of some

political rather than official or personal differences.  When the

news came, I rode into the city to the Galt House to learn the

particulars, reaching there about 10 o'clock in the forenoon.  Here I

learned that Nelson had been shot by Davis about two hours before, at

the foot of the main stairway leading from the corridor just beyond

the office to the second floor, and that Nelson was already dead.  It

was almost as difficult to get reliable particulars of the matter at

the hotel as it had been in my camp, but I gathered that the two men

had met first at an early hour near the counter of the hotel office,

and that an altercation which had begun several days before in

relation to something official was renewed by Davis, who, attempting

to speak to Nelson in regard to the subject-matter of their previous

dispute, was met by an insulting refusal to listen.  It now appears

that when Nelson made this offensive remark, Davis threw a small

paper ball that he was nervously rolling between his fingers into

Nelson's face, and that this insult was returned by Nelson slapping

Davis (Killed by a Brother Soldier.--Gen. J. B. Fry.) in the face.

But at the time, exactly what had taken place just before the

shooting was shrouded in mystery by a hundred conflicting stories,

the principal and most credited of which was that Davis had demanded

from Nelson an apology for language used in the original altercation,

and that Nelson's refusal was accompanied by a slap in the face, at

the same moment denouncing Davis as a coward.  However this may be,

Nelson, after slapping Davis, moved toward the corridor, from which a

stairway led to the second floor, and just as he was about to ascend,

Davis fired with a pistol that he had obtained from some one near by

after the blow had been struck.  The ball entered Nelson's breast

just above the heart, but his great strength enabled him to ascend

the stairway notwithstanding the mortal character of the wound, and

he did not fall till he reached the corridor on the second floor.  He

died about half an hour later.  The tragedy cast a deep gloom over

all who knew the men, for they both had many warm personal friends;

and affairs at Louisville had hardly recovered as yet from the

confused and discouraging condition which preceded the arrival of

General Buell's army.  General Buell reported the killing of Nelson

to the authorities at Washington, and recommended the trial of Davis

by court-martial, but no proceedings were ever instituted against him

in either a civil or military court, so to this day it has not been

determined judicially who was the aggressor.  Some months later Davis

was assigned to the command of a division in Buell's army after that

officer had been relieved from its command.



Two Confederate armies, under General Kirby Smith and General Braxton

Bragg, had penetrated into Kentucky, the one under Smith by the way

of Cumberland Gap, the other and main army under Bragg by way of the

Sequatche Valley, Glasgow, and Mumfordsville.  Glasgow was captured

by the enemy on the 17th of September, and as the expectation was

that Buell would reach the place in time to save the town, its loss

created considerable alarm in the North, for fears were now

entertained that Bragg would strike Louisville and capture the city

before Buell could arrive on the ground.  It became necessary

therefore to put Louisville in a state of defense, and after the

cordon of principal works had been indicated, my troops threw up in

one night a heavy line of rifle-pits south of the city, from the

Bardstown pike to the river.  The apprehended attack by Bragg never

came, however, for in the race that was then going on between him and

Buell on parallel roads, the Army of the Ohio outmarched the

Confederates, its advance arriving at Louisville September 25.



General Buell immediately set about reorganizing the whole force, and

on September 29 issued an order designating the troops under my

command as the Eleventh Division, Army of the Ohio, and assigning

Brigadier-General J. T. Boyle to command the division, and me to

command one of its brigades.  To this I could not object, of course,

for I was a brigadier-general of very recent date, and could hardly

expect more than a brigade.  I had learned, however, that at least

one officer to whom a high command had been given--a corps--had not

yet been appointed a general officer by the President, and I

considered it somewhat unfair that I should be relegated to a

brigade, while men who held no commissions at all were being made

chiefs of corps and divisions; so I sought an interview with General

Buell's chief-of-staff, Colonel Fry, and, while not questioning

Buell's good intentions nor his pure motives, insisted that my rights

in the matter should be recognized.  That same evening I was assigned

to the command of the Eleventh Division, and began preparing it at

once for a forward movement, which I knew must soon take place in the

resumption of offensive operations by the Army of the Ohio.



During the interval from September 25 till October 1 there was among

the officers much criticism of General Buell's management of the

recent campaign, which had resulted in his retirement to Louisville;

and he was particularly censured by many for not offering battle to

General Bragg while the two armies were marching parallel to each

other, and so near that an engagement could have been brought on at

any one of several points--notably so at Glasgow, Kentucky, if there

had been a desire to join issue.  It was asserted, and by many

conceded, that General Buell had a sufficient force to risk a fight.

He was much blamed for the loss of Mumfordsville also.  The capture

of this point, with its garrison, gave Bragg an advantage in the race

toward the Ohio River, which odds would most likely have ensured the

fall of Louisville had they been used with the same energy and skill

that the Confederate commander displayed from Chattanooga to Glasgow;

but something always diverted General Bragg at the supreme moment,

and he failed to utilize the chances falling to him at this time,

for, deflecting his march to the north toward Bardstown, he left open

to Buell the direct road to Louisville by way of Elizabethtown.



At Bardstown Bragg's army was halted while he endeavored to establish

a Confederate government in Kentucky by arranging for the

installation of a provisional governor at Lexington.  Bragg had been

assured that the presence of a Confederate army in Kentucky would so

encourage the secession element that the whole State could be forced

into the rebellion and his army thereby largely increased; but he had

been considerably misled, for he now found that though much latent

sympathy existed for his cause, yet as far as giving active aid was

concerned, the enthusiasm exhibited by the secessionists of Kentucky

in the first year of the war was now replaced by apathy, or at best

by lukewarmness.  So the time thus spent in political machinations

was wholly lost to Bragg; and so little reinforcement was added to

his army that it may be said that the recruits gained were not enough

to supply the deficiencies resulting from the recent toilsome marches

of the campaign.



In the meanwhile Buell had arrived at Louisville, system had been

substituted for the chaos which had previously obtained there, and

orders were issued for an advance upon the enemy with the purpose of

attacking and the hope of destroying him within the limits of the

"blue grass" region, and, failing in that, to drive him from

Kentucky.  The army moved October 1, 1862, and my division, now a

part of the Third Corps, commanded by General C. C. Gilbert, marched

directly on Bardstown, where it was thought the enemy would make a

stand, but Bragg's troops retreated toward Perryville, only resisting

sufficiently to enable the forces of General Kirby Smith to be drawn

in closer--they having begun a concentration at Frankfort--so they

could be used in a combined attack on Louisville as soon as the

Confederate commander's political projects were perfected.



Much time was consumed by Buell's army in its march on Perryville,

but we finally neared it on the evening of October 7.  During the

day, Brigadier-General Robert B. Mitchell's division of Gilbert's

corps was in the advance on the Springfield pike, but as the enemy

developed that he was in strong force on the opposite side of a small

stream called Doctor's Creek, a tributary of Chaplin River, my

division was brought up and passed to the front.  It was very

difficult to obtain water in this section of Kentucky, as a drought

had prevailed for many weeks, and the troops were suffering so for

water that it became absolutely necessary that we should gain

possession of Doctor's Creek in order to relieve their distress.

Consequently General Gilbert, during the night, directed me to push

beyond Doctor's Creek early the next morning.  At daylight on the 8th

I moved out Colonel Dan McCook's brigade and Barnett's battery for

the purpose, but after we had crossed the creek with some slight

skirmishing, I found that we could not hold the ground unless we

carried and occupied a range of hills, called Chaplin Heights, in

front of Chaplin River.  As this would project my command in the

direction of Perryville considerably beyond the troops that were on

either flank, I brought up Laiboldt's brigade and Hescock's battery

to strengthen Colonel McCook.  Putting both brigades into line we

quickly carried the Heights, much to the surprise of the enemy, I

think, for he did not hold on to the valuable ground as strongly as

he should have done.  This success not only ensured us a good supply

of water, but also, later in the day, had an important bearing in the

battle of Perryville.  After taking the Heights, I brought up the

rest of my division and intrenched, without much difficulty, by

throwing up a strong line of rifle-pits, although the enemy's

sharpshooters annoyed us enough to make me order Laiboldt's brigade

to drive them in on the main body.  This was successfully done in a

few minutes, but in pushing them back to Chaplin River, we discovered

the Confederates forming a line of battle on the opposite bank, with

the apparent purpose of an attack in force, so I withdrew the brigade

to our intrenchments on the crest and there awaited the assault.



While this skirmishing was going on, General Gilbert--the corps

commander--whose headquarters were located on a hill about a mile

distant to the rear, kept sending me messages by signal not to bring

on an engagement.  I replied to each message that I was not bringing

on an engagement, but that the enemy evidently intended to do so, and

that I believed I should shortly be attacked.  Soon after returning

to the crest and getting snugly fixed in the rifle-pits, my attention

was called to our left, the high ground we occupied affording me in

that direction an unobstructed view.  I then saw General A. McD.

McCook's corps--the First-advancing toward Chaplin River by the

Mackville road, apparently unconscious that the Confederates were

present in force behind the stream.  I tried by the use of signal

flags to get information of the situation to these troops, but my

efforts failed, and the leading regiments seemed to approach the

river indifferently prepared to meet the sudden attack that speedily

followed, delivered as it was from the chosen position of the enemy.

The fury of the Confederate assault soon halted this advance force,

and in a short time threw it into confusion, pushed it back a

considerable distance, and ultimately inflicted upon it such loss of

men and guns as to seriously cripple McCook's corps, and prevent for

the whole day further offensive movement on his part, though he

stoutly resisted the enemy's assaults until 4 o'clock in the

afternoon.



Seeing McCook so fiercely attacked, in order to aid him I advanced

Hescock's battery, supported by six regiments, to a very good

position in front of a belt of timber on my extreme left, where an

enfilading fire could be opened on that portion of the enemy

attacking the right of the First Corps, and also on his batteries

across Chaplin River.  But at this juncture he placed two batteries

on my right and began to mass troops behind them, and General

Gilbert, fearing that my intrenched position on the heights might be

carried, directed me to withdraw Hescock and his supports and return

them to the pits.  My recall was opportune, for I had no sooner got

back to my original line than the Confederates attacked me furiously,

advancing almost to my intrenchments, notwithstanding that a large

part of the ground over which they had to move was swept by a heavy

fire of canister from both my batteries.  Before they had quite

reached us, however, our telling fire made them recoil, and as they

fell back, I directed an advance of my whole division, bringing up my

reserve regiments to occupy the crest of the hills; Colonel William

P. Carlin's brigade of Mitchell's division meanwhile moving forward

on my right to cover that flank.  This advance pressed the enemy to

Perryville, but he retired in such good order that we gained nothing

but some favorable ground that enabled me to establish my batteries

in positions where they could again turn their attention to the

Confederates in front of McCook, whose critical condition was shortly

after relieved, however, by a united pressure of Gilbert's corps

against the flank of McCook's assailants, compelling them to retire

behind Chaplin River.



The battle virtually ended about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, though

more or less desultory firing continued until dark.  Considering the

severity of the engagement on McCook's front, and the reverses that

had befallen him, I question if, from that part of the line, much

could have been done toward retrieving the blunders of the day, but

it did seem to me that, had the commander of the army been able to be

present on the field, he could have taken advantage of Bragg's final

repulse, and there would have remained in our hands more than the

barren field.  But no attempt was made to do anything more till next

morning, and then we secured little except the enemy's killed and

most severely wounded.



The operations of my division during the engagement pleased.  General

Gilbert very much, and he informed me that he would relax a rigidly

enforced order which General Buell had issued some days before,

sufficiently to permit my trains to come to the front and supply my

almost starving troops with rations.  The order in question was one

of those issued, doubtless with a good intent, to secure generally

the safety of our trains, but General Gilbert was not elastic, and on

the march he had construed the order so illiberally that it was next

to impossible to supply the men with food, and they were particularly

short in this respect on the eve of the battle.  I had then

endeavored to persuade him to modify his iron-clad interpretation of

the order, but without effect, and the only wagons we could bring up

from the general parks in rear were ambulances and those containing

ammunition.  So to gain access to our trains was a great boon, and at

that moment a more welcome result than would have been a complete

victory minus this concession.



When the battle ceased General Gilbert asked me to join him at

Buell's headquarters, which were a considerable distance to the rear,

so after making some dispositions for the evening I proceeded there

as requested.  I arrived just as Buell was about to sit down to his

supper, and noticing that he was lame, then learned that he had been

severely injured by a recent fall from his horse.  He kindly invited

me to join him at the table, an invitation which I accepted with

alacrity, enjoying the meal with a relish known only to a very-hungry

man, for I had eaten nothing since morning.  Of course the events of

the day were the chief topic of discussion--as they were during my

stay at headquarters--but the conversation indicated that what had

occurred was not fully realized, and I returned to my troops

impressed with the belief that General Buell and his staff-officers

were unconscious of the magnitude of the battle that had just been

fought.



It had been expected by Buell that he would fight the enemy on the

9th of October, but the Confederates disposed of that proposition by

attacking us on the 8th, thus disarranging a tactical conception

which, with our superior numbers, would doubtless have proved

successful had it not been anticipated by an enterprising foe.

During the battle on the 8th the Second Corps, under General Thomas

L. Crittenden, accompanied by General George H. Thomas, lay idle the

whole day for want of orders, although it was near enough to the

field to take an active part in the fight; and, moreover, a large

part of Gilbert's corps was unengaged during the pressure on McCook.

Had these troops been put in on the enemy's left at any time after he

assaulted McCook, success would have been beyond question; but there

was no one on the ground authorized to take advantage of the

situation, and the battle of Perryville remains in history an example

of lost opportunities.  This was due in some measure probably to

General Buell's accident, but is mainly attributable to the fact that

he did not clearly apprehend Bragg's aim, which was to gain time to

withdraw behind Dick's River all the troops he had in Kentucky, for

the Confederate general had no idea of risking the fate of his army

on one general battle at a place or on a day to be chosen by the

Union commander.



Considering the number of troops actually engaged, the losses to

Buell were severe, amounting to something over five thousand in

killed, wounded, and missing.  Among the killed were two brigade

commanders of much promise--General James S. Jackson and General

William R. Terrill.  McCook's corps lost twelve guns, some of which

were recovered next day.  The enemy's loss in killed and wounded we

never learned, but it must have equalled ours; and about four

thousand prisoners, consisting principally of sick and wounded, fell

into our hands.  In the first report of the battle sent North to the

newspapers I was reported among the killed; but I was pleased to

notice, when the papers reached us a few days later, that the error

had been corrected before my obituary could be written.



The enemy retired from our front the night of the 8th, falling back

on Harrodsburg to form a junction with Kirby Smith, and by taking

this line of retreat opened to us the road to Danville and the chance

for a direct march against his depot of supplies at Bryantsville.  We

did not take advantage of this opening, however, and late in the day-

-on the 9th--my division marched in pursuit, in the direction of

Harrodsburg, which was the apex of a triangle having for its base a

line from Perryville to Danville.  The pursuit was slow, very slow,

consuming the evening of the 9th and all of the l0th and 11th.  By

cutting across the triangle spoken of above, just south of the apex,

I struck the Harrodsburg-Danville road, near Cave Springs, joining

there Gilbert's left division, which had preceded me and marched

through Harrodsburg.  Here we again rested until the intention of the

enemy could be divined, and we could learn on which side of Dick's

River he would give us battle.  A reconnoissance sent toward the

Dickville crossing developed to a certainty that we should not have

another engagement, however; for it disclosed the fact that Bragg's

army had disappeared toward Camp Dick Robinson, leaving only a small

rear-guard at Danville, which in turn quickly fled in the direction

of Lancaster, after exchanging a few shots with Hescock's battery.



While this parting salute of deadly projectiles was going on, a

little, daughter of Colonel William J. Landram, whose home was in

Danville, came running out from his house and planted a small

national flag on one of Hescock's guns.  The patriotic act was so

brave and touching that it thrilled all who witnessed the scene; and

until the close of the war, when peace separated the surviving

officers and men of the battery, that little flag was protected and

cherished as a memento of the Perryville campaign.



Pursuit of the enemy was not continued in force beyond Crab Orchard,

but some portions of the army kept at Bragg's heels until he crossed

the Cumberland River, a part of his troops retiring to Tennessee by

way of Cumberland Gap, but the major portion through Somerset.  As

the retreat of Bragg transferred the theatre of operations back to

Tennessee, orders were now issued for a concentration of Buell's army

at Bowling Green, with a view to marching it to Nashville, and my

division moved to that point without noteworthy incident.  I reached

Bowling Green with a force much reduced by the losses sustained in

the battle of Perryville and by sickness.  I had started from

Louisville on October 1 with twelve regiments of infantry--four old

and eight new ones--and two batteries, but many poor fellows,

overcome by fatigue, and diseases induced by the heat, dust, and

drought of the season, had to be left at roadside hospitals.  This

was particularly the case with the new regiments, the men of which,

much depressed by homesickness, and not yet inured to campaigning,

fell easy victims to the hardships of war.



At Bowling Green General Buell was relieved, General W. S. Rosecrans

succeeding him.  The army as a whole did not manifest much regret at

the change of commanders, for the campaign from Louisville on was

looked upon generally as a lamentable failure, yet there were many

who still had the utmost confidence in General Buell, and they

repelled with some asperity the reflections cast upon him by his

critics.  These admirers held him blameless throughout for the

blunders of the campaign, but the greater number laid every error at

his door, and even went to the absurdity of challenging his loyalty

in a mild way, but they particularly charged incompetency at

Perryville, where McCook's corps was so badly crippled while nearly

30,000 Union troops were idle on the field, or within striking

distance.  With these it was no use to argue that Buell's accident

stood in the way of his activity, nor that he did not know that the

action had assumed the proportions of a battle.  The physical

disability was denied or contested, but even granting this, his

detractors claimed that it did not excuse his ignorance of the true

condition of the fight, and finally worsted his champions by pointing

out that Bragg's retreat by way of Harrodsburg beyond Dick's River so

jeopardized the Confederate army, that had a skillful and energetic

advance of the Union troops been made, instead of wasting precious

time in slow and unnecessary tactical manoeuvres, the enemy could

have been destroyed before he could quit the State of Kentucky.









CHAPTER XII.



MOVING TO BOWLING GREEN--JAMES CARD, THE SCOUT AND GUIDE--GENERAL

SILL--COLONEL SCHAEFER--COLONEL G. W. ROBERTS--MOVEMENT ON

MURFREESBORO'--OPENING OF THE BATTLE OF STONE RIVER.



My division had moved from Crab Orchard to Bowling Green by easy

marches, reaching this place November 1. General Rosecrans assumed

command of the department October 30, at Louisville, and joined the

army November 2.  There had been much pressure brought to bear on

General Buell to induce him to take measures looking to the occupancy

of East Tennessee, and the clamor to this end from Washington still

continued; but now that Bragg was south of the Cumberland River, in a

position threatening Nashville, which was garrisoned by but a small

force, it was apparent to every one at all conversant with the

situation that a battle would have to be fought somewhere in Middle

Tennessee.  So, notwithstanding the pressure from Washington, the

army was soon put in motion for Nashville, and when we arrived there

my division went into camp north of the river, on a plateau just

outside the little town of Edgefield, until the movements of the

enemy should be further developed.



While in this camp, on the plantation of Mr. Hobson, there came to my

headquarters one morning an East Tennessean named James Card, who

offered to the Union cause his services in any capacity in which they

might be made useful.  This offer, and the relation of his personal

history, were given with such sincerity of speech and manner that in

a short time I became convinced of his honesty of purpose.  He was a

small, active, busy man, with a determined way about him, and his

countenance indicated great intelligence.  He gave minute information

that was of inestimable value to me regarding East and Middle

Tennessee and northern Georgia, for, with a view to the army's future

movements, I was then making a study of the topography of this

region, and posting myself as to Middle Tennessee, for all knew this

would be the scene of active operations whenever the campaign was

resumed.  This man, like most of the East Tennesseans whom I had met,

was intensely loyal and patriotic, and the interview led in a few

days to his employment as a scout and guide, and subsequently to the

engaging in the same capacity of two of his brothers, who were good

men; but not quite as active nor so intelligent as he was.  Card had

been a colporter, having pedled books, especially religious tracts,

over all Middle and East Tennessee and Georgia, assisted by his

brothers at times, and was therefore thoroughly familiar with these

regions, their roads and inhabitants.  He also preached to country

congregations occasionally, when ministers were scarce, and I have no

doubt often performed the functions of family physician in the

mountain district.  Thus his opportunities were great; and the loyal

people in every section of the country being well known to him and

his brothers, the three began, at this time, a system of scouting and

investigation which bore its first-fruits in specifically locating

the different divisions of Bragg's army, with statements of their

strength and condition, and all with so much accuracy that I

thereafter felt reasonably sure that I could at all times procure

such knowledge of the enemy's operations as would well equip me for

any contingency that might arise.



By the middle of November the enemy, having assembled his forces in

Middle Tennessee, showed considerable boldness, and it became

necessary to rearrange the Union lines; so my troops were moved to

the south side of the river, out on the Murfreesboro' pike, to Mill

Creek, distant from Nashville about seven miles.  While we were in

camp on Mill Creek the army was reorganized, and General Joshua W.

Sill, at his own request, was assigned to my division, and took

command of Colonel Nicholas Greusel's brigade.  My division became at

the same time the Third Division, Right Wing, Fourteenth Army Corps,

its three brigades of four regiments each being respectively

commanded by General Sill, Colonel Frederick Schaefer and Colonel Dan

McCook; but a few days later Colonel George W. Roberts's brigade,

from the garrison at Nashville, was substituted for McCook's.



General Sill was a classmate of mine at the Military Academy, having

graduated in 1853.  On graduating he was appointed to the Ordnance

Corps, and served in that department at various arsenals and ordnance

depots throughout the country till early in 1861, when he resigned to

accept a professorship of mathematics and civil engineering at the

Brooklyn Collegiate and Polytechnic Institute.  At the breaking out

of the war he immediately tendered his services to the Government,

and soon rose to the colonelcy of the Thirty-Third Ohio Volunteers,

and afterward to the rank of brigadier-general.  I knew him well, and

was glad that he came to my division, though I was very loth to

relieve Colonel Greusel, of the Thirty-Sixth Illinois, who had

already indicated much military skill and bravery, and at the battle

of Perryville had handled his men with the experience of a veteran.

Sill's modesty and courage were exceeded only by a capacity that had

already been demonstrated in many practical ways, and his untimely

death, almost within a month of his joining me, abruptly closed a

career which, had it been prolonged a little more, not only would

have shed additional lustre on his name, but would have been of

marked benefit to his country.



Colonel Schaefer, of the Second Missouri Infantry, had been absent on

sick-leave during the Kentucky campaign, but about this date he

returned to duty, and by seniority fell in command of the second

brigade.  He was of German birth, having come from Baden, where,

prior to 1848, he had been a non-commissioned officer in the service

of his State.  He took part as an insurgent in the so-called

revolution which occurred at Baden in that year, and, compelled to

emigrate on the suppression of the insurrection, made his way to this

country and settled in St. Louis.  Here the breaking out of the war

found him, and through the personal interest which General Sigel took

in him he was commissioned a colonel of volunteers.  He had had a

pretty fair education, a taste for the military profession, and was

of tall and slender build, all of which gave him a student-like

appearance.  He was extremely excitable and nervous when anticipating

a crisis, but always calmed down to cool deliberation when the

critical moment came.  With such a man I could not be less than well

satisfied, although the officer whom he replaced--Colonel Laiboldt--

had performed efficient service and shown much capacity in the recent

campaign.



Colonel G. W. Roberts, of the Forty-Second Illinois Infantry, also

came to me in the reorganization.  He was an ideal soldier both in

mind and body.  He was young, tall, handsome, brave, and dashing, and

possessed a balance-wheel of such good judgment that in his sphere of

action no occasion could arise from which he would not reap the best

results.  But he too was destined to lay, down his life within a few

days, and on the same fatal field.  His brigade had been performing

garrison duty in Nashville during the siege of that city while

Buell's army was in Kentucky, but disliking the prospect of

inactivity pending the operations opening before us, Roberts had

requested and obtained a transfer to the army in the field.  His

brigade relieved Colonel Dan McCook's, the latter reluctantly joining

the garrison at Nashville, every one in it disappointed and disgusted

that the circumstances existing at this time should necessitate their

relegation to the harassing and tantalizing duty of protecting our

depots and line of supply.



I was fortunate in having such brigade commanders, and no less

favored in the regimental and battery commanders.  They all were not

only patriots, but soldiers, and knowing that discipline must be one

of the most potent factors in bringing to a successful termination,

the mighty contest in which our nation was struggling for existence,

they studied and practiced its methods ceaselessly, inspiring with

the same spirit that pervaded themselves the loyal hearts of their

subordinate officers and men.  All worked unremittingly in the camp

at Mill Creek in preparing for the storm, which now plainly indicated

its speedy coming.  Drills, parades, scouts, foraging expeditions,

picket and guard duty, made up the course in this school of

instruction, supplemented by frequent changes in the locations of the

different brigades, so that the division could have opportunity to

learn to break camp quickly and to move out promptly on the march.

Foraging expeditions were particularly beneficial in this respect,

and when sent out, though absent sometimes for days, the men went

without tents or knapsacks, equipped with only one blanket and their

arms, ammunition, and rations, to teach them to shift for themselves

with slender means in the event of necessity.  The number of

regimental and headquarters wagons was cut down to the lowest

possible figure, and everything made compact by turning into the

supply and ammunition trains of the division all surplus

transportation, and restricting the personal baggage of officers to

the fewest effects possible.



My own staff also was somewhat reorganized and increased at Mill

Creek, and though it had been perfectly satisfactory before, yet, on

account of the changes of troops that had occurred in the command, I

found it necessary to replace valuable officers in some instances,

and secure additional ones in others.  The gathering of information

about the enemy was also industriously pursued, and Card and his

brothers were used constantly on expeditions within the Confederate

lines, frequently visiting Murfreesboro', Sparta, Tullahoma,

Shelbyville, and other points.  What they learned was reported to

army headquarters, often orally through me or personally communicated

by Card himself, but much was forwarded in official letters,

beginning with November 24, when I transmitted accurate information

of the concentration of Bragg's main force at Tullahoma.  Indeed,

Card kept me so well posted as to every movement of the enemy, not

only with reference to the troops in my immediate front, but also

throughout his whole army, that General Rosecrans placed the most

unreserved reliance on all his statements, and many times used them

to check and correct the reports brought in by his own scouts.



Slight skirmishes took place frequently during this period, and now

and then heavy demonstrations were made in the neighborhood of

Nolensville by reconnoitring parties from both armies, but none of

these ever grew into a battle.  These affairs sprung from the desire

of each side to feel his antagonist, and had little result beyond

emphasizing the fact that behind each line of pickets lay a massed

and powerful army busily preparing for the inevitable conflict and

eager for its opening.  So it wore on till the evening of December

25, 1862; then came the order to move forward.



General Rosecrans, in the reorganization of the army, had assigned

Major-General A. McD. McCook to command the right wing, MajorGeneral

George H. Thomas the centre, and Major-General T. L. Crittenden the

left wing.  McCook's wing was made up of three divisions, commanded

in order of rank by Brigadier-General Jeff. C. Davis; Brigadier-

General R. W. Johnson, and Brigadier-General P. H. Sheridan.

Although the corps nomenclature established by General Buell was

dropped, the grand divisions into which he had organized the army at

Louisville were maintained, and, in fact, the conditions established

then remained practically unaltered, with the exception of the

interchange of some brigades, the transfer of a few general officers

from one wing or division to another, and the substitution of General

Thomas for Gilbert as a corps commander.  The army was thus compact

and cohesive, undisturbed by discord and unembarrassed by jealousies

of any moment; and it may be said that under a commander who, we

believed, had the energy and skill necessary to direct us to success,

a national confidence in our invincibility made us all keen for a

test of strength with the Confederates.  We had not long to wait.



Early on the morning of December 26, 1862, in a heavy rain, the army

marched, the movement being directed on Murfreesboro', where the

enemy had made some preparation to go into winter-quarters, and to

hold which town it was hoped he would accept battle.  General Thomas

moved by the Franklin and Wilson pikes, General Crittenden by the

Murfreesboro' pike, through Lavergne, and General McCook by the

Nolensville pike--Davis's division in advance.  As McCook's command

neared Nolensville, I received a message from Davis informing me that

the Confederates were in considerable force, posted on a range of

hills in his front, and requesting me to support him in an attack he

was about to make.  When the head of my column arrived at Nolensville

I began massing my troops on the right of the road, and by the time

this formation was nearly completed Davis advanced, but not meeting

with sufficient resistance to demand active assistance from me, he

with his own command carried the hills, capturing one piece of

artillery.  This position of the Confederates was a strong one,

defending Knob's Gap, through which the Nolensville and Triune pike

passed.  On the 27th Johnson's division, followed by mine, advanced

to Triune, and engaged in a severe skirmish near that place, but my

troops were not called into action, the stand made by the enemy being

only for the purpose of gaining time to draw in his outlying troops,

which done, he retired toward Murfreesboro'.  I remained inactive at


Triune during the 28th, but early on the 29th moved out by the Bole

Jack road to the support of, Davis in his advance to Stewart's Creek,

and encamped at Wilkinson's crossroads, from which point to

Murfreesboro', distant about six miles, there was a good turnpike.

The enemy had sullenly resisted the progress of Crittenden and McCook

throughout the preceding three days, and as it was thought probable

that he might offer battle at Stewart's Creek, Thomas, in pursuance

of his original instructions looking to just such a contingency, had

now fallen into the centre by way of the Nolensville crossroads.



On the morning of the 3oth I had the advance of McCook's corps on the

Wilkinson pike, Roberts's brigade leading.  At first only slight

skirmishing took place, but when we came within about three miles of

Murfreesboro' the resistance of the enemy's pickets grew serious, and

a little further on so strong that I had to put in two regiments to

push them back.  I succeeded in driving them about half a mile, when

I was directed by McCook to form line of battle and place my

artillery in position so that I could act in concert with Davis's

division, which he wished to post on my right in the general line he

desired to take up.  In obedience to these directions I deployed on

the right of, and oblique to the Wilkinson pike, with a front of four

regiments, a second line of four regiments within short supporting

distance, and a reserve of one brigade in column of regiments to the

rear of my centre.  All this time the enemy kept up a heavy artillery

and musketry fire on my skirmishers, he occupying, with his

sharpshooters, beyond some open fields, a heavy belt of timber to my

front and right, where it was intended the left of Davis should

finally rest.  To gain this point Davis was ordered to swing his

division into it in conjunction with a wheeling movement of my right

brigade, until our continuous line should face nearly due east.  This

would give us possession of the timber referred to, and not only rid

us of the annoying fire from the skirmishers screened by it, but also

place us close in to what was now developing as Bragg's line of

battle.  The movement was begun about half-past 2, and was

successfully executed, after a stubborn resistance.  In this

preliminary affair the enemy had put in one battery of artillery,

which was silenced in a little while, however, by Bush's and

Hescock's guns.  By sundown I had taken up my prescribed position,

facing almost east, my left (Roberts's brigade) resting on the

Wilkinson pike, the right (Sill's brigade) in the timber we had just

gained, and the reserve brigade (Schaefer's) to the rear of my

centre, on some rising ground in the edge of a strip of woods behind

Houghtaling's and Hescock's batteries.  Davis's division was placed

in position on my right, his troops thrown somewhat to the rear, so

that his line formed nearly a right angle with mine, while Johnson's

division formed in a very exposed position on the right of Davis,

prolonging the general line just across the Franklin pike.



The centre, under Thomas, had already formed to my left, the right of

Negley's division joining my left in a cedar thicket near the

Wilkinson pike, while Crittenden's corps was posted on the left of

Thomas, his left resting on Stone River, at a point about two miles

and a half from Murfreesboro'.



The precision that had characterized every manoeuvre of the past

three days, and the exactness with which each corps and division fell

into its allotted place on the evening of the 30th, indicated that at

the outset of the campaign a well-digested plan of operations had

been prepared for us; and although the scheme of the expected battle

was not known to subordinates of my grade, yet all the movements up

to this time had been so successfully and accurately made as to give

much promise for the morrow, and when night fell there was general

anticipation of the best results to the Union army.










CHAPTER XIII.



ASSAULT ON OUR RIGHT FLANK--OCCUPYING A NEW POSITION--THE ENEMY

CHECKED--TERRIBLE LOSS OF OFFICERS--AMMUNITION GIVES OUT--

RECONSTRUCTING THE LINE--COLLECTING THE WOUNDED AND BURYING THE DEAD-

-DEALING WITH COWARDS--RESULTS OF THE VICTORY.



The enemy under Bragg lay between us and stone River in order of

battle, his general line conforming to the course of that stream. In

my immediate front he appeared to be established in strong force in a

dense cedar wood, just beyond an open valley, which varied from two

hundred to four hundred yards in width, the cedars extending the

entire length of the valley.  From the events of the day and evening

of the 3oth, it was apparent that the two armies were in close

proximity, and orders received during the night revealed the fact

that Rosecrans intended to attack by throwing his left on the enemy's

right, with the expectation of driving it in toward Murfreesboro', so

that the right of Crittenden's corps could attack Bragg's centre in

reverse, while Thomas supported Crittenden by a simultaneous front

assault; and from the movements of the enemy at daylight next

morning, it was plainly indicated that Bragg had planned to swing his

left on our right by an exactly similar manoeuvre, get possession of

the railroad and the Nashville pike, and if possible cut us off from

our base at Nashville.  The conceptions in the minds of the two

generals were almost identical; but Bragg took the initiative,

beginning his movement about an hour earlier than the time set by

Rosecrans, which gained him an immense advantage in execution in the

earlier stages of the action.



During the evening of the th, feeling keenly all the solicitude which

attends one in anticipation of a battle, I examined my position with

great care, inspecting its whole length several times to remedy any

defects that might exist, and to let the men see that I was alive to

their interests and advantages.  After dark, I went back to the rear

of my reserve brigade, and establishing my headquarters behind the

trunk of a large fallen tree, which would shelter me somewhat from

the cold December wind, lay down beside a small camp-fire to get some

rest.



At 2 o'clock on the morning of the 31st General Sill came back to me

to report that on his front a continuous movement of infantry and

artillery had been going on all night within the Confederate lines,

and that he was convinced that Bragg was massing on our right with

the purpose of making an attack from that direction early in the

morning.  After discussing for a few minutes the probabilities of

such a course on the part of the enemy, I thought McCook should be

made acquainted with what was going on, so Sill and I went back to

see him at his headquarters, not far from the Griscom House, where we

found him sleeping on some straw in the angle of a worm-fence.  I

waked him up and communicated the intelligence, and our consequent

impressions.  He talked the matter over with us for some little time,

but in view of the offensive-defensive part he was to play in the

coming battle, did not seem to think that there was a necessity for

any further dispositions than had already been taken.  He said that

he thought Johnson's division would be able to take care of the

right, and seemed confident that the early assault which was to be

made from Rosecrans's left would anticipate and check the designs

which we presaged.  We two then returned to my little camp-fire

behind the log, and as we continued talking of what might be expected

from the indications on the right, and Sill becoming more anxious, I

directed two regiments from the reserve to report to him, that they

might be placed within very short supporting distance of his line.

He then rejoined his brigade, better satisfied, but still adhering to

the belief he had expressed when first making his report.



Long before dawn my division breakfasted, and was assembled under

arms, the infantry in line, the cannoneers at their pieces, but while

we were thus preparing, all the recent signs of activity in the

enemy's camp were hushed, a death-like stillness prevailing in the

cedars to our front.  Shortly after daylight General Hardee opened

the engagement, just as Sill had predicted, by a fierce attack on

Johnson's division, the extreme right of the Union line.  Immediate

success attending this assault, Hardee extended the attack gradually

along in front of Davis, hip movement taking the form of a wheel to

the right, the pivot being nearly opposite the left of my division.

Johnson's division soon gave way, and two of Davis's brigades were

forced to fall back with it, though stubbornly resisting the

determined and sweeping onset.



In the meantime the enemy had also attacked me, advancing across an

old cotton-field in Sill's front in heavy masses, which were

furiously opened upon by Bush's battery from Sill's line, and by

Hescock's and Houghtaling's batteries, which had an oblique fire on

the field from a commanding position in rear of my centre.  The

effect of this fire on the advancing column was terrible, but it

continued on till it reached the edge of the timber where Sill's

right lay, when my infantry opened at a range of not over fifty

yards.  For a short time the Confederates withstood the fire, but

then wavered, broke, and fell back toward their original line.  As

they retired, Sill's brigade followed in a spirited charge, driving

them back across the open ground and behind their intrenchments.  In

this charge the gallant Sill was killed; a rifle ball passing through

his upper lip and penetrating the brain.  Although this was a heavy

loss, yet the enemy's discomfiture was such as to give us an hour's

time, and as Colonel Greusel, Thirty-sixth Illinois, succeeded to

Sill's command, I directed him, as he took charge, to recall the

brigade to its original position, for the turning-column on my

extreme right was now assuming the most menacing attitude, and it was

urgently necessary to prepare for it.



When that portion of the enemy driven back by Sill recovered from its

repulse it again advanced to the attack, this time directing its

efforts chiefly upon my extreme right, and the front of Woodruff's

brigade of Davis's division, which brigade still held on in its first

position.  In front of my centre the Confederates were again driven

back, but as the assault on Woodruff was in conjunction with an

advance of the column that had forced Johnson to retire, Woodruff was

compelled unfortunately to give way, and two regiments on the right

of my line went with him, till they rallied on the two reserve

regiments which, in anticipation of the enemy's initiatory attack I

had sent to Sill's rear before daylight.



Both Johnson's and Davis's divisions were now practically gone from

our line, having retired with a loss of all formation, and they were

being closely pursued by the enemy, whose columns were following the

arc of a circle that would ultimately carry him in on my rear.  In

consequence of the fact that this state of things would soon subject

me to a fire in reverse, I hastily withdrew Sill's brigade and the

reserve regiments supporting it, and ordered Roberts's brigade, which

at the close of the enemy's second repulse had changed front toward

the south and formed in column of regiments, to cover the withdrawal

by a charge on the Confederates as they came into the timber where my

right had originally rested.  Roberts made the charge at the proper

time, and was successful in checking the enemy's advance, thus giving

us a breathing-spell, during which I was able to take up a new

position with Schaefer's and Sill's brigades on the commanding ground

to the rear, where Hescock's and Houghtaling's batteries had been

posted all the morning.



The general course of this new position was at right angles with my

original line, and it took the shape of an obtuse angle, with my

three batteries at the apex.  Davis, and Carlin of his division,

endeavored to rally their men here on my right, but their efforts

were practically unavailing,--though the calm and cool appearance of

Carlin, who at the time was smoking a stumpy pipe, had some effect,

and was in strong contrast to the excited manner of Davis, who seemed

overpowered by the disaster that had befallen his command.  But few

could be rallied, however, as the men were badly demoralized, and

most of them fell back beyond the Wilkinson pike, where they

reorganized behind the troops of General Thomas.



At this juncture the enemy's turning-column began advancing again in

concert with Cheatham's division, and as the extreme left of the

Confederates was directed on Griscom's house, and their right on the

Blanton house, my new position was in danger of envelopment.  No hope

of stemming the tide at this point seemed probable, but to gain time

I retained my ground as long as possible, and until, under directions

from General McCook, I moved to the front from my left flank and

attached myself to the right of Negley's division, which up to this

hour had been left almost undisturbed by the enemy in the line it had

taken up the night before.  Under a heavy fire we succeeded in this

manoeuvre, Schaefer's brigade marching first, then the batteries, and

Roberts's and Sill's brigades following.  When my division arrived on

this new ground, I posted Roberts on Negley's right, with Hescock's

and Bush's guns, the brigade and guns occupying a low rocky ridge of

limestone, which faced them toward Murfreesboro', nearly south.  The

rest of my division was aligned facing west, along the edge of a

cedar thicket, the rear rank backed up on the right flank of Roberts,

with Houghtaling's battery in the angle.  This presented Sill's and

Schaefer's brigades in an almost opposite direction to the line we

had so confidently taken up the night before, and covered Negley's

rear.  The enemy, in the meantime, had continued his wheeling

movement till he occupied the ground that my batteries and reserve

brigade had held in the morning, and I had now so changed my position

that the left brigade of my division approached his intrenchments in

front of Stone River, while Sill's and Schaeffer's brigades, by

facing nearly west, confronted the successful troops that had smashed

in our extreme right.



I had hardly got straightened out in this last place when I was

attacked by Cheatham's'division, which, notwithstanding the

staggering blows it had previously received from Sill and Roberts,

now again moved forward in conjunction with the wheeling movement

under the immediate command of Hardee.  One of the most sanguinary

contests of the day now took place.  In fulfillment of Bragg's

original design no doubt, Cheatham's division attacked on my left,

while heavy masses under Hardee, covered by batteries posted on the

high ground formerly occupied by my guns, assaulted my right, the

whole force advancing simultaneously.  At the same time the enemy

opened an artillery fire from his intrenchments in front of

Murfreesboro', and it seemed that he was present on every side.  My

position was strong, however, located in the edge of a dense cedar

thicket and commanding a slight depression of open ground that lay in

my front.  My men were in good spirits too, notwithstanding they had

been a good deal hustled around since daylight, with losses that had

told considerably on their numbers.  Only a short distance now

separated the contending lines, and as the batteries on each side

were not much more than two hundred yards apart when the enemy made

his assault, the artillery fire was fearful in its effect on the

ranks of both contestants, the enemy's heavy masses staggering under

the torrent of shell and canister from our batteries, while our lines

were thinned by his ricochetting projectiles, that rebounded again

and again over the thinly covered limestone formation and sped on to

the rear of Negley.  But all his efforts to dislodge or destroy us

were futile, and for the first time since daylight General Hardee was

seriously checked in the turning movement he had begun for the

purpose of getting possession of the Nashville pike, and though

reinforced until two-fifths of Bragg's army was now at his command,

yet he met with repulse after repulse, which created great gaps in

his lines and taught him that to overwhelm us was hopeless.



As the enemy was recoiling from his first attack, I received a

message from Rosecrans telling me that he was making new

dispositions, and directing me to hold on where I was until they were

completed.  From this I judged that the existing conditions of the

battle would probably require a sacrifice of my command, so I

informed Roberts and Schaefer that we must be prepared to meet the

demand on us by withstanding the assault of the enemy, no matter what

the outcome.  Every energy was therefore bent to the simple holding

of our ground, and as ammunition was getting scarce, instructions

were given throughout the command to have it reserve its fire till

the most effective moment.  In a little while came a second and a

third assault, and although they were as daring and furious as the

first, yet in each case the Confederates were repulsed, driven back

in confusion, but not without deadly loss to us, for the noble

Roberts was killed, and Colonel Harrington, of the Twenty-Seventh

Illinois, who succeeded to his brigade, was mortally wounded a few

minutes later.  I had now on the death-roll three brigade commanders,

and the loss of subordinate officers and men was appalling, but their

sacrifice had accomplished the desired result; they had not fallen in

vain.  Indeed, the bravery and tenacity of my division gave to

Rosecrans the time required to make new dispositions, and exacted

from our foes the highest commendations.



A lull followed the third fierce assault, and an investigation showed

that, with the exception of a few rounds in my brigade, our

ammunition was entirely exhausted; and while it was apparent that the

enemy was reluctant to renew the conflict in my front, yet I was

satisfied I could not hold on much longer without the danger of

ultimate capture, so I prepared to withdraw as soon as the troops of

Rousseau's division, which had been ordered to take up a line on my

right, came into position.  Schaefer's and Sill's brigades being

without a cartridge, I directed them to fix bayonets for a charge,

and await any attempt of the enemy to embarrass my retreat, while

Roberts's brigade, offering such resistance as its small quantity of

ammunition would permit, was pulled slowly in toward the Nashville

pike.  Eighty of the horses of Houghtaling's battery having been

killed, an attempt was made to bring his guns back by hand over the

rocky ground, but it could not be done, and we had to abandon them.

Hescock also had lost most of his horses, but all his guns were

saved.  Bush's battery lost two pieces, the tangled underbrush in the

dense cedars proving an obstacle to getting them away which his

almost superhuman exertions could not surmount.  Thus far the bloody

duel had cost me heavily, one-third of my division being killed or

wounded.  I had already three brigade commanders killed; a little

later I lost my fourth--Colonel Schaefer.



The difficulties of withdrawing were very great, as the ground was

exceptionally rocky, and the growth of cedars almost impenetrable for

wheeled carriages.  Retiring sullenly under a heavy fire, while the

general line was reformed to my right and rear, my division was at

length drawn through the cedars and debouched into an open space near

the Murfreesboro' pike, behind the right of Palmer's division.  Two

regiments of Sill's brigade, however, on account of the conformation

of the ground, were obliged to fall back from the point where

Woodruff's brigade of Davis's division had rallied after the disaster

of the early morning.  The division came out of the cedars with

unbroken ranks, thinned by only its killed and wounded--but few

missing.  When we came into the open ground, McCook directed

Roberts's brigade--now commanded by Colonel Luther P. Bradley--to

proceed a short distance to the rear on the Nashville pike, to repel

the enemy's threatening attempt at our communications.  Willingly and

cheerfully the brigade again entered the fight under these new

conditions, and although it was supplied with but three or four

cartridges to the man now, it charged gallantly and recaptured two

pieces of artillery which the Union troops had had to abandon at that

point.



Shortly after we debouched from the cedars I was directed by

Rosecrans to send some aid to the right of General Palmer's division;

and two of Schaefer's regiments, having obtained ammunition, were

pushed up on Palmer's right, accompanied by four of Hescock's guns;

but the advance of the enemy here had already been checked by Palmer,

and only a desultory contest ensued.  Rosecrans, whom I now met in

the open ground west of the railroad, behind Palmer, directed that my

command should relieve Wood's division, which was required to fall

back and take up the new line that had been marked out while I was

holding on in the cedars.  His usually florid face had lost its ruddy

color, and his anxious eyes told that the disasters of the morning

were testing his powers to the very verge of endurance, but he seemed

fully to comprehend what had befallen us.  His firmly set lips and,

the calmness with which his instructions were delivered inspired

confidence in all around him; and expressing approbation of what my

division had done, while deliberately directing it to a new point, he

renewed in us all the hope of final victory, though it must be

admitted that at this phase of the battle the chances lay largely

with the enemy.



Withdrawing the two regiments and Hescock's battery, that I had

posted on the right of Palmer, I moved as directed by Rosecrans into

the position to the east of the railroad, and formed immediately to

the right of Wood, who was now being attacked all along his front,

but more particularly where his right rested near the railroad.

Under a storm of shot and shell that came in torrents my troops took

up the new ground, advancing through a clump of open timber to Wood's

assistance.  Forming in line in front of the timber we poured a

telling fire into the enemy's ranks, which were then attacking across

some cleared fields; but when he discovered additional troops

confronting him, he gave up the attempt to carry Wood's position.  It

was here that I lost Schaefer, who was killed instantly, making my

fourth brigade commander dead that day.  The enemy in front of Wood

having been checked, our whole line east of the railroad executed

undisturbed its retrograde movement to a position about three hundred

yards to its rear.  When I fell back to the edge of the clump of

timber, where when first coming on the ground I had formed to help

Wood, I was ordered by Rosecrans to prepare to make a charge should

the enemy again assault us.  In anticipation of this work I massed my

troops in close column.  The expected attack never came, however, but

the shot and shell of a furious cannonade told with fatal effect upon

men and officers as they lay on their faces hugging the ground.  The

torments of this trying situation were almost unbearable, but it was

obvious to all that it was necessary to have at hand a compact body

of troops to repel any assault the enemy might make pending the

reconstruction of the extreme right of our line, and a silent

determination to stay seemed to take hold of each individual soldier;

nor was this grim silence interrupted throughout the cannonade,

except in one instance, when one of the regiments broke out in a

lusty cheer as a startled rabbit in search of a new hiding-place

safely ran the whole length of the line on the backs of the men.



While my troops were still lying here, General Rosecrans, with a part

of his staff and a few orderlies, rode out on the rearranged line to

supervise its formation and encourage the men, and in prosecution of

these objects moved around the front of my column of attack, within

range of the batteries that were shelling us so viciously.  As he

passed to the open ground on my left, I joined him.  The enemy seeing

this mounted party, turned his guns upon it, and his accurate aim was

soon rewarded, for a solid shot carried away the head of Colonel

Garesche, the chief-of-staff, and killed or wounded two or three

orderlies.  Garesche's appalling death stunned us all, and a

momentary expression of horror spread over Rosecrans's face; but at

such a time the importance of self-control was vital, and he pursued

his course with an appearance of indifference, which, however, those

immediately about him saw was assumed, for undoubtedly he felt most

deeply the death of his friend and trusted staff-officer.



No other attacks were made on us to the east of the railroad for the

rest of the afternoon, and just before dark I was directed to

withdraw and take up a position along the west side of the Nashville

pike, on the extreme right of our new line, where Roberts's brigade

and the Seventy-third and Eighty-eighth Illinois had already been

placed by McCook.  The day had cost me much anxiety and sadness, and

I was sorely disappointed at the general result, though I could not

be other than pleased at the part taken by my command.  The loss of

my brigade commanders--Sill, Roberts, Schaefer, and Harrington-and a

large number of regimental and battery officers, with so many of

their men, struck deep into my heart: My thinned ranks told the

woeful tale of the fierce struggles, indescribable by words, through

which my division had passed since 7 o'clock in the morning; and

this, added to our hungry and exhausted condition, was naturally

disheartening.  The men had been made veterans, however, by the

fortunes and misfortunes of the day, and as they went into their new

places still confident of final success, it was plain to see that

they felt a self-confidence inspired by the part they had already

played.



My headquarters were now established on the Nashville pike, about

three miles and a half from Murfreesboro'; my division being aligned

to the west of the pike, bowed out and facing almost west, Cleburn's

division of the Confederates confronting it.  Davis's division was

posted on my right, and Walker's brigade of Thomas's corps, which had

reported to me, took up a line that con nected my left with Johnson's

division.



Late in the evening General Rosecrans, accompanied by General McCook,

and several other officers whose names I am now unable to recall,

rode by my headquarters on their way to the rear to look for a new

line of battle--on Overall's creek it was said--that would preserve

our communications with Nashville and offer better facilities for

resistance than the one we were now holding.  Considerable time had

elapsed when they returned from this exploration and proceeded to

their respective commands, without intimating to me that anything had

been determined upon by the reconnoissance, but a little later it was

rumored through the different headquarters that while the party was

looking for a new position it discovered the enemy's troops moving

toward our right and rear, the head of his columns being conducted in

the darkness by the aid of torches, and that no alternative was left

us but to hold the lines we then occupied.  The torches had been seen

unquestionably, and possibly created some alarm at first in the minds

of the reconnoitring party, but it was soon ascertained that the

lights came from a battalion of the Fourth regular cavalry that was

picketing our flank and happened to be starting its bivouac fires at

the moment.  The fires and the supposed movements had no weight,

therefore, in deciding the proposition to take up a line at Overall's

creek, but General Rosecrans, fortunately for the army, decided to

remain where he was.  Doubtless reflections during his ride caused

him to realize that the enemy must be quite as much crippled as

himself.  If it had been decided to fall back to Overall's creek, we

could have withdrawn without much difficulty very likely, but such a

retrograde movement would have left to the enemy the entire battle-

field of Stone River and ultimately compelled our retreat to

Nashville.



In the night of December 3rd several slight demonstrations were made

on my front, but from the darkness neither party felt the effect of

the other's fire, and when daylight came again the skirmishers and

lines of battle were in about the same position they had taken up the

evening before.  Soon after daybreak it became evident that the

conflict was to be renewed, and a little later the enemy resumed the

offensive by an attack along my left front, especially on Walker's

brigade.  His attempt was ineffectual, however, and so easily

repulsed as to demonstrate that the desperate character of his

assaults the day before had nearly exhausted his strength.  About 3

o'clock in the afternoon he made another feeble charge on my front,

but our fire from the barricades and rifle-pits soon demoralized his

advancing lines, which fell back in some confusion, thus enabling us

to pick up about a hundred prisoners.  From this time till the

evening of January 3 Bragg's left remained in our front, and

continued to show itself at intervals by weak demonstrations, which

we afterward ascertained were directly intended to cover the

desperate assault he made with Breckenridge on the left of Rosecrans,

an assault that really had in view only a defensive purpose, for

unless Bragg dislodged the troops which were now massing in front of

his right he would be obliged to withdraw General Polk's corps behind

Stone River and finally abandon Murfreesboro'.  The sequel proved

this to be the case; and the ill-judged assault led by Breckenridge

ending in entire defeat, Bragg retired from Murfreesboro' the night

of January 3.



General Rosecrans occupied Murfreesboro' on the 4th and 5th, having

gained a costly victory, which was not decisive enough in its

character to greatly affect the general course of the war, though it

somewhat strengthened and increased our hold on Middle Tennessee.

The enemy in retiring did not fall back very far--only behind Duck

River to Shelbyville and Tullahoma--and but little endeavor was made

to follow him.  Indeed, we were not in condition to pursue, even if

it had been the intention at the outset of the campaign.



As soon as possible after the Confederate retreat I went over the

battle-field to collect such of my wounded as had not been carried

off to the South and to bury my dead.  In the cedars and on the

ground where I had been so fiercely assaulted when the battle opened,

on the morning of the 31st, evidences of the bloody struggle appeared

on every hand in the form of broken fire-arms, fragments of

accoutrements, and splintered trees.  The dead had nearly all been

left unburied, but as there was likelihood of their mutilation by

roving swine, the bodies had mostly been collected in piles at

different points and inclosed by rail fences.  The sad duties of

interment and of caring for the wounded were completed by the 5th,

and on the 6th I moved my division three miles, south of

Murfreesboro' on the Shelbyville pike, going into camp on the banks

of Stone River.  Here the condition of my command was thoroughly

looked into, and an endeavor made to correct such defects as had been

disclosed by the recent battle.



During the engagement there had been little straggling, and my list

of missing was small and legitimate; still, it was known that a very

few had shirked their duty, and an example was necessary.  Among this

small number were four officers who, it was charged, had abandoned

their colors and regiments.  When their guilt was clearly

established, and as soon as an opportunity occurred, I caused the

whole division to be formed in a hollow square, closed in mass, and

had the four officers marched to the centre, where, telling them that

I would not humiliate any officer or soldier by requiring him to

touch their disgraced swords, I compelled them to deliver theirs up

to my colored servant, who also cut from their coats every insignia

of rank.  Then, after there had been read to the command an order

from army headquarters dismissing the four from the service, the

scene was brought to a close by drumming the cowards out of camp.  It

was a mortifying spectacle, but from that day no officer in that

division ever abandoned his colors.



My effective force in the battle of Stone River was 4,154 officers

and men.  Of this number I lost 1,633 killed, wounded, and missing,

or nearly 40 per cent.  In the remaining years of the war, though

often engaged in most severe contests, I never experienced in any of

my commands so high a rate of casualties.  The ratio of loss in the

whole of Rosecrans's army was also high, and Bragg's losses were

almost equally great.  Rosecrans carried into the action about 42,000

officers and men.  He lost 13,230, or 31 per cent.  Bragg's effective

force was 37,800 officers and men; he lost 10,306, or nearly 28 per

cent.



Though our victory was dearly bought, yet the importance of gaining

the day at any price was very great, particularly when we consider

what might have been the result had not the gallantry of the army and

the manoeuvring during the early disaster saved us from ultimate

defeat.  We had started out from Nashville on an offensive campaign,

probably with no intention of going beyond Murfreesboro', in

midwinter, but still with the expectation of delivering a crushing

blow should the enemy accept our challenge to battle.  He met us with

a plan of attack almost the counterpart of our own.  In the execution

of his plan he had many advantages, not the least of which was his

intimate knowledge of the ground, and he came near destroying us.

Had he done so, Nashville would probably have fallen; at all events,

Kentucky would have been opened again to his incursions, and the

theatre of war very likely transferred once more to the Ohio River.

As the case now stood, however, Nashville was firmly established as a

base for future operations, Kentucky was safe from the possibility of

being again overrun, and Bragg, thrown on the defensive, was

compelled to give his thoughts to the protection of the interior of

the Confederacy and the security of Chattanooga, rather than indulge

in schemes of conquest north of the Cumberland River.  While he still

held on in Middle Tennessee his grasp was so much loosened that only

slight effort would be necessary to push him back into Georgia, and

thus give to the mountain region of East Tennessee an opportunity to

prove its loyalty to the, Union.



The victory quieted the fears of the West and Northwest, destroyed

the hopes of the secession element in Kentucky, renewed the drooping

spirits of the East Tennesseans, and demoralized the disunionists in

Middle Tennessee; yet it was a negative victory so far as concerned

the result on the battle-field.  Rosecrans seems to have planned the

battle with the idea that the enemy would continue passive, remain

entirely on the defensive, and that it was necessary only to push

forward our left in order to force the evacuation of Murfreesboro';

and notwithstanding the fact that on the afternoon of December 30

McCook received information that the right of Johnson's division.

resting near the Franklin pike, extended only to about the centre of

the Confederate army, it does not appear that attack from that

quarter was at all apprehended by the Union commanders.



The natural line of retreat of the Confederates was not threatened by

the design of Rosecrans; and Bragg, without risk to his

communications, anticipated it by a counter-attack of like character

from his own left, and demolished his adversary's plan the moment we

were thrown on the defensive.  Had Bragg followed up with the spirit

which characterized its beginning the successful attack by Hardee on

our right wing--and there seems no reason why he should not have done

so--the army of Rosecrans still might have got back to Nashville, but

it would have been depleted and demoralized to such a degree as to

unfit it for offensive operations for a long time afterward.  Bragg's

intrenchments in front of Stone River were very strong, and there

seems no reason why he should not have used his plain advantage as

explained, but instead he allowed us to gain time, intrench, and

recover a confidence that at first was badly shaken.  Finally, to cap

the climax of his errors, he directed Breckenridge to make the

assault from his right flank on January 2, with small chance for

anything but disaster, when the real purpose in view could have been

accomplished without the necessity of any offensive manoeuvre

whatever.









CHAPTER XIV.



APPOINTED A MAJOR-GENERAL--THE SECRET EXPEDITION UNDER CARD THE

SCOUT--HIS CAPTURE BY GUERRILLAS--ESCAPE--A REVENGE PARTY--WOMEN

SOLDIERS--A FIGHT WITH SABRES--TULLAHOMA CAMPAIGN--A FOOLISH

ADVENTURE.



On the 6th of January, 1863, my division settled quietly down in its

camp south of Murfreesboro'.  Its exhausted condition after the

terrible experiences of the preceding week required attention.  It

needed recuperation, reinforcement, and reorganization, and I set

about these matters without delay, in anticipation of active

operations early in the spring.  No forward movement was made for

nearly six months, however, and throughout this period drills,

parades, reconnoissances, and foraging expeditions filled in the time

profitably.  In addition to these exercises the construction of

permanent fortifications for the security of Murfreesboro' was

undertaken by General Rosecrans, and large details from my troops

were furnished daily for the work.  Much attention was also given to

creating a more perfect system of guard and picket duty-a matter that

had hitherto been somewhat neglected in the army, as its constant

activity had permitted scant opportunity for the development of such

a system.  It was at this time that I received my appointment as a

major-general of Volunteers.  My promotion had been recommended by

General Rosecrans immediately after the battle of Stone River, but

for some reason it was delayed until April, and though a long time

elapsed between the promise and the performance, my gratification was

extreme.



My scout, Card, was exceedingly useful while encamped near

Murfreesboro, making several trips to East Tennessee within the

enemy's lines to collect information as to the condition of the loyal

people there, and to encourage them with the hope of early

liberation.  He also brought back from each trip very accurate

statements as to the strength and doings of the Confederate army,

fixing almost with certainty its numbers and the locations of its

different divisions, and enabling my engineer-officer--Major

Morhardt--to construct good maps of the country in our front.  On

these dangerous excursions Card was always accompanied by one of his

brothers, the other remaining with me to be ready for duty if any

accident occurred to those who had gone out, or in case I wanted to

communicate with them.  In this way we kept well posted, although the

intelligence these men brought was almost always secured at the risk

of their lives.



Early in the spring, before the Tullahoma campaign began, I thought

it would be practicable, by sending out a small secret expedition of

but three or four men, to break the Nashville and Chattanooga

railroad between Chattanooga and the enemy's position at Tullahoma by

burning the bridges in Crow Creek valley from its head to Stevenson,

Alabama, and then the great bridge across the Tennessee River at

Bridgeport.  Feeling confident that I could persuade Card to

undertake the perilous duty, I broached the contemplated project to

him, and he at once jumped at the opportunity of thus distinguishing

himself, saying that with one of his brothers and three other loyal

East Tennesseeans, whose services he knew could be enlisted, he felt

sure of carrying out the idea, so I gave him authority to choose his

own assistants.  In a few days his men appeared at my headquarters,

and when supplied with money in notes of the State Bank of Tennessee,

current everywhere as gold in those days, the party, composed of

Card, the second brother, and the three East Tennesseeans, started on

their precarious enterprise, their course being directed first toward

the Cumberland Mountains, intending to strike the Nashville and

Chattanooga railroad somewhere above Anderson's station.  They

expected to get back in about fifteen days, but I looked for some

knowledge of the progress of their adventure before the expiration of

that period, hoping to hear through Confederate sources prisoners and

the like-of the destruction of the bridges.  I waited in patience for

such news, but none came, and as the time Card had allotted himself

passed by, I watched anxiously for his return, for, as there was

scarcely a doubt that the expedition had proved a failure, the fate

of the party became a matter of deep concern to Card's remaining

brother and to me.  Finally this brother volunteered to go to his

father's house in East Tennessee to get tidings of the party, and I

consented, for the probabilities were that some of them had made

their way to that point, or at least that some information had

reached there about them.  As day after day went by, the time fixed

for this brother's return came round, yet he also remained out; but

some days after the lad was due Card himself turned up accompanied by

the brother he had taken with him, soon explained his delay in

getting back, and gave me the story of his adventures while absent.



After leaving my camp, his party had followed various byways across

the Cumberland Mountains to Crow Creek Valley, as instructed; but

when nearing the railroad above Anderson's Station, they were

captured by some guerrillas prowling about that vicinity, and being

suspected of disloyalty to the Confederacy, were carried to

Chattanooga and imprisoned as Yankee spies.  Their prospects now were

decidedly discouraging, for death stared them in the face.

Fortunately, however, some delays occurred relative to the

disposition that should be made of them, and they, meanwhile,

effected their escape from their jailors by way of one of the prison

windows, from which they managed to displace a bar, and by a skiff,

in the darkness of night, crossed the Tennessee River a little below

Chattanooga.  From this point the party made their way back to my

camp, traveling only at night, hiding in the woods by day, and for

food depending on loyal citizens that Card had become acquainted with

when preaching and pedling.



Card's first inquiry after relating his story was for the youngest

brother, whom he had left with me.  I told him what I had done, in my

anxiety about himself, and that more than sufficient time had elapsed

for his brother's return.  His reply was: "They have caught him.  The

poor fellow is dead."  His surmise proved correct; for news soon came

that the poor boy had been captured at his father's house, and

hanged.  The blow to Card was a severe one, and so hardened his heart

against the guerrillas in the neighborhood of his father's home--for

he knew they were guilty of his brother's murder--that it was with

difficulty I could persuade him to continue in the employment of the

Government, so determined was he to avenge his brother's death at the

first opportunity.  Finally, however, I succeeded in quieting the

almost uncontrollable rage that seemed to possess him, and he

remained with me during the Tullahoma and Chickamauga campaigns; but

when we reached Knoxville the next winter, he took his departure,

informing me that he was going for the bushwhackers who had killed

his brother.  A short time after he left me, I saw him at the head of

about thirty well-armed East Tennesseeans--refugees.  They were

determined-looking men, seeking revenge for the wrongs and sufferings

that had been put upon them in the last two years, and no doubt

wreaked their vengeance right and left on all who had been in any way

instrumental in persecuting them.



The feeding of our army from the base at Louisville was attended with

a great many difficulties, as the enemy's cavalry was constantly

breaking the railroad and intercepting our communications on the

Cumberland River at different points that were easily accessible to

his then superior force of troopers.  The accumulation of reserve

stores was therefore not an easy task, and to get forage ahead a few

days was well-nigh impossible, unless that brought from the North was

supplemented by what we could gather from the country.  Corn was

abundant in the region to the south and southwest of Murfreesboro',

so to make good our deficiences in this respect, I employed a brigade

about once a week in the duty of collecting and bringing in forage,

sending out sometimes as many as a hundred and fifty wagons to haul

the grain which my scouts had previously located.  In nearly every

one of these expeditions the enemy was encountered, and the wagons

were usually loaded while the skirmishers kept up a running fire,

Often there would occur a respectable brush, with the loss on each

side of a number of killed and wounded.  The officer in direct

command always reported to me personally whatever had happened during

the time he was out--the result of his reconnoissance, so to speak,

for that war the real nature of these excursions--and on one occasion

the colonel in command, Colonel Conrad, of the Fifteenth Missouri,

informed me that he got through without much difficulty; in fact,

that everything had gone all right and been eminently satisfactory,

except that in returning he had been mortified greatly by the conduct

of the two females belonging to the detachment and division train at

my headquarters.  These women, he said, had given much annoyance by

getting drunk, and to some extent demoralizing his men.  To say that

I was astonished at his statement would be a mild way of putting it,

and had I not known him to be a most upright man and of sound sense,

I should have doubted not only his veracity, but his sanity.

Inquiring who they were and for further details, I was informed that

there certainly were in the command two females, that in some

mysterious manner had attached themselves to the service as soldiers;

that one, an East Tennessee woman, was a teamster in the division

wagon-train and the other a private soldier in a cavalry company

temporarily attached to my headquarters for escort duty.  While out

on the foraging expedition these Amazons had secured a supply of

"apple-jack" by some means, got very drunk, and on the return had

fallen into Stone River and been nearly drowned.  After they had been

fished from, the water, in the process of resuscitation their sex was

disclosed, though up to this time it appeared to be known only to

each other.  The story was straight and the circumstance clear, so,

convinced of Conrad's continued sanity, I directed the provost-

marshal to bring in arrest to my headquarters the two disturbers of

Conrad's peace of mind, After some little search the East Tennessee

woman was found in camp, somewhat the worse for the experiences of

the day before, but awaiting her fate content idly smoking a cob-

pipe.  She was brought to me, and put in duress under charge of the

division surgeon until her companion could be secured.  To the doctor

she related that the year before she had "refugeed" from East

Tennessee, and on arriving in Louisville assumed men's apparel and

sought and obtained employment as a teamster in the quartermaster's

department.  Her features were very large, and so coarse and

masculine was her general appearance that she would readily have

passed as a man, and in her case the deception was no doubt easily

practiced.  Next day the "she dragoon" was caught, and proved to be a

rather prepossessing young woman, and though necessarily bronzed and

hardened by exposure, I doubt if, even with these marks of

campaigning, she could have deceived as readily as did her companion.

How the two got acquainted, I never learned, and though they had

joined the army independently of each other, yet an intimacy had

sprung up between them long before the mishaps of the foraging

expedition.  They both were forwarded to army headquarters, and, when

provided with clothing suited to their sex, sent back to Nashville,

and thence beyond our lines to Louisville.



On January 9, by an order from the War Department, the Army of the

Cumberland had been divided into three corps, designated the

Fourteenth, Twentieth, and Twenty-first.  This order did not alter

the composition of the former grand divisions, nor change the

commanders, but the new nomenclature was a decided improvement over

the clumsy designations Right Wing, Centre, and Left Wing, which were

well calculated to lead to confusion sometimes.  McCook's wing became

the Twentieth Corps, and my division continued of the same

organization, and held the same number as formerly-the Third

Division, Twentieth Corps.  My first brigade was now commanded by

Brigadier-General William H. Lytle, the second by Colonel Bernard

Laiboldt, and the third by Colonel Luther P. Bradley.



On the 4th of March I was directed to move in light marching order

toward Franklin and join General Gordon Granger, to take part in some

operations which he was projecting against General Earl Van Dorn,

then at Spring Hill.  Knowing that my line of march would carry me

through a region where forage was plentiful, I took along a large

train of empty wagons, which I determined to fill with corn and send

back to Murfreesboro', believing that I could successfully cover the

train by Minty's brigade of cavalry, which had joined me for the

purpose of aiding in a reconnoissance toward Shelbyville.  In

marching the column I placed a regiment of infantry at its head, then

the wagon-train, then a brigade of infantry--masking the cavalry

behind this brigade.  The enemy, discovering that the train was with

us, and thinking he could capture it, came boldly out with his,

cavalry to attack.  The head of his column came up to the crossroads

at Versailles, but holding him there, I passed the train and infantry

brigade beyond toward Eagleville, and when my cavalry had been thus

unmasked, Minty, followed by the balance of my division, which vas

still behind, charged him with the sabre.  Success was immediate and

complete, and pursuit of the routed forces continued through

Unionville, until we fell upon and drove in the Confederate outposts

at Shelbyville.  Here the enemy was taken by surprise evidently,

which was most fortunate for us, otherwise the consequences might

have been disastrous.  Minty captured in the charge about fifty

prisoners and a few wagons and mules, and thus enabled me to load my

train with corn, and send it back to Murfreesboro' unmolested.  In

this little fight the sabre was freely used by both sides, and I do

not believe that during the whole war I again knew of so large a

percentage of wounds by that arm in proportion to the numbers

engaged.



That night I encamped at Eagleville, and next day reported to Granger

at Franklin, arriving in the midst of much excitement prevailing on

account of the loss of Coburn's brigade, which had been captured the

day before a little distance south of that point, while marching to

form a junction with a column that had been directed on Columbia from

Murfreesboro'.  Shortly after Coburn's capture General Granger had

come upon the scene, and the next day he advanced my division and

Minty's troops directly on Spring Hill, with a view to making some

reprisal; but Van Dorn had no intention of accommodating us, and

retired from Spring Hill, offering but little resistance.  He

continued to fall back, till finally he got behind Duck River, where

operations against him ceased; for, in consequence of the incessant

rains of the season, the streams had become almost impassable.

Later, I returned by way of Franklin to my old camp at Murfreesboro',

passing over on this march the ground on which the Confederate

General Hood met with such disaster the following year in his attack

on Stanley's corps.



My command had all returned from the Franklin expedition to

Murfreesboro' and gone into camp on the Salem pike by the latter part

of March, from which time till June it took part in only the little

affairs of outposts occurring every now and then on my own front.  In

the meanwhile General Rosecrans had been materially reinforced by the

return of sick and wounded men; his army had become well disciplined,

and was tolerably supplied; and he was repeatedly pressed by the

authorities at Washington to undertake offensive operations.



During the spring and early summer Rosecrans resisted, with a great

deal of spirit and on various grounds, these frequent urgings, and

out of this grew up an acrimonious correspondence and strained

feeling between him and General Halleck.  Early in June, however,

stores had been accumulated and other preparations made for a move

forward, Resecrans seeming to have decided that he could safely risk

an advance, with the prospect of good results.  Before finally

deciding, he called upon most of his corps and division commanders

for their opinions on certain propositions which he presented, and

most of them still opposed the projected movement, I among the

number, reasoning that while General Grant was operating against

Vicksburg, it was better to hold Bragg in Middle Tennessee than to

push him so far back into Georgia that interior means of

communication would give the Confederate Government the opportunity

of quickly joining a part of his force to that of General Johnson in

Mississippi.



At this stage, and in fact prior to it, Rosecrans seemed to manifest

special confidence in me, often discussing his plans with me

independent of the occasions on which he formally referred them for

my views.  I recollect that on two different occasions about this

time he unfolded his designs to me in this informal way, outlining

generally how he expected ultimately to force Bragg south of the

Tennessee River, and going into the details of the contemplated move

on Tullahoma.  His schemes, to my mind, were not only comprehensive,

but exact, and showed conclusively, what no one doubted then, that

they were original with him.  I found in them very little to

criticise unfavorably, if we were to move at all, and Rosecrans

certainly impressed me that he favored an advance at an early day,

though many of his generals were against it until the operations on

the Mississippi River should culminate in something definite.  There

was much, fully apparent in the circumstances about his headquarters,

leading to the conviction that Rosecrans originated the Tullahoma

campaign, and the record of his prior performances collaterally

sustains the visible evidence then existing.  In my opinion, then,

based on a clear recollection of various occurrences growing out of

our intimacy, he conceived the plan of the Tullahoma campaign and the

one succeeding it; and is therefore entitled to every credit that

attended their execution, no matter what may be claimed for others.



On the 23d of June Bragg was covering his position north of Duck

River with a front extending from McMinnville, where his cavalry

rested, through Wartrace and Shelbyville to Columbia, his depot being

at Tullahoma.  Rosecrans, thinking that Bragg would offer strong

resistance at Shelbyville--which was somewhat protected by a spur of

low mountains or hills, offshoots of the Cumberland Mountains--

decided to turn that place; consequently, he directed the mass of the

Union army on the enemy's right flank, about Manchester.



On the 26th of June McCook's corps advanced toward Liberty Gap, my

divisions marching on the Shelbyville pike.  I had proceeded but a

few miles when I encountered the enemy's pickets, who fell back to

Christiana, about nine miles from Murfreesboro'.  Here I was assailed

pretty wickedly by the enemy's sharpshooters and a section of

artillery, but as I was instructed to do nothing more than cover the

road from Eagleville, over which Brannan's division was to approach

Christiana, I made little reply to this severe annoyance, wishing to

conceal the strength of my force.  As soon as the head of Brannan's

column arrived I marched across-country to the left, and encamped

that night at the little town of Millersburg, in the vicinity of

Liberty Gap.  I was directed to move from Millersburg, on Hoover's

Gap--a pass in the range of hills already referred to, through which

ran the turnpike from Murfreesboro' to Manchester--but heavy rains

had made the country roads almost impassable, and the last of my

division did not reach Hoover's Gap till the morning of June 27,

after its abandonment by the enemy.  Continuing on to Fairfield, the

head of my column met, south of that place, a small force of

Confederate infantry and cavalry, which after a slight skirmish

Laiboldt's brigade drove back toward Wartrace.  The next morning I

arrived at Manchester, where I remained quiet for the day.  Early on

the 29th I marched by the Lynchburg road for Tullahoma, where the

enemy was believed to be in force, and came into position about six

miles from the town.



By the 31st the whole army had been concentrated, in spite of many

difficulties, and though, on account of the heavy rains that had

fallen almost incessantly since we left Murfreesboro', its movements

had been slow and somewhat inaccurate, yet the precision with which

it took up a line of battle for an attack on Tullahoma showed that

forethought and study had been given to every detail.  The enemy had

determined to fall back from Tullahoma at the beginning of the

campaign, however, and as we advanced, his evacuation had so far

progressed that when, on July 1.  We reached the earthworks thrown.

up early in the year for the defense of the place, he had almost

wholly disappeared, carrying off all his stores and munitions of war

except some little subsistence and eleven pieces of artillery.  A

strong rearguard remained to cover the retreat, and on my front the

usual encounters between advancing and retreating forces took place.

Just before reaching the intrenchments on the Lynchburg road, I came

upon an open space that was covered by a network of fallen trees and

underbrush, which had been slashed all along in front of the enemy's

earthworks.  This made our progress very difficult, but I shortly

became satisfied that there were only a few of the enemy within the

works, so moving a battalion of cavalry that had joined me the day

before down the road as rapidly as the obstructions would permit, the

Confederate pickets quickly departed, and we gained possession of the

town.  Three siege guns, four caissons, a few stores, and a small

number of prisoners fell into my hands.



That same evening orders were issued to the army to push on from

Tullahoma in pursuit, for, as it was thought that we might not be

able to cross Elk River on account of its swollen condition, we could

do the enemy some damage by keeping close as possible at his heels.

I marched on the Winchester road at 3 o'clock on the 2d of July and

about 8 o'clock reached Elk River ford.  The stream was for the time

truly an impassable torrent, and all hope of crossing by the

Winchester ford had to be abandoned.  Deeming that further effort

should be made, however, under guidance of Card, I turned the head of

my column in the direction of Alisona, marching up the river and

nearly parallel with it till I came to Rock Creek.  With a little

delay we got across Rock Creek, which was also much swollen, and

finding a short distance above its mouth a ford on Elk River that

Card said was practicable, I determined to attempt it: Some of the

enemy's cavalry were guarding this ford, but after a sharp little

skirmish my battalion of cavalry crossed and took up a strong

position on the other bank.  The stream was very high and the current

very swift, the water , tumbling along over its rocky bed in an

immense volume, but still it was fordable for infantry if means could

be devised by which the men could keep their feet.  A cable was

stretched across just below the ford as a lifeline for the weaker

ones, and then the men of the entire division having secured their

ammunition by placing the cartridge-boxes on their shoulders, the

column pushed cheerfully into the rushing current.  The men as they

entered the water joined each other in sets of four in a close

embrace, which enabled them to retain a foothold and successfully

resist the force of the flood.  When they were across I turned the

column down the left bank of Elk River, and driving the enemy from

some slight works near Estelle Springs, regained the Winchester road.



By this time it was clear that Bragg intended to fall back behind the

Tennessee River, and our only chance of accomplishing anything of

importance was to smash up his rear-guard before it crossed the

Cumberland Mountains, and in pursuance of this idea I was directed to

attack such of his force as was holding on to Winchester.  At 4

o'clock on the morning of July 2 I moved on that town, and when we

got close to it directed my mounted troops to charge a small force of

Confederate cavalry that was picketing their front.  The Confederates

resisted but little, and our men went with them in a disorderly chase

through the village to Boiling Fork, a small stream about half a mile

beyond.  Here the fleeing pickets, rallying behind a stronger force,

made a stand, and I was directed by McCook to delay till I

ascertained if Davis's division, which was to support me, had made

the crossing of Elk River, and until I could open up communication

with Brannan's division, which was to come in on my left at Decherd.

As soon as I learned that Davis was across I pushed on, but the delay

had permitted the enemy to pull his rear-guard up on the mountain,

and rendered nugatory all further efforts to hurt him materially, our

only returns consisting in forcing him to relinquish a small amount

of transportation and forage at the mouth of the pass just beyond

Cowan, a station on the line of the Nashville and Chattanooga

railroad.



At Cowan, Colonel Watkins, of the Sixth Kentucky Cavalry, reported to

me with twelve hundred mounted men.  Having heard during the night

that the enemy had halted on the mountain near the University--an

educational establishment on the summit--I directed Watkins to make a

reconnoissance and find out the value of the information.  He learned

that Wharton's brigade of cavalry was halted at the University to

cover a moderately large force of the enemy's infantry which had not

yet got down the mountain on the other side, so I pushed Watkins out

again on the 5th, supporting him by a brigade of infantry, which I

accompanied myself.  We were too late, however, for when we arrived

at the top of the mountain Wharton had disappeared, and though

Watkins pursued to Bridgeport, he was able to do nothing more, and on

his return reported that the last of the enemy had crossed the

Tennessee River and burned the railroad bridge.



Nothing further could now be done, so I instructed Watkins to rejoin

the division at Cowan, and being greatly fatigued by the hard

campaigning of the previous ten days, I concluded to go back to my

camp in a more comfortable way than on the back of my tired horse.

In his retreat the enemy had not disturbed the railway track at all,

and as we had captured a hand-car at Cowan, I thought I would have it

brought up to the station near the University to carry me down the

mountain to my camp, and, desiring company, I persuasively invited

Colonel Frank T. Sherman to ride with me.  I sent for the car by a

courier, and for a long time patiently awaited its arrival, in fact,

until all the returning troops had passed us, but still it did not

come.  Thinking it somewhat risky to remain at the station without

protection, Sherman and myself started our horses to Cowan by our

orderlies, and set out on foot to meet the car, trudging along down

the track in momentary expectation of falling in with our private

conveyance.  We had not gone very far before night overtook us, and

we then began to realize the dangers surrounding us, for there we

were alone and helpless, tramping on in the darkness over an unknown

railroad track in the enemy's country, liable on the one hand to go

tumbling through some bridge or trestle, and on the other, to

possible capture or death at the hands of the guerrillas then

infesting these mountains.  Just after dark we came to a little cabin

near the track, where we made bold to ask for water, notwithstanding

the fact that to disclose ourselves to the inmates might lead to

fatal consequences.  The water was kindly given, but the owner and

his family were very much exercised lest some misfortune might befall

us near their house, and be charged to them, so they encouraged us to

move on with a frankness inspired by fear of future trouble to

themselves.



At every turn we eagerly hoped to meet the hand-car, but it never

came, and we jolted on from tie to tie for eleven weary miles,

reaching Cowan after midnight, exhausted and sore in every muscle

from frequent falls on the rough, unballasted road-bed.  Inquiry.

developed that the car had been well manned, and started to us as

ordered, and nobody could account for its non-arrival.  Further

investigation next day showed, however, that when it reached the foot

of the mountain, where the railroad formed a junction, the improvised

crew, in the belief no doubt that the University was on the main line

instead of near the branch to Tracy City, followed the main stem

until it carried them clear across the range down the Crow Creek

Valley, where the party was captured.



I had reason to remember for many a day this foolish adventure, for

my sore bones and bruised muscles, caused me physical suffering until

I left the Army of the Cumberland the next spring; but I had still

more reason to feel for my captured men, and on this account I have

never ceased to regret that I so thoughtlessly undertook to rejoin my

troops by rail, instead of sticking to my faithful horse.









CHAPTER XV.



ORDERED TO OCCUPY BRIDGEPORT--A SPY--THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA--

GENERAL THOMAS--TREATED TO COFFEE--RESULTS OF THE BATTLE.



The Tullahoma campaign was practically closed by the disappearance of

the enemy from the country north of the Tennessee River.  Middle

Tennessee was once more in the possession of the National troops, and

Rosecrans though strongly urged from Washington to continue on,

resisted the pressure until he could repair the Nashville and

Chattanooga railroad, which was of vital importance in supplying his

army from its secondary base at Nashville.  As he desired to hold

this road to where it crossed the Tennessee, it was necessary to push

a force beyond the mountains, and after a few days of rest at Cowan

my division was ordered to take station at Stevenson, Alabama, the

junction of the Memphis and Charleston road with the Nashville and

Chattanooga, with instructions to occupy Bridgeport also.



The enemy had meanwhile concentrated most of his forces at

Chattanooga for the twofold purpose of holding this gateway of the

Cumberland Mountains, and to assume a defensive attitude which would

enable him to take advantage of such circumstances as might arise in

the development of the offensive campaign he knew we must make.  The

peculiar topography of the country was much to his advantage, and

while we had a broad river and numerous spurs and ridges of the

Cumberland Mountains to cross at a long distance from our base, he

was backed up on his depots of supply, and connected by interior

lines of railway with the different armies of the Confederacy, so

that he could be speedily reinforced.



Bridgeport was to be ultimately a sub-depot for storing subsistence

supplies, and one of the points at which our army would cross the

Tennessee, so I occupied it on July 29 with two brigades, retaining

one at Stevenson, however, to protect that railway junction from

raids by way of Caperton's ferry.  By the 29th of August a

considerable quantity of supplies had been accumulated, and then

began a general movement of our troops for crossing the river.  As

there were not with the army enough pontoons to complete the two

bridges required, I was expected to build one of them of trestles;

and a battalion of the First Michigan Engineers under Colonel Innis

was sent me to help construct the bridge.  Early on the 3ist I sent

into the neighboring woods about fifteen hundred men with axes and

teams, and by nightfall they had delivered on the riverbank fifteen

hundred logs suitable for a trestle bridge.  Flooring had been

shipped to me in advance by rail, but the quantity was insufficient,

and the lack had to be supplied by utilizing planking and weather-

boarding taken from barns and houses in the surrounding country.  The

next day Innis's engineers, with the assistance of the detail that

had felled the timber, cut and half-notched the logs, and put the

bridge across; spanning the main channel, which was swimming deep,

with four or five pontoons that had been sent me for this purpose.

On the 2d and 3d of September my division crossed on the bridge in

safety, though we were delayed somewhat because of its giving way

once where the pontoons joined the trestles.  We were followed by a

few detachments from other commands, and by nearly all the

transportation of McCook's corps.



After getting to the south side of the Tennessee River I was ordered

to Valley Head, where McCook's corps was to concentrate.  On the 4th

of September I ascended Sand Mountain, but had got only half way

across the plateau, on top, when night came, the march having been a

most toilsome one.  The next day we descended to the base, and

encamped near Trenton.  On the l0th I arrived at Valley Head, and

climbing Lookout Mountain, encamped on the plateau at Indian Falls.

The following day I went down into Broomtown Valley to Alpine.

The march of McCook's corps from Valley Head to Alpine was in

pursuance of orders directing it to advance on Summerville, the

possession of which place would further threaten the enemy's

communications, it being assumed that Bragg was in full retreat

south, as he had abandoned Chattanooga on the 8th.  This assumption

soon proved erroneous, however, and as we, while in Broomtown Valley,

could not communicate directly with Thomas's corps, the scattered

condition of the army began to alarm us all, and McCook abandoned the

advance to Summerville, ordering back to the summit of Lookout

Mountain such of the corps trains as had got down into Broomtown

Valley.



But before this I had grown uneasy in regard to the disjointed

situation of our army, and, to inform myself of what was going on,

determined to send a spy into the enemy's lines.  In passing Valley

Head on the l0th my scout Card, who had been on the lookout for some

one capable to undertake the task, brought me a Union man with whom

he was acquainted, who lived on Sand Mountain, and had been much

persecuted by guerrillas on account of his loyal sentiments.  He knew

the country well, and as his loyalty was vouched for I asked him to

go into the enemy's camp, which I believed to be near Lafayette, and,

bring me such information as he could gather.  He said such a journey

would be at the risk of his life, and that at best he could not

expect to remain in that section of country if he undertook it, but

that he would run all the chances if I would enable him to emigrate

to the West at the end c f the "job," which I could do by purchasing

the small "bunch" of stock he owned on the mountain.  To this I

readily assented, and he started on the delicate undertaking.  He

penetrated the enemy's lines with little difficulty, but while

prosecuting his search for information was suspected, and at once

arrested and placed under guard.  From this critical situation he

escaped; however, making his way through the enemy's picket-line in

the darkness by crawling on his belly and deceiving the sentinels by

imitating the grunts of the half-wild, sand-colored hogs with which

the country abounded.  He succeeded in reaching Rosecrans's

headquarters finally, and there gave the definite information that

Bragg intended to fight, and that he expected to be reinforced by

Longstreet.



By this time it was clear that Bragg had abandoned Chattanooga with

the sole design of striking us in detail as we followed in pursuit;

and to prevent his achieving this purpose orders came at 12 o'clock,

midnight, for McCook to draw in toward Chattanooga.  This could be

done only by recrossing Lookout Mountain, the enemy's army at

Lafayette now interposing between us and Thomas's corps.  The

retrograde march began at once.  I moved back over the mountain on

the 13th and 14th to Stevens's Mills, and on the 15th and 16th

recrossed through Stevens's Gap, in the Lookout range, and encamped

at its base in McLamore's cove.  The march was made with all possible

celerity, for the situation was critical and demanded every exertion.

The ascent and descent of the mountains was extremely exhausting, the

steep grades often rendering it necessary to drag up and let down by

hand both the transportation and artillery.  But at last we were in

conjunction with the main army, and my division breathed easier.



On the 17th I remained in line of battle all day and night in front

of McLamore's cove, the enemy making slight demonstrations against me

from the direction of Lafayette.  The main body of the army having

bodily moved to the left meanwhile, I followed it on the 18th,

encamping at Pond Spring.  On the 19th I resumed the march to the

left and went into line of battle at Crawfish Springs to cover our

right and rear.  Immediately after forming this line, I again became

isolated by the general movement to the left, and in consequence was

directed to advance and hold the ford of Chickamauga Creek at Lee and

Gordon's Mills, thus coming into close communication with the balance

of our forces.  I moved into this position rapidly, being compelled,

though, first to drive back the enemy's cavalry skirmishers, who,

having crossed to the west side of the creek, annoyed the right flank

of my column a good deal while en route.



Upon arrival at Lee and Gordon's Mills I found the ford over

Chickamauga Creek temporarily uncovered, through the hurried movement

of Wood to the assistance of Davis's division.  The enemy was already

present in small force, with the evident intention of taking

permanent possession, but my troops at once actively engaged him and

recovered the ford with some slight losses.  Scarcely had this been

done when I was directed to assist Crittenden.  Leaving Lytle's

brigade at the ford, I proceeded with Bradley's and Laiboldt's to

help Crittenden, whose main line was formed to the east of the

Chattanooga and Lafayette road, its right trending toward a point on

Chickamauga Creek about a mile and a half north of Lee and Gordon's

Mills.  By the time I had joined Crittenden with my two brigades,

Davis had been worsted in an attack Rosecrans had ordered him to make

on the left of that portion of the enemy's line which was located

along the west bank of the Chickamauga, the repulse being so severe

that one of Davis's batteries had to be abandoned.  Bradley's brigade

arrived on the ground first and was hastily formed and thrown into

the fight, which up to this moment had been very doubtful, fortune

inclining first to one side, then to the other.  Bradley's brigade

went in with steadiness, and charging across an open corn-field that

lay in front of the Lafayette road, recovered Davis's guns and forced

the enemy to retire.  Meanwhile Laiboldt's brigade had come on the

scene, and forming it on Bradley's right, I found myself at the end

of the contest holding the ground which was Davis's original

position.  It was an ugly fight and my loss was heavy, including

Bradley wounded.  The temporary success was cheering, and when

Lytle's brigade joined me a little later I suggested to Crittenden

that we attack, but investigation showed that his troops, having been

engaged all day, were not in condition, so the suggestion could not

be carried out.



The events of the day had indicated that Bragg's main object was to

turn Rosecrans's left; it was therefore still deemed necessary that

the army should continue its flank movement to the left, so orders

came to draw my troops in toward the widow Glenn's house.  By

strengthening the skirmish line and shifting my brigades in

succession from right to left until the point designated was reached,

I was able to effect the withdrawal without much difficulty, calling

in my skirmish line after the main force had retired.



My command having settled down for the night in this new line I rode

to army headquarters, to learn if possible the expectations for the

morrow and hear the result of the battle in General Thomas's front.

Nearly all the superior officers of the army were at headquarters,

and it struck me that much depression prevailed, notwithstanding the

fact that the enemy's attempts during the day to turn our left flank

and also envelop our right had been unsuccessful.  It was now

positively known, through prisoners and otherwise, that Bragg had

been reinforced to such an extent as to make him materially outnumber

us, consequently there was much apprehension for the future.



The necessity of protecting our left was most apparent, and the next

day the drifting in that direction was to be continued.  This

movement in the presence of the enemy, who at all points was actively

seeking an opportunity to penetrate our line and interpose a column

between its right and left, was most dangerous.  But the necessity

for shifting the army to the left was obvious, hence only the method

by which it was undertaken is open to question.  The move was made by

the flank in the face of an exultant foe superior in numbers, and was

a violation of a simple and fundamental military principle.  Under

such circumstauces columns naturally stretch out into attenuated

lines, organizations become separated, and intervals occur, all of

which we experienced; and had the orders for the movement been

construed properly I doubt if it could have been executed without

serious danger.  Necessity knows no law, however, and when all the

circumstances of this battle are fully considered it is possible that

justification may be found for the manoeuvres by which the army was

thus drifted to the left.  We were in a bad strait unquestionably,

and under such conditions possibly the exception had to be applied

rather than the rule.



At daylight on the morning of the 20th a dense fog obscured

everything; consequently both armies were passive so far as fighting

was concerned.  Rosecrans took advantage of the inaction to rearrange

his right, and I was pulled back closer to the widow Glenn's house to

a strong position, where I threw together some rails and logs as

barricades, but I was disconnected from the troops on my left by a

considerable interval.  Here I awaited the approach of the enemy, but

he did not disturb me, although about 9 o'clock in the forenoon he

had opened on our extreme left with musketry fire and a heavy

cannonade.  Two hours later it was discovered by McCook that the

interval between the main army and me was widening, and he ordered me

to send Laiboldt's brigade to occupy a portion of the front that had

been covered by Negley's division.  Before getting this brigade into

place, however, two small brigades of Davis's division occupied the

ground, and I directed Laiboldt to form in column of regiments on the

crest of a low ridge in rear of Carlin's brigade, so as to prevent

Davis's right flank from being turned.  The enemy was now feeling

Davis strongly, and I was about sending for Lytle's and Bradley's

brigades when I received an order to move these rapidly to the,

extreme left of the army to the assistance of General Thomas.  I rode

hastily back toward their position, but in the meanwhile, they had

been notified by direct orders from McCook, and were moving out at a

double-quick toward the Lafayette road.  By this time the enemy had

assaulted Davis furiously in front and flank, and driven him from his

line, and as the confused mass came back, McCook ordered Laiboldt to

charge by deploying to the front.  This he did through Davis's broken

ranks, but failed to check the enemy's heavy lines, and finally

Laiboldt's brigade broke also and fell to the rear.  My remaining

troops, headed by Lytle, were now passing along the rear of the

ground where this disaster took place--in column on the road--en

route to Thomas, and as the hundreds of fugitives rushed back, McCook

directed me to throw in Lytle's and Bradley's brigades.  This was

hastily done, they being formed to the front under a terrible fire.

Scarcely were they aligned when the same horde of Confederates that

had overwhelmed Davis and Laiboldt poured in upon them a deadly fire

and shivered the two brigades to pieces.  We succeeded in rallying

them, however, and by a counter attack regained the ridge that

Laiboldt had been driven from, where we captured the colors of the

Twenty-fourth Alabama.  We could not hold the ridge, though, and my

troops were driven back with heavy loss, including General Lytle

killed, past the widow Glenn's house, and till I managed to establish

them in line of battle on a range of low hills behind the Dry Valley

road.



During these occurrences General Rosecrans passed down the road

behind my line, and sent word that he wished to see me, but affairs

were too critical to admit of my going to him at once, and he rode on

to Chattanooga.  It is to be regretted that he did not wait till I

could join him, for the delay would have permitted him to see that

matters were not in quite such bad shape as he supposed; still, there

is no disguising the fact that at this juncture his army was badly

crippled.



Shortly after my division had rallied on the low hills already

described, I discovered that the enemy, instead of attacking me in

front, was wedging in between my division and the balance of the

army; in short, endeavoring to cut me off from Chattanooga.  This

necessitated another retrograde movement, which brought me back to

the southern face of Missionary Ridge, where I was joined by Carlin's

brigade of Davis's division.  Still thinking I could join General

Thomas, I rode some distance to the left of my line to look for a way

out, but found that the enemy had intervened so far as to isolate me

effectually.  I then determined to march directly to Rossville, and

from there effect a junction with Thomas by the Lafayette road.  I

reached Rossville about o'clock in the afternoon, bringing with me

eight guns, forty-six caissons, and a long ammunition train, the

latter having been found in a state of confusion behind the widow

Glenn's when I was being driven back behind the Dry Valley road.



The head of my column passed through Rossville, appearing upon

Thomas's left about 6 o'clock in the evening, penetrated without any

opposition the right of the enemy's line, and captured several of his

field-hospitals.  As soon as I got on the field I informed Thomas of

the presence of my command, and asked for orders.  He replied that

his lines were disorganized, and that it would be futile to attack;

that all I could do was to hold on, and aid in covering his

withdrawal to Rossville.



I accompanied him back to Rossville, and when we reached the skirt of

the little hamlet General Thomas halted and we dismounted.  Going

into one of the angles of a worm fence near by I took a rail from the

top and put it through the lower rails at a proper height from the

ground to make a seat, and General Thomas and I sat down while, my

troops were moving by.  The General appeared very much exhausted,

seemed to forget what he had stopped for, and said little or nothing

of the incidents of the day.  This was the second occasion on which I

had met him in the midst of misfortune, for during the fight in the

cedars at Stone River, when our prospects were most disheartening, we

held a brief conversation respecting the line he was then taking up

for the purpose of helping me.  At other times, in periods of

inactivity, I saw but little of him.  He impressed me, now as he did

in the cedars, his quiet, unobtrusive: demeanor communicating a

gloomy rather than a hopeful view of the situation.  This apparent

depression was due no doubt to the severe trial through which he had

gone in the last forty-eight hours, which, strain had exhausted him

very much both physically and mentally.  His success in maintaining

his ground was undoubtedly largely influenced by the fact that two-

thirds of the National forces had been sent to his succor, but his

firm purpose to save the army was the mainstay on which all relied

after Rosecrans left the field.  As the command was getting pretty

well past, I rose to go in order to put my troops into camp.  This

aroused the General, when, remarking that he had a little flask of

brandy in his saddle-holster, he added that he had just stopped for

the purpose of offering me a drink, as he knew I must be very tired.

He requested one of his staff-officers to get the flask, and after

taking a sip himself, passed it to me.  Refreshed by the brandy,I

mounted and rode off to supervise the encamping of my division, by no

means an easy task considering the darkness, and the confusion that

existed among the troops that had preceded us into Rossville.



This done, I lay down at the foot of a tree, with my saddle for a

pillow, and saddle-blanket for a cover.  Some soldiers near me having

built a fire, were making coffee, and I guess I must have been

looking on wistfully, for in a little while they brought me a tin-

cupful of the coffee and a small piece of hard bread, which I

relished keenly, it being the first food that had passed my lips

since the night before.  I was very tired, very hungry, and much

discouraged by what had taken place since morning.  I had been

obliged to fight my command under the most disadvantageous

circumstances, disconnected, without supports, without even

opportunity to form in line of battle, and at one time contending

against four divisions of the enemy.  In this battle of Chickamauga,

out of an effective strength Of 4,000 bayonets, I had lost 1,517

officers and men, including two brigade commanders.  This was not

satisfactory indeed, it was most depressing--and then there was much

confusion prevailing around Rossville; and, this condition of things

doubtless increasing my gloomy reflections, it did not seem to me

that the outlook for the next day was at all auspicious, unless the

enemy was slow to improve his present advantage.  Exhaustion soon

quieted all forebodings, though, and I fell into a sound sleep, from

which I was not aroused till daylight.



On the morning of the 21st the enemy failed to advance, and his

inaction gave us the opportunity for getting the broken and

disorganized army into shape.  It took a large part of the day to

accomplish this, and the chances of complete victory would have been

greatly in Bragg's favor if he could have attacked us vigorously at

this time.  But he had been badly hurt in the two days' conflict, and

his inactivity on the 21st showed that he too had to go through the

process of reorganization.  Indeed, his crippled condition began to

show itself the preceding evening, and I have always thought that,

had General Thomas held on and attacked the Confederate right and

rear from where I made the junction with him on the Lafayette road,

the field of Chickamauga would have been relinquished to us; but it

was fated to be otherwise.



Rosecrans, McCook, and Crittenden passed out of the battle when they

went back to Chattanooga, and their absence was discouraging to all

aware of it.  Doubtless this had much to do with Thomas's final

withdrawal, thus leaving the field to the enemy, though at an immense

cost in killed and wounded.  The night of the 21st the army moved

back from Rossville, and my division, as the rearguard of the

Twentieth Corps, got within our lines at Chattanooga about 8 o'clock

the morning of the 22d.  Our unmolested retirement from Rossville

lent additional force to the belief that the enemy had been badly

injured, and further impressed me with the conviction that we might

have held on.  Indeed, the battle of Chickamauga was somewhat like

that of Stone River, victory resting with the side that had the grit

to defer longest its relinquishment of the field.



The manoeuvres by which Rosecrans had carried his army over the

Cumberland Mountains, crossed the Tennessee River, and possessed

himself of Chattanooga, merit the highest commendation up to the

abandonment of this town by Bragg on the 8th of September; but I have

always fancied that that evacuation made Rosecrans over-confident,

and led him to think that he could force Bragg south as far as Rome.

After the Union army passed the river and Chattanooga fell into our

hands; we still kept pressing the enemy's communications, and the

configuration of the country necessitated more or less isolation of

the different corps.  McCook's corps of three divisions had crossed

two difficult ridges--Sand and Lookout mountains--to Alpine in

Broomtown Valley with intentions against Summerville.  Thomas's corps

had marched by the way of Stevens's Gap toward Lafayette, which he

expected to occupy.  Crittenden had passed through Chattanooga, at

first directing his march an Ringgold.  Thus the corps of the army

were not in conjunction, and between McCook and Thomas there

intervened a positive and aggressive obstacle in the shape of Bragg's

army concentrating and awaiting reinforcement at Lafayette.  Under

these circumstances Bragg could have taken the different corps in

detail, and it is strange that he did not, even before receiving his

reinforcements, turn on McCook in Broomtown Valley and destroy him.



Intelligence that Bragg would give battle began to come to us from

various sources as early as the l0th of September, and on the 11th

McCook found that he could not communicate with Thomas by the direct

road through Broomtown Valley; but we did not begin closing in toward

Chattanooga till the 13th, and even then the Twentieth Corps had

before it the certainty of many delays that must necessarily result

from the circuitous and difficult mountain roads which we would be

obliged to follow.  Had the different corps, beginning with McCook's,

been drawn in toward Chattanooga between the 8th and 12th of

September, the objective point of the campaign would have remained in

our hands without the battle of Chickamauga, but, as has been seen,

this was not done.  McCook was almost constantly on the march day and

night between the 13th and the 19th, ascending and descending

mountains, his men worried and wearied, so that when they appeared on

the battle-field, their fatigued condition operated greatly against

their efficiency.  This delay in concentration was also the original

cause of the continuous shifting toward our left to the support of

Thomas, by which manoeuvre Rosecrans endeavored to protect his

communications with Chattanooga, and out of which grew the intervals

that offered such tempting opportunities to Bragg.  In addition to

all this, much transpired on the field of battle tending to bring

about disaster.  There did not seem to be any well-defined plan of

action in the fighting; and this led to much independence of judgment

in construing orders among some of the subordinate generals.  It also

gave rise to much license in issuing orders: too many people were

giving important directions, affecting the whole army, without

authority from its head.  In view, therefore, of all the errors that

were committed from the time Chattanooga fell into our hands after

our first crossing the Tennessee, it was fortunate that the Union

defeat was not more complete, that it left in the enemy's possession

not much more than the barren results arising from the simple holding

of the ground on which the engagement was fought.









CHAPTER XVI.



AT CHATTANOOGA--THE ENEMY FORTIFIES LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND MISSIONARY

RIDGE--REORGANIZING THE ARMY--REMOVAL OF GENERAL ROSECRANS--

PUNISHMENT OF DESERTERS--GRANT AT CHATTANOOGA--THE FIGHT ON LOOKOUT

MOUNTAIN--A BRAVE COLOR-BEARER--BATTLE OF MISSIONARY RIDGE.



By 9 o'clock on the morning of September 22 my command took up a

position within the heavy line of intrenchments at Chattanooga, the

greater part of which defenses had been thrown up since the army

commenced arriving there the day before.  The enemy, having now

somewhat recovered from the shock of the recent battle, followed

carefully, and soon invested us close into our lines with a parallel

system of rifle-pits.  He also began at once to erect permanent lines

of earthworks on Missionary Ridge and to establish himself strongly

on Lookout Mountain.  He then sent Wheeler's cavalry north of the

Tennessee, and, aided greatly by the configuration of the ground,

held us in a state of partial siege, which serious rains might

convert into a complete investment.  The occupation of Lookout

Mountain broke our direct communication with Bridgeport-our sub-

depot--and forced us to bring supplies by way of the Sequatchie

Valley and Waldron's Ridge of the Cumberland Mountains, over a road

most difficult even in the summer season, but now liable to be

rendered impassable by autumn rains.  The distance to Bridgeport by

this circuitous route was sixty miles, and the numerous passes,

coves, and small valleys through which the road ran offered tempting

opportunities, for the destruction of trains, and the enemy was not

slow to take advantage of them.  Indeed, the situation was not

promising, and General Rosecrans himself, in communicating with the

President the day succeeding the battle of Chickamauga, expressed

doubts of his ability to hold the gateway of the Cumberland

Mountains.



The position taken up by my troops inside the lines of Chattanooga

was near the old iron-works, under the shadow of Lookout Mountain.

Here we were exposed to a continual fire from the enemy's batteries

for many days, but as the men were well covered by secure though

simple intrenchments, but little damage was done.  My own

headquarters were established on the grounds of Mr. William

Crutchfield, a resident of the place, whose devotion to the Union

cause knew no bounds, and who rendered me--and, in fact, at one time

or another, nearly every general officer in the Army of the

Cumberland--invaluable service in the way of information about the

Confederate army.  My headquarters camp frequently received shots

from the point of Lookout Mountain also, but fortunately no

casualties resulted from this plunging fire, though, I am free to

confess, at first our nerves were often upset by the whirring of

twenty-pounder shells dropped inconsiderately into our camp at

untimely hours of the night.



In a few days rain began to fali, and the mountain roads by which our

supplies came were fast growing impracticable.  Each succeeding train

of wagons took longer to make the trip from Bridgeport, and the draft

mules were dying by the hundreds.  The artillery horses would soon go

too, and there was every prospect that later the troops would starve

unless something could be done.  Luckily for my division, a company

of the Second Kentucky Cavalry had attached itself to my

headquarters, and, though there without authority, had been left

undisturbed in view of a coming reorganization of the army incidental

to the removal of McCook and Crittenden from the command of their

respective corps, a measure that had been determined upon immediately

after the battle of Chickamauga.  Desiring to remain with me, Captain

Lowell H. Thickstun, commanding this company, was ready for any duty

I might find, for him, so I ordered him into the Sequatchie Valley

for the purpose of collecting supplies for my troops, and sent my

scout, Card along to guide him to the best locations.  The company

hid itself away in a deep cove in the upper end of the valley, and by

keeping very quiet and paying for everything it took from the people,

in a few days was enabled to send me large quantities of corn for my

animals and food for the officers and men, which greatly supplemented

the scanty supplies we were getting from the sub-depot at Bridgeport.

In this way I carried men and animals through our beleaguerment in

pretty fair condition, and of the turkeys, chickens, ducks, and eggs

sent in for the messes of my officers we often had enough to divide

liberally among those at different headquarters.  Wheeler's cavalry

never discovered my detached company, yet the chances of its capture

were not small, sometimes giving much uneasiness; still, I concluded

it was better to run all risks than to let the horses die of

starvation in Chattanooga.  Later, after the battle of Missionary

Ridge, when I started to Knoxville, the company joined me in

excellent shape, bringing with it an abundance of food, including a

small herd of beef cattle.



The whole time my line remained near the iron-mills the shelling from

Lookout was kept up, the screeching shots inquisitively asking in

their well-known way, "Where are you? Where are you?" but it is

strange to see how readily, soldiers can become accustomed to the

sound of dangerous missiles under circumstances of familiarity, and

this case was no exception to the rule.  Few casualties occurred, and

soon contempt took the place of nervousness, and as we could not

reply in kind on account of the elevation required for our guns, the

men responded by jeers and imprecations whenever a shell fell into

their camp.



Meantime, orders having been issued for the organization of the army,

additional troops were attached to my command, and it became the

Second Division of the Fourth Army Corps, to which Major-General

Gordon Granger was assigned as commander.  This necessitated a change

of position of the division, and I moved to ground behind our works,

with my right resting on Fort Negley and my left extending well over

toward Fort Wood, my front being parallel to Missionary Ridge.  My

division was now composed of twenty-five regiments, classified into

brigades and demi-brigades, the former commanded by Brigadier-General

G. D. Wagner, Colonel C. G. Harker, and Colonel F. T. Sherman; the

latter, by Colonels Laiboldt, Miller, Wood, Walworth, and Opdyke.

The demi-brigade was an awkward invention of Granger's; but at this

time it was necessitated--perhaps by the depleted condition of our

regiments, which compelled the massing of a great number of

regimental organizations into a division to give it weight and force.



On October 16, 1863, General Grant had been assigned to the command

of the "Military Division of the Mississippi," a geographical area

which embraced the Departments of the Ohio, the Cumberland, and the

Tennessee, thus effecting a consolidation of divided commands which

might have been introduced most profitably at an earlier date.  The

same order that assigned General Grant relieved General Rosecrans,

and placed General Thomas in command of the Army of the Cumberland.

At the time of the reception of the order, Rosecrans was busy with

preparations for a movement to open the direct road to Bridgeport--

having received in the interval, since we came back to Chattanooga,

considerable reinforcement by the arrival in his department of the

Eleventh and Twelfth corps, under General Hooker, from the Army of

the Potomac.  With this force Rosecrans had already strengthened

certain important points on the railroad between Nashville and

Stevenson, and given orders to Hooker to concentrate at Bridgeport

such portions of his command as were available, and to hold them in

readiness to advance toward Chattanooga.



On the 19th of October, after turning the command over to Thomas,

General Rosecrans quietly slipped away from the army.  He submitted _

uncomplainingly to his removal, and modestly left us without fuss or

demonstration; ever maintaining, though, that the battle of

Chickamauga was in effect a victory, as it had ensured us, he said,

the retention of Chattanooga.  When his departure became known deep

and almost universal regret was expressed, for he was

enthusiastically esteemed and loved by the Army of the Cumberland,

from the day he assumed command of it until he left it,

notwithstanding the censure poured upon him after the battle of

Chickamauga.



The new position to which my division had been moved, in consequence

of the reorganization, required little additional labor to strengthen

it, and the routine of fatigue duty and drills was continued as

before, its monotony occasionally broken by the excitement of an

expected attack, or by amusements of various kinds that were

calculated to keep the men in good spirits.  Toward this result much

was contributed by Mr. James E. Murdock, the actor, who came down

from the North to recover the body of his son, killed at Chickamauga,

and was quartered with me for the greater part of the time he was

obliged to await the successful conclusion of his sad mission.  He

spent days, and even weeks, going about through the division giving

recitations before the camp-fires, and in improvised chapels, which

the men had constructed from refuse lumber and canvas.  Suiting his

selections to the occasion, he never failed to excite intense

interest in the breasts of all present, and when circumstances

finally separated him from us, all felt that a debt of gratitude was

due him that could never be paid.  The pleasure he gave, and the

confident feeling that was now arising from expected reinforcements,

was darkened, however, by one sad incident.  Three men of my division

had deserted their colors at the beginning of the siege and made

their way north.  They were soon arrested, and were brought back to

stand trial for the worst offense that can be committed by a soldier,

convicted of the crime, and ordered to be shot.  To make the example

effective I paraded the whole division for the execution, and on the

13th of November, in the presence of their former comrades, the

culprits were sent, in accordance with the terms of their sentence,

to render their account to the Almighty.  It was the saddest

spectacle I ever witnessed, but there could be no evasion, no

mitigation of the full letter of the law; its timely enforcement was

but justice to the brave spirits who had yet to fight the rebellion

to the end.



General Grant arrived at Chattanooga on October 23, and began at once

to carry out the plans that had been formed for opening the shorter

or river road to Bridgeport.  This object was successfully

accomplished by the moving of Hooker's command to Rankin's and

Brown's ferries in concert with a force from the Army of the

Cumberland which was directed on the same points, so by the 27th of

October direct communication with our depots was established.  The

four weeks which followed this cheering result were busy with the

work of refitting and preparing for offensive operations as soon as

General Sherman should reach us with his troops from West Tennessee.

During this period of activity the enemy committed the serious fault

of detaching Longstreet's corps--sending it to aid in the siege of

Knoxville in East Tennessee--an error which has no justification

whatever, unless it be based on the presumption that it was

absolutely necessary that Longstreet should ultimately rejoin Lee's

army in Virginia by way of Knoxville and Lynchburg, with a chance of

picking up Burnside en route.  Thus depleted, Bragg still held

Missionary Ridge in strong force, but that part of his line which

extended across the intervening valley to the northerly point of.

Lookout Mountain was much attenuated.



By the 18th of November General Grant had issued instructions

covering his intended operations.  They contemplated that Sherman's

column, which was arriving by the north bank of the Tennessee, should

cross the river on a pontoon bridge just below the mouth of

Chickamauga Creek and carry the northern extremity of Missionary

Ridge as far as the railroad tunnel; that the Army of the Cumberland-

-the centre--should co-operate with Sherman; and that Hooker with a

mixed command should continue to hold Lookout Valley and operate on

our extreme right as circumstances might warrant.  Sherman crossed on

the 24th to perform his alloted part of the programme, but in the

meantime Grant becoming impressed with the idea that Bragg was

endeavoring to get away, ordered Thomas to make a strong

demonstration in his front, to determine the truth or falsity of the

information that had been received.  This task fell to the Fourth

Corps, and at 12 o'clock on the 23d I was notified that Wood's

division would make a reconnoissance to an elevated point in its

front called Orchard Knob, and that I was to support it with my

division and prevent Wood's right flank from being turned by an

advance of the enemy on Moore's road or from the direction of

Rossville.  For this duty I marched my division out of the works

about 2 p.m., and took up a position on Bushy Knob.  Shortly after we

reached this point Wood's division passed my left flank on its

reconnoissance, and my command, moving in support of it, drove in the

enemy's picket-line.  Wood's took possession of Orchard Knob easily,

and mine was halted on a low ridge to the right of the Knob, where I

was directed by General Thomas to cover my front by a strong line of

rifle-pits, and to put in position two batteries of the Fourth

regular artillery that had joined me from the Eleventh Corps.  After

dark Wood began to feel uneasy about his right flank, for a gap

existed between it and my left, so I moved in closer to him, taking

up a line where I remained inactive till the 25th, but suffering some

inconvenience from the enemy's shells.



On the 24th General Sherman made an attack for the purpose of

carrying the north end of Missionary Ridge.  His success was not

complete, although at the time it was reported throughout the army to

be so.  It had the effect of disconcerting Bragg, however, and caused

him to strengthen his right by withdrawing troops from his left,

which circumstance led Hooker to advance on the northerly face of

Lookout Mountain.  At first, with good glasses, we could plainly see

Hooker's troops driving the Confederates up the face of the mountain.

All were soon lost to view in the dense timber, but emerged again on

the open ground, across which the Confederates retreated at a lively

pace, followed by the pursuing line, which was led by a color-bearer,

who, far in advance, was bravely waving on his comrades.  The

gallantry of this man elicited much enthusiasm among us all, but as

he was a considerable distance ahead of his comrades I expected to

see his rashness punished at any moment by death or capture.  He

finally got quite near the retreating Confederates, when suddenly

they made a dash at him, but he was fully alive to such a move, and

ran back, apparently uninjured, to his friends.  About this time a

small squad of men reached the top of Lookout and planted the Stars

and Stripes on its very crest.  Just then a cloud settled down on the

mountain, and a heavy bank of fog obscured its whole face.



After the view was lost the sharp rattle of musketry continued some

time, but practically the fight had been already won by Hooker's men,

the enemy only holding on with a rear-guard to assure his retreat

across Chattanooga Valley to Missionary Ridge.  Later we heard very

heavy cannonading, and fearing that Hooker was in trouble I sent a

staff-officer to find out whether he needed assistance, which I

thought could be given by a demonstration toward Rossville.  The

officer soon returned with the report that Hooker was all right, that

the cannonading was only a part of a little rear-guard fight, two

sections of artillery making all the noise, the reverberations from

point to point in the adjacent mountains echoing and reechoing till

it seemed that at least fifty guns were engaged.



On the morning of the 25th of November Bragg's entire army was

holding only the line of Missionary Ridge, and our troops, being now

practically connected from Sherman to Hooker, confronted it with the

Army of the Cumberland in the centre--bowed out along the front of

Wood's division and mine.  Early in the day Sherman, with great

determination and persistence, made an attempt to carry the high

ground near the tunnel, first gaining and then losing advantage, but

his attack was not crowned with the success anticipated.  Meanwhile

Hooker and Palmer were swinging across Chattanooga Valley, using me

as a pivot for the purpose of crossing Missionary Ridge in the

neighborhood of Rossville.  In the early part of the day I had driven

in the Confederate pickets in my front, so as to prolong my line of

battle on that of Wood, the necessity of continuing to refuse my

right having been obviated by the capture of Lookout Mountain and the

advance of Palmer.



About 2 o'clock orders came to carry the line at the foot of the

ridge, attacking at a signal of six guns.  I had few changes or new

dispositions to make.  Wagner's brigade, which was next to Wood's

division, was formed in double lines, and Harker's brigade took the

same formation on Wagner's right.  Colonel F. T. Sherman's brigade

came on Harker's right, formed in a column of attack, with a front of

three regiments, he having nine.  My whole front was covered with a

heavy line of skirmishers.  These dispositions made, my right rested

a little distance south of Moore's road, my left joined Wood over

toward Orchard Knob, while my centre was opposite Thurman's house--

the headquarters of General Bragg--on Missionary Ridge.  A small

stream of water ran parallel to my front, as far as which the ground

was covered by a thin patch of timber, and beyond the edge of the

timber was an open plain to the foot of Missionary Ridge, varying in

width from four to nine hundred yards.  At the foot of the ridge was

the enemy's first line of rifle-pits; at a point midway up its face,

another line, incomplete; and on the crest was a third line, in which

Bragg had massed his artillery.



The enemy saw we were making dispositions for an attack, and in plain

view of my whole division he prepared himself for resistance,

marching regiments from his left flank with flying colors; and

filling up the spaces not already occupied in his intrenchments.

Seeing the enemy thus strengthening himself, it was plain that we

would have to act quickly if we expected to accomplish much, and I

already began to doubt the feasibility of our remaining in the first

line of rifle-pits when we should have carried them.  I discussed the

order with Wagner, Harker, and Sherman, and they were similarly

impressed, so while anxiously awaiting the signal I sent Captain

Ransom of my staff to Granger, who was at Fort Wood, to ascertain if

we were to carry the first line or the ridge beyond.  Shortly after

Ransom started the signal guns were fired, and I told my brigade

commanders to go for the ridge.



Placing myself in front of Harker's brigade, between the line of

battle and the skirmishers, accompanied by only an orderly so as not

to attract the enemy's fire, we moved out.  Under a terrible storm of

shot and shell the line pressed forward steadily through the timber,

and as it emerged on the plain took the double-quick and with fixed

bayonets rushed at the enemy's first line.  Not a shot was fired from

our line of battle, and as it gained on my skirmishers they melted

into and became one with it, and all three of my brigades went over

the rifle-pits simultaneously.  They then lay down on the face of the

ridge, for a breathing-spell and for protection' from the terrible

fire, of canister and musketry pouring over us from the guns on the

crest.  At the rifle-pits there had been little use for the bayonet,

for most of the Confederate troops, disconcerted by the sudden rush,

lay close in the ditch and surrendered, though some few fled up the

slope to the next line.  The prisoners were directed to move out to

our rear, and as their intrenchments had now come under fire from the

crest, they went with alacrity, and without guard or escort, toward

Chattanooga.



After a short pause to get breath the ascent of the ridge began, and

I rode, into the ditch of the intrenchments to drive out a few

skulkers who were hiding there.  Just at this time I was joined by

Captain Ransom, who, having returned from Granger, told me that we

were to carry only the line at the base, and that in coming back,

when he struck the left of the division, knowing this interpretation

of the order, he in his capacity as an aide-de-camp had directed

Wagner, who was up on the face of the ridge, to return, and that in

consequence Wagner was recalling his men to the base.  I could not

bear to order the recall of troops now so gallantly climbing the hill

step by step, and believing we could take it, I immediately rode to

Wagner's brigade and directed it to resume the attack.  In the

meantime Harker's and F. T. Sherman's troops were approaching the

partial line of works midway of the ridge, and as I returned to the

centre of their rear, they were being led by many stands of

regimental colors.  There seemed to be a rivalry as to which color

should be farthest to the front; first one would go forward a few

feet, then another would come up to it, the color-bearers vying with

one another as to who should be foremost, until finally every

standard was planted on the intermediate works.  The enemy's fire

from the crest during the ascent was terrific in the noise made, but

as it was plunging, it over-shot and had little effect on those above

the second line of pits, but was very uncomfortable for those below,

so I deemed it advisable to seek another place, and Wagner's brigade

having reassembled and again pressed up the ridge, I rode up the face

to join my troops.



As soon as the men saw me, they surged forward and went over the

works on the crest.  The parapet of the intrenchment was too high for

my horse to jump, so, riding a short distance to the left, I entered

through a low place in the line.  A few Confederates were found

inside, but they turned the butts of their muskets toward me in token

of surrender, for our men were now passing beyond them on both their

flanks.



The right and right centre of my division gained the summit first,

they being partially sheltered by a depression in the face of the

ridge, the Confederates in their immediate front fleeing down the

southern face.  When I crossed the rifle-pits on the top the

Confederates were still holding fast at Bragg's headquarters, and a

battery located there opened fire along the crest; making things most

uncomfortably hot.  Seeing the danger to which I was exposed, for I

was mounted, Colonel Joseph Conrad, of the Fifteenth Missouri, ran up

and begged me to dismount.  I accepted his excellent advice, and it

probably saved my life; but poor Conrad was punished for his

solicitude by being seriously wounded in the thigh at the moment he

was thus contributing to my safety.



Wildly cheering, the men advanced along the ridge toward Bragg's

headquarters, and soon drove the Confederates from this last

position, capturing a number of prisoners, among them Breckenridge's

and Bates's adjutant-generals, and the battery that had made such

stout resistance on the crest-two guns which were named "Lady

Breckenridge" and "Lady Buckner" General Bragg himself having barely

time to escape before his headquarters were taken.



My whole division had now reached the summit, and Wagner and Harker--

the latter slightly wounded--joined me as I was standing in the

battery just secured.  The enemy was rapidly retiring, and though

many of his troops, with disorganized wagon-trains and several pieces

of artillery, could be distinctly seen in much confusion about half a

mile distant in the valley below, yet he was covering them with a

pretty well organized line that continued to give us a desultory

fire.  Seeing this, I at once directed Wagner and Harker to take up

the pursuit along Moore's road, which led to Chickamauga Station--

Bragg's depot of supply--and as they progressed, I pushed Sherman's

brigade along the road behind them.  Wagner and Harker soon overtook

the rearguard, and a slight skirmish caused it to break, permitting

nine guns and a large number of wagons which were endeavoring to get

away in the stampede to fall into our hands.



About a mile and a half beyond Missionary Ridge, Moore's road passed

over a second ridge or high range of hills, and here the enemy had

determined to make a stand for that purpose, posting eight pieces of

artillery with such supporting force as he could rally.  He was

immediately attacked by Harker and Wagner, but the position was

strong, the ridge being rugged and difficult of ascent, and after the

first onset our men recoiled.  A staff-officer from Colonel Wood's

demi-brigade informing me at this juncture that that command was too

weak to carry the position in its front, I ordered the Fifteenth

Indiana and the Twenty-Sixth Ohio to advance to Wood's aid, and then

hastening to the front I found his men clinging to the face of the

ridge, contending stubbornly with the rear-guard of the enemy.

Directing Harker to put Opdyke's demi-brigade in on the right, I

informed Wagner that it was necessary to flank the enemy by carrying

the high bluff on our left where the ridge terminated, that I had

designated the Twenty-Sixth Ohio and Fifteenth Indiana for the work,

and that I wished him to join them.



It was now dusk, but the two regiments engaged in the flanking

movement pushed on to gain the bluff.  Just as they reached the crest

of the ridge the moon rose from behind, enlarged by the refraction of

the atmosphere, and as the attacking column passed along the summit

it crossed the moon's disk and disclosed to us below a most

interesting panorama, every figure nearly being thrown out in full

relief.  The enemy, now outflanked on left and right, abandoned his

ground, leaving us two pieces of artillery and a number of wagons.

After this ridge was captured I found that no other troops than mine

were pursuing the enemy, so I called a halt lest I might become too

much isolated.  Having previously studied the topography of the

country thoroughly, I knew that if I pressed on my line of march

would carry me back to Chickamauga station, where we would be in rear

of the Confederates that had been fighting General Sherman, and that

there was a possibility of capturing them by such action; but I did

not feel warranted in marching there alone, so I rode back to

Missionary Ridge to ask for more troops, and upon arriving there I

found Granger in command, General Thomas having gone back to

Chattanooga.



Granger was at Braggy's late headquarters in bed.  I informed him of

my situation and implored him to follow me up with the Army of the

Cumberland, but he declined, saying that he thought we had done well

enough.  I still insisting, he told me finally to push on to the

crossing of Chickamauga Creek, and if I, encountered the enemy he

would order troops to my support.  I returned to my division about

12 o'clock at night, got it under way, and reached the crossing,

about half a mile from the station, at 2 o'clock on the morning of

the 26th, and there found the bridge destroyed, but that the creek

was fordable.  I did not encounter the enemy in any force, but feared

to go farther without assistance.  This I thought I might bring up by

practicing a little deception, so I caused two regiments to simulate

an engagement by opening fire, hoping that this would alarm Granger

and oblige him to respond with troops, but my scheme failed.  General

Granger afterward told me that he had heard the volleys, but

suspected their purpose, knowing that they were not occasioned by a

fight, since they were too regular in their delivery.



I was much disappointed that my pursuit had not been supported, for I

felt that great results were in store for us should the enemy be

vigorously followed.  Had the troops under Granger's command been

pushed out with mine when Missionary Ridge was gained, we could have

reached Chickamauga Station by 12 o'clock the night of the 25th; or

had they been sent even later, when I called for them, we could have

got there by daylight and worked incalculable danger to the

Confederates, for the force that had confronted Sherman did not pass

Chickamauga Station in their retreat till after daylight on the

morning of the 26th.



My course in following so close was dictated by a thorough knowledge

of the topography of the country and a familiarity with its roads,

bypaths, and farm-houses, gained with the assistance of Mr.

Crutchfield; and sure my column was heading in the right direction,

though night had fallen I thought that an active pursuit would almost

certainly complete the destruction of Bragg's army.  When General

Grant came by my bivouac at the crossing of Chickamauga Creek on the

26th, he realized what might have been accomplished had the

successful assault on Missionary Ridge been supplemented by vigorous

efforts on the part of some high officers, who were more interested

in gleaning that portion of the battle-field over which my command

had passed than in destroying a panic-stricken enemy.



Although it cannot be said that the result of the two days'

operations was reached by the methods which General Grant had

indicated in his instructions preceding the battle, yet the general

outcome was unquestionably due to his genius, for the manoeuvring of

Sherman's and Hooker's commands created the opportunity for Thomas's

corps of the Army of the Cumberland to carry the ridge at the centre.

In directing Sherman to attack the north end of the ridge, Grant

disconcerted Bragg--who was thus made to fear the loss of his depot

of supplies at Chickamauga Station--and compelled him to resist

stoutly; and stout resistance to Sherman meant the withdrawal of the

Confederates from Lookout Mountain.  While this attack was in process

of execution advantage was taken of it by Hooker in a well-planned

and well-fought battle, but to my mind an unnecessary one, for our

possession of Lookout was the inevitable result that must follow from

Sherman's threatening attitude.  The assault on Missionary Ridge by

Granger's and Palmer's corps was not premeditated by Grant, he

directing only the line at its base to be carried, but when this fell

into our hands the situation demanded our getting the one at the top

also.



I took into the action an effective force of 6,000, and lost 123

officers and 1,181 men killed and wounded.  These casualties speak

louder than words of the character of the fight, and plainly tell

where the enemy struggled most stubbornly for these figures comprise

one-third the casualties of the entire body of Union troops--

Sherman's and all included.  My division captured 1,762 prisoners

and, in all, seventeen pieces of artillery.  Six of these guns I

turned over with caissons complete; eleven were hauled off the field

and appropriated by an officer of high rank--General Hazen.  I have

no disposition to renew the controversy which grew out of this

matter.  At the time the occurrence took place I made the charge in a

plain official report, which was accepted as correct by the corps and

army commanders, from General Granger up to General Grant.  General

Hazen took no notice of this report then, though well aware of its

existence.  Nearly a quarter of a century later, however, he

endeavored to justify his retention of the guns by trying to show

that his brigade was the first to reach the crest of Missionary

Ridge, and that he was therefore entitled to them.  This claim of

being the first to mount the ridge is made by other brigades than

Hazen's, with equal if not greater force, so the absurdity of his

deduction is apparent:



NOTE: In a book published by General Hazen in 1885, he endeavored to

show, by a number of letters from subordinate officers of his

command, written at his solicitation from fifteen to twenty years

after the occurrence, that his brigade was the first to mount

Missionary Ridge, and that it was entitled to possess these guns.

The doubtful character of testimony dimmed by the lapse of many years

has long been conceded, and I am content to let the controversy stand

the test of history, based on the conclusions of General Grant, as he

drew them from official reports made when the circumstances were

fresh in the minds of all.



General Grant says: "To Sheridan's prompt movement, the Army of the

Cumberland and the nation are indebted for the bulk of the capture of

prisoners, artillery, and small-arms that day.  Except for his prompt

pursuit, so much in this way would not have been accomplished."



General Thomas says: "We captured all their cannon and ammunition

before they could be removed or destroyed.  After halting a few

moments to reorganize the troops, who had become somewhat scattered

in the assault of the hill, General Sheridan pushed forward in

pursuit, and drove those in his front who had escaped capture across

Chickamauga Creek."



REPORT OF COLONEL FRANCIS T. SHERMAN, COMMANDING FIRST BRIGADE:

"When within ten yards of the crest, our men seemed to be thrown

forward as if by some powerful engine, and the old flag was planted

firmly and surely on the last line of works of the enemy, followed by

the men, taking one battery of artillery."



REPORT OF COLONEL MICHAEL GOODING, TWENTY-SECOND INDIANA:

...."I pushed men up to the second line of works as fast as possible;

on and on, clear to the top, and over the ridge they went, to the

hollow beyond, killing and wounding numbers of the enemy as we

advanced, and leaving the rebel battery in our rear.  We captured

great numbers of prisoners, and sent them to the rear without guards,

as we deemed the pursuit of the enemy of greater importance....

"I cannot give too much praise to Captain Powers, Company "H,"

Lieutenant Smith, Company "K," Lieutenant Gooding, Company "A," and

Second Lieutenant Moser, Company "G," for their assistance, and for

the gallant manner in which they encouraged their men up the side of

the mountain, and charging the enemy's works right up to the muzzles

of their guns."



REPORT OF COLONEL JASON MARSH, SEVENTY-FOURTH ILLINOIS:

...."The first on the enemy's works, and almost simultaneously, were

Lieutenant Clement, Company "A," Captain Stegner, Company "I,"

Captain Bacon, "Company "G," and Captain Leffingwell, with some of

their men.  The enemy was still in considerable force behind their

works; but, for some unaccountable reason, they either fled or

surrendered instantly upon the first few of our men reaching them--

not even trying to defend their battery, which was immediately

captured by Captain Stegner."



REPORT OF LIEUTENANT-COLONEL PORTER C. OLSON, THIRTY-SIXTH ILLINOIS:

...."In connection with other regiments of this brigade, we assisted

in capturing several pieces of artillery, a number of caissons, and a

great quantity of small-arms."



REPORT OF COLONEL JOHN Q. LANE:

...."At the house known as Bragg's headquarters, the enemy were

driven from three guns, which fell into our hands."



REPORT OF BRIGADIER-GENERAL G. D. WAGNER, SECOND BRIGADE:

...."I ordered the command to storm the ridge, bringing up the

Fifteenth Indiana and Ninety-seventh Ohio, which had not yet been

engaged, although suffering from the enemy's artillery.  The result

is a matter of history, as we gained the ridge, capturing artillery,

prisoners, and small-arms; to what amount, however, I do not know, as

we pushed on after the enemy as soon as I had re-formed the command .

....Captain Tinney, with his usual gallantry, dashed up the line with

the first troops, and with the aid of an orderly (George Dusenbury,

Fifteenth Indiana), turned the loaded gun of the enemy on his

retreating ranks."



REPORT OF CAPTAIN BENJAMIN F. HEGLER, FIFTEENTH INDIANA:

...."Our captures amounted to prisoners not counted, representing

many different regiments; several pieces of artillery, and some

wagons."



REPORT OF LIEUTENANT-COLONEL ELIAS NEFF, FORTIETH INDIANA:

...."As the regiment reached the top of the ridge and swept for.

ward, the right passed through, without stopping to take possession,

the battery at General Bragg's headquarters that had fired so

venomously during the whole contest."



REPORT OF LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. MOORE, FIFTY-EIGHTH INDIANA:

...."In passing to the front from Missionary Ridge, we saw several

pieces of artillery which had been abandoned by the enemy, though I

did not leave any one in charge of them."



REPORT OF MAJOR C, M. HAMMOND, ONE HUNDREDTH ILLINOIS:

...."I immediately organized my regiment, and while so doing

discovered a number of pieces of artillery in a ravine on my left.  I

sent Lieutenant Stewart, of Company A, to see if these guns which the

enemy had abandoned could not be turned upon them.  He returned and

reported them to be four ten-pound Parrotts and two brass Napoleons;

also that it would require a number of men to place them in position.

I ordered him to report the same to General Wagner, and ask

permission, but before receiving a reply was ordered by you to move

forward my regiment on the left of the Fifty-Eighth Indiana

Volunteers."



REPORT OF COLONEL CHARLES G. HARKER, THIRD BRIGADE:

...."My right and Colonel Sherman's left interlocked, so to speak, as

we approached the summit, and it was near this point that I saw the

first part of my line gain the crest.  This was done by a few brave

men of my own and Colonel Sherman's command driving the enemy from

his intrenchments.  The gap thus opened, our men rushed rapidly in,

and the enemy, loth to give up their position, still remained, firing

at my command toward the left, and the battery in front of the house

known as General Bragg's headquarters was still firing at the troops,

and was captured by our men while the gunners were still at their

posts....

...."We captured and sent to division and corps headquarters 503

prisoners and a large number of small-arms.  In regard to the number

of pieces of artillery, it will probably be difficult to reconcile

the reports of my regimental commanders with the reports of other

regiments and brigades who fought so nobly with my own command, and

who alike are entitled to share the honors and glories of the day.

More anxious to follow the enemy than to appropriate trophies already

secured, we pushed to the front, while the place we occupied on

ascending the hill was soon occupied by other troops, who, I have

learned, claim the artillery as having fallen into their own hands.

It must therefore remain with the division and corps commanders, who

knew the relative position of each brigade and division, to accord to

each the trophies to which they are due.

...."From my personal observation I can claim a battery of six guns

captured by a portion of my brigade."



REPORT OF COLONEL EMERSON OPDYKE, FIRST DEMI-BRIGADE:

...."My command captured Bragg's headquarters, house, and the six

guns which were near there; one of these I ordered turned upon the

enemy, which was done with effect."



REPORT OF COLONEL H. C. DUNLAP, THIRD KENTUCKY:

...."The point at which the centre of my regiment reached the crest

was at the stable to the left of the house said to be Bragg's

headquarters, and immediately in front of the road which leads down

the southern slope of the ridge.  One piece of the abandoned battery,

was to the left of this point, the remainder to the right, near by."



REPORT OF LIEUTENANT-COLONEL W. A. BULLITT, SIXTY-FIFTH OHIO:

...."The position in which my regiment found itself was immediately

in front of a battery, which belched forth a stream of canister upon

us with terrible rapidity.  In addition to this, the enemy, whenever

driven from other points, rallied around this battery, and defended

it with desperation.  It cost a struggle to take it; but we finally

succeeded, and the colors of the Sixty-fifth Ohio were the first

planted upon the yet smoking guns.  Captain Smith, of my regiment,

was placed in charge of the captured battery, which consisted of 5

guns, 3 caissons, and 17 horses."



REPORT OF CAPTAIN E. P. BATES, ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH OHIO:

...."Perceiving that the ridge across which my regiment extended was

commanded to the very crest by a battery in front, also by those to

right and left, I directed the men to pass up the gorges on either

side.  About forty men, with Captain Parks and Lieutenant Stinger,

passed to the left, the balance to the right, and boldly charged on,

till, foremost with those of other regiments, they stood on the

strongest point of the enemy's works, masters alike of his guns and

position....  Captain Parks reports his skirmish-line to have charged

upon and captured one gun, that otherwise would have been hauled

off."



REPORT OF COLONEL ALLEN BUCKNER, SEVENTY-NINTH ILLINOIS:

...."The right of the regiment rested on the left of the road, where

it crossed the rebel fortification, leading up the hill toward

Bragg's headquarters.  We took a right oblique direction through a

peach orchard until arriving at the woods and logs on the side of the

ridge, when I ordered the men to commence firing, which they did with

good effect, and continued it all the way up until the heights were

gained.  At this point the left of the regiment was near the right of

the house, and I claim that my officers and men captured two large

brass pieces, literally punching the cannoniers from their guns.

Privates John Fregan and Jasper Patterson, from Company "A," rushed

down the hill, captured one caisson, with a cannonier and six horses,

and brought them back."



REPORT OF COLONEL J. R. MILES, TWENTY-SEVENTH ILLINOIS:

...."The regiment, without faltering, finally, at about 4.30 P.M.,

gained the enemy's works in conjunction with a party of the Thirty-

sixth Illinois, who were immediately on our right.  The regiment, or

a portion of it, proceeded to the left, down the ridge, for nearly or

quite a quarter of a mile capturing three or four pieces of cannon,

driving the gunners from them."









CHAPTER XVII.



ORDERED TO RETURN TO CHATTANOOGA--MARCH TO KNOXVILLE--COLLECTING

SUBSISTENCE STORES--A CLEVER STRATAGEM--A BRIDGE OF WAGONS--LOOKING

OUT FOR THE PERSONAL COMFORT OF THE SOLDIERS-A LEAVE OF ABSENCE--

ORDERED TO WASHINGTON--PARTING WITH SHERIDAN'S DIVISION.



The day after the battle of Missionary Ridge I was ordered in the

evening to return to Chattanooga, and from the limited supply of

stores to be had there outfit my command to march to the relief of

Knoxville, where General Burnside was still holding out against the

besieging forces of General Longstreet.  When we left Murfreesboro'

in the preceding June, the men's knapsacks and extra clothing, as

well as all our camp equipage, had been left behind, and these

articles had not yet reached us, so we were poorly prepared for a

winter campaign in the mountains of East Tennessee.  There was but

little clothing to be obtained in Chattanooga, and my command

received only a few overcoats and a small supply of India-rubber

ponchos.  We could get no shoes, although we stood in great need of

them, for the extra pair with which each man had started out from

Murfreesboro' was now much the worse for wear.  The necessity for

succoring Knoxville was urgent, however, so we speedily refitted as

thoroughly as was possible with the limited means at hand.  My

division teams were in very fair condition in consequence of the

forage we had procured in the Sequatchie Valley, so I left the train

behind to bring up clothing when any should arrive in Chattanooga.



Under these circumstances, on the 29th of November the Fourth Corps

(Granger's) took up the line of march for Knoxville, my men carrying

in their haversacks four days' rations, depending for a further

supply of food on a small steamboat loaded with subsistence stores,

which was to proceed up the Tennessee River and keep abreast of the

column.



Not far from Philadelphia, Tennessee, the columns of General

Sherman's army, which had kept a greater distance from the river than

Granger's corps, so as to be able to subsist on the country, came in

toward our right and the whole relieving force was directed on

Marysville, about fifteen miles southwest of Knoxville.  We got to

Marysville December 5, and learned the same day that Longstreet had

shortly before attempted to take Knoxville by a desperate assault,

but signally failing, had raised the siege and retired toward Bean's

Station on the Rutledge, Rogersville, and Bristol road, leading to

Virginia.  From Marysville General Sherman's troops returned to

Chattanooga, while Granger's corps continued on toward Knoxville, to

take part in the pursuit of Longstreet.



Burnside's army was deficient in subsistence, though not to the

extent that we had supposed before leaving Chattanooga.  It had eaten

out the country in the immediate vicinity of Knoxville, however;

therefore my division did not cross the Holstein River, but was

required, in order to maintain itself, to proceed to the region of

the French Broad River.  To this end I moved to Sevierville, and

making this village my headquarters, the division was spread out over

the French Broad country, between Big Pigeon and Little Pigeon

rivers, where we soon had all the mills in operation, grinding out

plenty of flour and meal.  The whole region was rich in provender of

all kinds, and as the people with rare exceptions were

enthusiastically loyal, we in a little while got more than enough

food for ourselves, and by means of flatboats began sending the

surplus down the river to the troops at Knoxville.



The intense loyalty of this part of Tennessee exceeded that of any

other section I was in during the war.  The people could not do too

much to aid the Union cause, and brought us an abundance of

everything needful.  The women were especially loyal, and as many of

their sons and husbands, who had been compelled to "refugee" on

account of their loyal sentiments, returned with us, numbers of the

women went into ecstasies of joy when this part of the Union army

appeared among them.  So long as we remained in the French Broad

region, we lived on the fat of the land, but unluckily our stay was

to be of short duration, for Longstreet's activity kept the

department commander in a state of constant alarm.



Soon after getting the mills well running, and when the shipment of

their surplus product down the river by flatboats had begun, I was

ordered to move to Knoxville, on account of demonstrations by

Longstreet from the direction of Blain's crossroads.  On arriving at

Knoxville, an inspection of my command, showed that the shoes of many

of the men were entirely worn out, the poor fellows having been

obliged to protect their feet with a sort of moccasin, made from

their blankets or from such other material as they could procure.

About six hundred of the command were in this condition, plainly not

suitably shod to withstand the frequent storms of sleet and snow.

These men I left in Knoxville to await the arrival of my train, which

I now learned was en route from Chattanooga with shoes, overcoats,

and other clothing, and with the rest of the division proceeded to

Strawberry Plains, which we reached the latter part of December.



Mid-winter was now upon us, and the weather in this mountain region

of East Tennessee was very cold, snow often falling to the depth of

several inches.  The thin and scanty clothing of the men afforded

little protection, and while in bivouac their only shelter was the

ponchos with which they had been provided before leaving Chattanooga;

there was not a tent in the command.  Hence great suffering resulted,

which I anxiously hoped would be relieved shortly by the arrival of

my train with supplies.  In the course of time the wagons reached

Knoxville, but my troops derived little comfort from this fact, for

the train was stopped by General Foster, who had succeeded Burnside

in command of the department, its contents distributed pro rata to

the different organizations of the entire army, and I received but a

small share.  This was very disappointing, not to say exasperating,

but I could not complain of unfairness, for every command in the army

was suffering to the same extent as mine, and yet it did seem that a

little forethought and exertion on the part of some of the other

superior officers, whose transportation was in tolerable condition,

might have ameliorated the situation considerably.  I sent the train

back at once for more clothing, and on its return, just before

reaching Knoxville, the quartermaster in charge, Captain Philip

Smith, filled the open spaces in the wagons between the bows and load

with fodder and hay, and by this clever stratagem passed it through

the town safe and undisturbed as a forage train.  On Smith's arrival

we lost no time in issuing the clothing, and when it had passed into

the hands of the individual soldiers the danger of its appropriation

for general distribution, like the preceding invoice, was very

remote.



General Foster had decided by this time to move his troops to

Dandridge for the twofold purpose of threatening the enemy's left and

of getting into a locality where we could again gather subsistence

from the French Broad region.  Accordingly we began an advance on the

15th of January, the cavalry having preceded us some time before.

The Twenty-third Corps and Wood's division of the Fourth Corps

crossed the Holstein River by a bridge that had been constructed at

Strawberry Plains.  My division being higher up the stream, forded

it, the water very deep and bitter cold, being filled with slushy

ice.  Marching by way of New Market, I reached Dandridge on the 17th,

and here on my arrival met General Sturgis, then commanding our

cavalry.  He was on the eve of setting out to, "whip the enemy's

cavalry," as he said, and wanted me to go along and see him do it.  I

declined, however, for being now the senior officer present, Foster,

Parke, and Granger having remained at Knoxville and Strawberry

Plains, their absence left me in command, and it was necessary that I

should make disposition of the infantry when it arrived.  As there

were indications of a considerable force of the enemy on the

Russellville road I decided to place the troops in line of battle, so

as to be prepared for any emergency that might arise in the absence

of the senior officers, and I deemed it prudent to supervise

personally the encamping of the men.  This disposition necessarily

required that some of the organizations should occupy very

disagreeable ground, but I soon got all satisfactorily posted with

the exception of General Willich, who expressed some discontent at

being placed beyond the shelter of the timber, but accepted the

situation cheerfully when its obvious necessity was pointed out to

him.



Feeling that all was secure, I returned to my headquarters in the

village with the idea that we were safely established in ease of

attack, and that the men would now have a good rest if left

undisturbed; and plenty to eat, but hardly had I reached my own camp

when a staff-officer came post-haste from Sturgis with the

information that he was being driven back to my lines, despite the

confident invitation to me (in the morning) to go out and witness the

whipping which was to be given to the enemy's cavalry.  Riding to the

front, I readily perceived that the information was correct, and I

had to send a brigade of infantry out to help Sturgis, thus relieving

him from a rather serious predicament.  Indeed, the enemy was present

in pretty strong force, both cavalry and infantry, and from his

vicious attack on Sturgis it looked very much as though he intended

to bring on a general engagement.



Under such circumstances I deemed it advisable that the responsible

commanders of the army should be present, and so informed them.  My

communication brought Parke and Granger to the front without delay,

but Foster could not come, since the hardships of the winter had

reopened an old wound received during the Mexican War, and brought on

much suffering.  By the time Parke and Granger arrived, however, the

enemy, who it turned out was only making a strong demonstration to

learn the object of our movement on Dandridge, seemed satisfied with

the results of his reconnoissance, and began falling back toward

Bull's Gap.  Meanwhile Parke and Granger concluded that Dandridge was

an untenable point, and hence decided to withdraw a part of the army

to Strawberry Plains; and the question of supplies again coming up,

it was determined to send the Fourth Corps to the south side of the

French Broad to obtain subsistence, provided we could bridge the

river so that men could get across the deep and icy stream without

suffering.



I agreed to undertake the construction of a bridge on condition that

each division should send to the ford twenty-five wagons with which

to make it.  This being acceded to, Harker's brigade began the work

next morning at a favorable point a few miles down the river.  As my

quota of wagons arrived, they were drawn into the stream one after

another by the wheel team, six men in each wagon, and as they

successively reachd the other side of the channel the mules were

unhitched, the pole of each wagon run under thre hind axle of the one

just in front, and the tailboards used so as to span the slight space

between them.  The plan worked well as long as the material lasted,

but no other wagons than my twenty-five coming on the ground, the

work stopped when the bridge was only half constructed.  Informed of

the delay and its cause, in sheer desperation I finished the bridge

by taking from my own division all the wagons needed to make up the

deficiency.



It was late in the afternoon when the work was finished, and I began

putting over one of my brigades; but in the midst of its crossing

word came that Longstreet's army was moving to attack us, which

caused an abandonment of the foraging project, and orders quickly

followed to retire to Strawberry Plains, the retrograde movement to

begin forthwith.  I sent to headquarters information of the plight I

was in--baggage and supplies on the bank and wagons in the stream--

begged to know what was to become of them if we were to hurry off at

a moment's notice, and suggested that the movement be delayed until I

could recover my transportation.  Receiving in reply no assurances

that I should be relieved from my dilemma--and, in fact, nothing

satisfactory--I determined to take upon myself the responsibility of

remaining on the ground long enough to get my wagons out of the

river; so I sent out a heavy force to watch for the enemy, and with

the remainder of the command went to work to break up the bridge.

Before daylight next morning I had recovered everything without

interference by Longstreet, who, it was afterward ascertained, was

preparing to move east toward Lynchburg instead of marching to attack

us; the small demonstration against Dandridge, being made simply to

deceive us as to his ultimate object.  I marched to Strawberry Plains

unmolested, and by taking the route over Bay's Mountain, a shorter

one than that followed by the main body of our troops, reached the

point of rendezvous as soon as the most of the army, for the road it

followed was not only longer, but badly cut up by trains that had

recently passed over it.



Shortly after getting into camp, the beef contractor came in and

reported that a detachment of the enemy's cavalry had captured my

herd of beef cattle.  This caused me much chagrin at first, but the

commissary of my division soon put in an appearance, and assured me

that the loss would not be very disastrous to us nor of much benefit

to the enemy, since the cattle were so poor and weak that they could

not be driven off.  A reconnoissance in force verified the

Commissary's statement.  From its inability to travel, the herd,

after all efforts to carry it off had proved ineffectual, had been

abandoned by its captors.



After the troops from Chattanooga arrived in the vicinity of

Knoxville and General Sherman had returned to Chattanooga, the

operations in East Tennessee constituted a series of blunders,

lasting through the entire winter; a state of affairs doubtless due,

in the main, to the fact that the command of the troops was so

frequently changed.  Constant shifting of responsibility from one to

another ensued from the date that General Sherman, after assuring

himself that Knoxville was safe, devolved the command on Burnside.

It had already been intimated to Burnside that he was to be relieved,

and in consequence he was inactive and apathetic, confining his

operations to an aimless expedition whose advance extended only as

far as Blain's crossroads, whence it was soon withdrawn.  Meanwhile

General Foster had superseded Burnside, but physical disabilities

rendered him incapable of remaining in the field, and then the chief

authority devolved on Parke.  By this time the transmission of power

seemed almost a disease; at any rate it was catching, so, while we

were en route to Dandridge, Parke transferred the command to Granger.

The latter next unloaded it on me, and there is no telling what the

final outcome would have been had I not entered a protest against a

further continuance of the practice, which remonstrance brought

Granger to the front at Dandridge.



While the events just narrated were taking place, General Grant had

made a visit to Knoxville--about the last of December--and arranged

to open the railroad between there and Chattanooga, with a view to

supplying the troops in East Tennessee by rail in the future, instead

of through Cumberland Gap by a tedious line of wagon-trains.  In

pursuance of his plan the railroad had already been opened to Loudon,

but here much delay occurred on account of the long time it took to

rebuild the bridge over the Tennessee.  Therefore supplies were still

very scarce, and as our animals were now dying in numbers from

starvation, and the men were still on short allowance, it became

necessary that some of the troops east of Knoxville should get nearer

to their depot, and also be in a position to take part in the coming

Georgia campaign, or render assistance to General Thomas, should

General Johnston (who had succeeded in command of the Confederate

army) make any demonstration against Chattanooga.  Hence my division

was ordered to take station at Loudon, Tennessee, and I must confess

that we took the road for that point with few regrets, for a general

disgust prevailed regarding our useless marches during the winter.



At this time my faithful scout Card and his younger brother left me,

with the determination, as I have heretofore related, to avenge their

brother's death.  No persuasion could induce Card to remain longer,

for knowing that my division's next operation would be toward

Atlanta, and being ignorant of the country below Dalton,.  he

recognized and insisted that his services would then become

practically valueless.



At Loudon, where we arrived January 27, supplies were more plentiful,

and as our tents and extra clothing reached us there in a few days,

every one grew contented and happy.  Here a number of my regiments,

whose terms of service were about to expire, went through the process

of "veteranizing," and, notwithstanding the trials and hardships of

the preceding nine months, they re-enlisted almost to a man.



When everything was set in motion toward recuperating and refitting

my troops, I availed myself of the opportunity during a lull that

then existed to take a short leave of absence--a privilege I had not

indulged in since entering the service in 1853.  This leave I spent

in the North with much benefit to my physical condition, for I was

much run down by fatiguing service, and not a little troubled by

intense pain which I at times still suffered from my experience in

the unfortunate hand-car incident on the Cumberland Mountains the

previous July.  I returned from leave the latter part of March,

rejoining my division with the expectation that the campaign in that

section would begin as early as April.



On the 12th of March, 1864, General Grant was assigned to the command

of the armies of the United States, as general-in-chief.  He was

already in Washington, whither he had gone to receive his commission

as lieutenant-general.  Shortly after his arrival there, he commenced

to rearrange the different commands in the army to suit the plans

which he intended to enter upon in the spring, and out of this grew a

change in my career.  Many jealousies and much ill-feeling, the

outgrowth of former campaigns, existed among officers of high grade

in the Army of the Potomac in the winter of 1864, and several general

officers were to be sent elsewhere in consequence.  Among these,

General Alfred Pleasonton was to be relieved from the command of the

cavalry, General Grant having expressed to the President

dissatisfaction that so little had hitherto been accomplished by that

arm of the service, and I was selected as chief of the cavalry corps

of the Army of the Potomac, receiving on the night of the 23d of

March from General Thomas at Chattanooga the following telegram:



"MARCH 23, 1864.

"MAJOR-GENERAL THOMAS, Chattanooga



"Lieutenant-General Grant directs that Major-General Sheridan

immediately repair to Washington and report to the Adjutant-General

of the Army.



" H. W. HALLECK,

Major-General, Chief-of-Staff."





I was not informed of the purpose for which I was to proceed to

Washington, but I conjectured that it meant a severing of my

relations with the Second Division, Fourth Army Corps.  I at once set

about obeying the order, and as but little preparation was necessary,

I started for Chattanooga the next day, without taking any formal

leave of the troops I had so long commanded.  I could not do it; the

bond existing between them and me had grown to such depth of

attachment that I feared to trust my emotions in any formal parting

from a body of soldiers who, from our mutual devotion, had long

before lost their official designation, and by general consent within

and without the command were called "Sheridan's Division."  When I

took the train at the station the whole command was collected on the

hill-sides around to see me off.  They had assembled spontaneously,

officers and men, and as the cars moved out for Chattanooga they

waved me farewell with demonstrations of affection.



A parting from such friends was indeed to be regretted.  They had

never given me any trouble, nor done anything that could bring aught

but honor to themselves.  I had confidence in them, and I believe

they had in me.  They were ever steady, whether in victory or in

misfortune, and as I tried always to be with them, to put them into

the hottest fire if good could be gained, or save them from

unnecessary loss, as occasion required, they amply repaid all my care

and anxiety, courageously and readily meeting all demands in every

emergency that arose.



In Kentucky, nearly two years before, my lot had been cast with about

half of the twenty-five regiments of infantry that I was just

leaving, the rest joining me after Chickamauga.  It was practically a

new arm of the service to me, for although I was an infantry officer,

yet the only large command which up to that time I had controlled was

composed of cavalry, and most of my experience had been gained in

this arm of the service.  I had to study hard to be able to master

all the needs of such a force, to feed and clothe it and guard all

its interests.  When undertaking these responsibilities I felt that

if I met them faithfully, recompense would surely come through the

hearty response that soldiers always make to conscientious exertion

on the part of their superiors, and not only that more could be

gained in that way than from the use of any species of influence, but

that the reward would be quicker.  Therefore I always tried to look

after their comfort personally; selected their camps, and provided

abundantly for their subsistence, and the road they opened for me

shows that my work was not in vain.  I regretted deeply to have to

leave such soldiers, and felt that they were sorry I was going, and

even now I could not, if I would, retain other than the warmest

sentiments of esteem and the tenderest affection for the officers and

men of "Sheridan's Division," Army of the Cumberland.



On reaching Chattanooga I learned from General Thomas the purpose for

which I had been ordered to Washington.  I was to be assigned to the

command of the Cavalry Corps of the Army of the Potomac.  The

information staggered me at first, for I knew well the great

responsibilities of such a position; moreover, I was but slightly

acquainted with military operations in Virginia, and then, too, the

higher officers of the Army of the Potomac were little known to me,

so at the moment I felt loth to undergo the trials of the new

position.  Indeed, I knew not a soul in Washington except General

Grant and General Halleck, and them but slightly, and no one in

General Meade's army, from the commanding general down, except a few

officers in the lower grades, hardly any of whom I had seen since

graduating at the Military Academy.



Thus it is not much to be wondered at that General Thomas's

communication momentarily upset me.  But there was no help for it, so

after reflecting on the matter a little I concluded to make the best

of the situation.  As in Virginia I should be operating in a field

with which I was wholly unfamiliar, and among so many who were

strangers, it seemed to me that it would be advisable to have, as a

chief staff-officer, one who had had service in the East, if an

available man could be found.  In weighing all these considerations

in my mind, I fixed upon Captain James W. Forsyth, of the Eighteenth

Infantry, then in the regular brigade at Chattanooga--a dear friend

of mine, who had served in the Army of the Potomac, in the Peninsula

and Antietam campaigns.  He at once expressed a desire to accept a

position on my staff, and having obtained by the next day the

necessary authority, he and I started for Washington, accompanied by

Lieutenant T. W. C. Moore, one of my aides, leaving behind Lieutenant

M. V. Sheridan, my other aide, to forward our horses as soon as they

should be sent down to Chattanooga from Loudon, after which he was to

join me.









CHAPTER XVIII.




AT WASHINGTON--MEETING SECRETARY STANTON--INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT

LINCOLN--MADE COMMANDER OF THE CAVALRY CORPS OF THE ARMY OF THE

POTOMAC--ITS OFFICERS--GENERAL MEADE's METHOD OF USING CAVALRY--

OPENING OF THE CAMPAIGN--SPOTTSYLVANIA C. H.--A DIFFERENCE WITH

GENERAL MEADE--PREPARING TO FIGHT STUART'S CAVALRY.



Accompanied by Captain Forsyth and Lieutenant Moore, I arrived in

Washington on the morning of April, 4, 1864, and stopped at Willard's

Hotel, where, staying temporarily, were many officers of the Army of

the Potomac en route to their commands from leave at the North.

Among all these, however, I was an entire stranger, and I cannot now

recall that I met a single individual whom I had ever before known.



With very little delay after reaching my hotel I made my way to

General Halleck's headquarters and reported to that officer, having

learned in the meantime that General Grant was absent from the city.

General Halleck talked to me for a few minutes, outlining briefly the

nature and duties of my new command, and the general military

situation in Virginia.  When he had finished all he had to say about

these matters, he took me to the office of the Secretary of War, to

present me to Mr. Stanton.  During the ceremony of introduction, I

could feel that Mr. Stanton was eying me closely and searchingly,

endeavoring to form some estimate of one about whom he knew

absolutely nothing, and whose career probably had never been called

to his attention until General Grant decided to order me East, after

my name had been suggested by General Halleck in an interview the two

generals had with Mr. Lincoln.  I was rather young in appearance--

looking even under than over thirty-three years--but five feet five

inches in height, and thin almost to emaciation, weighing only one

hundred and fifteen pounds.  If I had ever possessed any self-

assertion in manner or speech, it certainly vanished in the presence

of the imperious Secretary, whose name at the time was the synonym of

all that was cold and formal.  I never learned what Mr. Stanton's

first impressions of me were, and his guarded and rather calculating

manner gave at this time no intimation that they were either

favorable or unfavorable, but his frequent commendation in after

years indicated that I gained his goodwill before the close of the

war, if not when I first came to his notice; and a more intimate

association convinced me that the cold and cruel characteristics

popularly ascribed to him were more mythical than real.



When the interview with the Secretary was over, I proceeded with

General Halleck to the White House to pay my respects to the

President.  Mr. Lincoln received me very cordially, offering both his

hands, and saying that he hoped I would fulfill the expectations of

General Grant in the new command I was about to undertake, adding

that thus far the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac had not done all

it might have done, and wound up our short conversation by quoting

that stale interrogation so prevalent during the early years of the

war, "Who ever saw a dead cavalryman?"  His manner did not impress

me, however, that in asking the question he had meant anything beyond

a jest, and I parted from the President convinced that he did not

believe all that the query implied.



After taking leave I separated from General Halleck, and on returning

to my hotel found there an order from the War Department assigning me

to the command of the Cavalry Corps, Army of the Potomac.  The next

morning, April 5, as I took the cars for the headquarters of the Army

of the Potomac, General Grant, who had returned to Washington the

previous night from a visit to his family, came aboard the train on

his way to Culpeper Court House, and on the journey down I learned

among other things that he had wisely determined to continue

personally in the field, associating himself with General Meade's

army; where he could supervise its movements directly, and at the

same time escape the annoyances which, should he remain in

Washington, would surely arise from solicitude for the safety of the

Capital while the campaign was in progress.  When we reached Brandy

Station, I left the train and reported to General Meade, who told me

that the headquarters of the Cavalry Corps were some distance back

from the Station, and indicated the general locations of the

different divisions of the corps, also giving me, in the short time I

remained with him, much information regarding their composition.



I reached the Cavalry Corps headquarters on the evening of April 5,

1864, and the next morning issued orders assuming command.  General

Pleasonton had but recently been relieved, and many of his staff-

officers were still on duty at the headquarters awaiting the arrival

of the permanent commander.  I resolved to retain the most of these

officers on my staff, and although they were all unknown to me when I

decided on this course, yet I never had reason to regret it, nor to

question the selections made by my predecessor.



The corps consisted of three cavalry divisions and twelve batteries

of horse artillery.  Brigadier-General A. T. A. Torbert was in

command of the First Division, which was composed of three brigades;

Brigadier-General D. McM. Gregg, of the Second, consisting of two

brigades; and Brigadier-General J. H. Wilson was afterward assigned

to command the Third, also comprising two brigades: Captain Robinson,

a veteran soldier of the Mexican war, was chief of artillery, and as

such had a general supervision of that arm, though the batteries,

either as units or in sections, were assigned to the different

divisions in campaign.



Each one of my division commanders was a soldier by profession.

Torbert graduated from the Military Academy in 1855, and was

commissioned in the infantry, in which arm he saw much service on the

frontier, in Florida, and on the Utah expedition.  At the beginning

of hostilities in April, 1861, he was made a colonel of New Jersey

volunteers, and from that position was promoted in the fall of 1862

to be a brigadier-general, thereafter commanding a brigade of

infantry in the Army of the Potomac till, in the redistribution of

generals, after Grant came to the East, he was assigned to the First

Cavalry Division.



Gregg graduated in 1855 also, and was appointed to the First

Dragoons, with which regiment, up to the breaking out of the war, he

saw frontier service extending from Fort Union, New Mexico, through

to the Pacific coast, and up into Oregon and Washington Territories,

where I knew him slightly.  In the fall of 1861 he became colonel of

the Eighth Pennsylvania Cavalry, and a year later was made a

brigadier-general.  He then succeeded to the command of a division of

cavalry, and continued in that position till the close of his

service, at times temporarily commanding the Cavalry Corps.  He was

the only division commander I had whose experience had been almost

exclusively derived from the cavalry arm.



Wilson graduated in 1860 in the Topographical Engineers, and was

first assigned to duty in Oregon, where he remained till July, 1861.

In the fall of that year his active service in the war began, and he

rose from one position to another, in the East and West, till, while

on General Grant's staff, he was made a brigadier-general in the fall

of 1863 in reward for services performed during the Vicksburg

campaign and for engineer duty at Chattanooga preceding the battle of

Missionary Ridge.  At my request he was selected to command the Third

Division.  General Grant thought highly of him, and, expecting much

from his active mental and physical ability, readily assented to

assign him in place of General Kilpatrick.  The only other general

officers in the corps were Brigadier-General Wesley Merritt,

Brigadier-General George A. Custer, and Brigadier-General Henry E.

Davies, each commanding a brigade.



In a few days after my arrival at Brandy Station I reviewed my new

command, which consisted of about twelve thousand officers and men,

with the same number of horses in passable trim.  Many of the general

officers of the army were present at the review, among them Generals

Meade, Hancock, and Sedgwick.  Sedgwick being an old dragoon, came to

renew his former associations with mounted troops, and to encourage

me, as he jestingly said, because of the traditional prejudices the

cavalrymen were supposed to hold against being commanded by an

infantry officer.  The corps presented a fine appearance at the

review, and so far as the health and equipment of the men were

concerned the showing was good and satisfactory; but the horses were

thin and very much worn down by excessive and, it seemed to me,

unnecessary picket duty, for the cavalry picket-line almost

completely encircled the infantry and artillery camps of the army,

covering a distance, on a continuous line, of nearly sixty miles,

with hardly a mounted Confederate confronting it at any point.  From

the very beginning of the war the enemy had shown more wisdom

respecting his cavalry than we.  Instead of wasting its strength by a

policy of disintegration he, at an early day, had organized his

mounted force into compact masses, and plainly made it a favorite;

and, as usual, he was now husbanding the strength of his horses by

keeping them to the rear, so that in the spring he could bring them

out in good condition for the impending campaign.



Before and at the review I took in this situation, and determined to

remedy it if possible; so in due time I sought an interview with

General Meade and informed him that, as the effectiveness of my

command rested mainly on the strength of its horses, I thought the

duty it was then performing was both burdensome and wasteful.  I also

gave him my idea as to what the cavalry should do, the main purport

of which was that it ought to be kept concentrated to fight the

enemy's cavalry.  Heretofore, the commander of the Cavalry Corps had

been, virtually, but an adjunct at army headquarters--a sort of chief

of cavalry--and my proposition seemed to stagger General Meade not a

little.  I knew that it would be difficult to overcome the recognized

custom of using the cavalry for the protection of trains and the

establishment of cordons around the infantry corps, and so far

subordinating its operations to the movements of the main army that

in name only was it a corps at all, but still I thought it my duty to

try.



At first General Meade would hardly listen to my proposition, for he

was filled with the prejudices that, from the beginning of the war,

had pervaded the army regarding the importance and usefulness of

cavalry, General Scott then predicting that the contest would be

settled by artillery, and thereafter refusing the services of

regiment after regiment of mounted troops.  General Meade deemed

cavalry fit for little more than guard and picket duty, and wanted to

know what would protect the transportation trains and artillery

reserve, cover the front of moving infantry columns, and secure his

flanks from intrusion, if my policy were pursued.  I told him that if

he would let me use the cavalry as I contemplated, he need have

little solicitude in these respects, for, with a mass of ten thousand

mounted men, it was my belief that I could make it so lively for the

enemy's cavalry that, so far as attacks from it were concerned, the

flanks and rear of the Army of the Potomac would require little or no

defense, and claimed, further, that moving columns of infantry should

take care of their own fronts.  I also told him that it was my object

to defeat the enemy's cavalry in a general combat, if possible, and

by such a result establish a feeling of confidence in my own troops

that would enable us after awhile to march where we pleased, for the

purpose of breaking General Lee's communications and destroying the

resources from which his army was supplied.



The idea as here outlined was contrary to Meade's convictions, for

though at different times since he commanded the Army of the Potomac

considerable bodies of the cavalry had been massed for some special

occasion, yet he had never agreed to the plan as a permanency, and

could not be bent to it now.  He gave little encouragement,

therefore, to what I proposed, yet the conversation was immediately

beneficial in one way, for when I laid before him the true condition

of the cavalry, he promptly relieved it from much of the arduous and

harassing picket service it was performing, thus giving me about two

weeks in which to nurse the horses before the campaign opened.



The interview also disclosed the fact that the cavalry commander

should be, according to General Meade's views, at his headquarters

practically as one of his staff, through whom he would give detailed

directions as, in his judgment, occasion required.  Meade's ideas and

mine being so widely divergent, disagreements arose between us later

during the battles of the Wilderness, which lack of concord ended in

some concessions on his part after the movement toward Spottsylvania

Court House began, and although I doubt that his convictions were

ever wholly changed, yet from that date on, in the organization of

the Army of the Potomac, the cavalry corps became more of a compact

body, with the same privileges and responsibilities that attached to

the other corps--conditions that never actually existed before.



On the 4th of May the Army of the Potomac moved against Lee, who was

occupying a defensive position on the south bank of the Rapidan.

After detailing the various detachments which I was obliged to supply

for escorts and other mounted duty, I crossed the river with an

effective force of about 10,000 troopers.  In the interval succeeding

my assignment to the command of the cavalry, I had taken the pains to

study carefully the topography of the country in eastern Virginia,

and felt convinced that, under the policy Meade intended I should

follow, there would be little opportunity for mounted troops to

acquit themselves well in a region so thickly wooded, and traversed

by so many almost parallel streams; but conscious that he would be

compelled sooner or later either to change his mind or partially give

way to the pressure of events, I entered on the campaign with the

loyal determination to aid zealously in all its plans.



General Lee's army was located in its winter quarters behind

intrenchments that lay along the Rapidan for a distance of about

twenty miles; extending from Barnett's to Morton's ford.  The fords

below Morton's were watched by a few small detachments of Confederate

cavalry, the main body of which, however, was encamped below

Hamilton's crossing, where it could draw supplies from the rich

country along the Rappahannock.  Only a few brigades of Lee's

infantry guarded the works along the river, the bulk of it being so

situated that it could be thrown to either flank toward which the

Union troops approached.



General Grant adopted the plan of moving by his left flank, with the

purpose of compelling Lee to come out from behind his intrenchments

along Mine Run and fight on equal terms.  Grant knew well the

character of country through which he would have to pass, but he was

confident that the difficulties of operation in the thickly wooded

region of the Wilderness would be counterbalanced by the facility

with which his position would enable him to secure a new base; and by

the fact that as he would thus cover Washington, there would be

little or no necessity for the authorities there to detach from his

force at some inopportune moment for the protection of that city.



In the move forward two divisions of my cavalry took the advance,

Gregg crossing the Rapidan at Ely's ford and Wilson at Germania ford.

Torbert's division remained in the rear to cover the trains and

reserve artillery, holding from Rapidan Station to Culpeper, and

thence through Stevensburg to the Rappahannock River.  Gregg crossed

the Rapidan before daylight, in advance of the Second Corps, and when

the latter reached Ely's ford, he pushed on to Chancellorsville;

Wilson preceded the Fifth Corps to Germania ford, and when it reached

the river he made the crossing and moved rapidly by Wilderness

Tavern, as far as Parker's Store, from which point he sent a heavy

reconnoissance toward Mine Run, the rest of his division bivouacking

in a strong position.  I myself proceeded to Chancellorsville and

fixed my headquarters at that place, whereon the 5th I was joined by

Torbert's division.



Meanwhile, General Meade had crossed the Rapidan and established his

headquarters not far from Germania ford.  From that point he was in

direct communication with Wilson, whose original instructions from me

carried him only as far as Parker's Store, but it being found, during

the night of the 4th, that the enemy was apparently unacquainted with

the occurrences of the day, Meade directed Wilson to advance in the

direction of Craig's Meeting House; leaving one regiment to hold

Parker's Store.  Wilson with the second brigade encountered Rosser's

brigade of cavalry just beyond the Meeting House, and drove it back

rapidly a distance of about two miles, holding it there till noon,

while his first brigade was halted on the north side of Robinson's

Run near the junction of the Catharpen and Parker's Store roads.



Up to this time Wilson had heard nothing of the approach of the Fifth

Corps, and the situation becoming threatening, he withdrew the second

brigade to the position occupied by the first, but scarcely had he

done so when he learned that at an early hour in the forenoon the

enemy's infantry had appeared in his rear at Parker's Store and cut

off his communication with General Meade.  Surprised at this, he

determined to withdraw to Todd's Tavern, but before his resolution

could be put into execution the Confederates attacked him with a

heavy force, and at the same time began pushing troops down the

Catharpen road.  Wilson was now in a perplexing situation, sandwiched

between the Confederates who had cut him off in the rear at Parker's

store and those occupying the Catharpen road, but he extricated his

command by passing it around the latter force, and reached Todd's

Tavern by crossing the Po River at Corbin's bridge.  General Meade

discovering that the enemy had interposed at Parker's store between

Wilson and the Fifth Corps, sent me word to go to Wilson's relief,

and this was the first intimation I received that Wilson had been

pushed out so far, but, surmising that he would retire in the

direction of Todd's Tavern I immediately despatched Gregg's division

there to his relief.  Just beyond Todd's Tavern Gregg met Wilson, who

was now being followed by the enemy's cavalry.  The pursuing force

was soon checked, and then driven back to Shady Grove Church, while

Wilson's troops fell in behind Gregg's line, somewhat the worse for

their morning's adventure.



When the Army of the Potomac commenced crossing the Rapidan on the

4th, General J. E. B. Stuart, commanding the Confederate cavalry,

began concentrating his command on the right of Lee's infantry,

bringing it from Hamilton's crossing and other points where it had

been wintering.  Stuart's force at this date was a little more than

eight thousand men, organized in two divisions, commanded by Generals

Wade Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee.  Hampton's division was composed of

three brigades, commanded by Generals Cordon, Young, and Rosser;

Fitzhugh Lee's division comprised three brigades also, Generals W. H.

F. Lee, Lomax, and Wickham commanding them.



Information of this concentration, and of the additional fact that

the enemy's cavalry about Hamilton's crossing was all being drawn in,

reached me on the 5th, which obviated all necessity for my moving on

that point as I intended at the onset of the campaign.  The

responsibility for the safety of our trains and of the left flank of

the army still continued, however, so I made such dispositions of my

troops as to secure these objects by holding the line of the Brock

road beyond the Furnaces, and thence around to Todd's Tavern and

Piney Branch Church.  On the 6th, through some false information,

General Meade became alarmed about his left flank, and sent me the

following note:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC,

"May 6, 1864.--1 o'clock P. M.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN,

"Commanding Cavalry Corps



"Your despatch of 11.45 a.m., received.  General Hancock has been

heavily pressed, and his left turned.  The major-general commanding

thinks that you had better draw in your cavalry, so as to secure the

protection of the trains.  The order requiring an escort for the

wagons to-night has been rescinded.



"A. A. HUMPHREYS,

"Major-General, Chief-of-Staff."





On the morning of the 6th Custer's and Devin's brigades had been

severely engaged at the Furnaces before I received the above note.

They had been most successful in repulsing the enemy's attacks,

however, and I felt that the line taken up could be held; but the

despatch from General Humphreys was alarming, so I drew all the

cavalry close in toward Chancellorsville.  It was found later that

Hancock's left had not been turned, and the points thus abandoned had

to be regained at a heavy cost in killed and wounded, to both the

cavalry and the infantry.



On the 7th of May, under directions from headquarters, Army of the

Potomac, the trains were put in motion to go into park at Piney

Branch Church, in anticipation of the movement that was about to be

made for the possession of Spottsylvania Court House.  I felt

confident that the order to move the trains there had been given

without a full understanding of the situation, for Piney Branch

Church was now held by the enemy, a condition which had resulted from

the order withdrawing the cavalry on account of the supposed disaster

to Hancock's left the day before; but I thought the best way to

remedy matters was to hold the trains in the vicinity of Aldrich's

till the ground on which it was intended to park them should be

regained.



This led to the battle of Todd's Tavern, a spirited fight for the

possession of the crossroads at that point, participated in by the

enemy's cavalry and Gregg's division, and two brigades of Torbert's

division, the latter commanded by Merritt, as Torbert became very ill

on the 6th, and had to be sent to the rear.  To gain the objective

point--the crossroads--I directed Gregg to assail the enemy on the

Catharpen road with Irvin Gregg's brigade and drive him over Corbin's

bridge, while Merritt attacked him with the Reserve brigade on the

Spottsylvania road in conjunction with Davies's brigade of Gregg's

division, which was to be put in on the Piney Branch Church road, and

unite with Merritt's left.  Davies's and Irvin Gregg's brigades on my

right and left flanks met with some resistance, yet not enough to

deter them from, executing their orders.  In front of Merritt the

enemy held on more stubbornly, however, and there ensued an

exceedingly severe and, at times, fluctuating fight.  Finally the

Confederates gave way, and we pursued them almost to Spottsylvania

Court House; but deeming it prudent to recall the pursuers about

dark, I encamped Gregg's and Merritt's divisions in the open fields

to the east of Todd's Tavern.



During the preceding three days the infantry corps of the army had

been engaged in the various conflicts known as the battles of the

Wilderness.  The success of the Union troops in those battles had not

been all that was desired, and General Grant now felt that it was

necessary to throw himself on Lee's communications if possible, while

preserving his own intact by prolonging the movement to the left.

Therefore, on the evening of the 7th he determined to shift his whole

army toward Spottsylvania Court House, and initiated the movement by

a night march of the infantry to Todd's Tavern.  In view of what was

contemplated, I gave orders to Gregg and Merritt to move at daylight

on the morning of the 8th, for the purpose of gaining possession of

Snell's bridge over the Po River, the former by the crossing at

Corbin's bridge and the latter by the Block House.  I also directed

Wilson, who was at Alsop's house, to take possession of Spottsylvania

as early as possible on the morning of the 8th, and then move into

position at Snell's bridge conjointly with the other two divisions.

Wilson's orders remained as I had issued them, so he moved

accordingly and got possession of Spottsylvania, driving the enemy's

cavalry a mile beyond, as will be seen by the following despatch sent

me at 9 A. M. of the 8th:



"HEADQUARTERS THIRD DIVISION, CAVALRY CORPS,

"ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.

"SPOTTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE, May 8, 1864 9 A. M.

" LIEUTENANT-COLONEL FORSYTH, CHIEF-OF-STAFF, C. C.



"Have run the enemy's cavalry a mile from Spottsylvania Court House;

have charged them, and drove them through the village; am fighting

now with a considerable force, supposed to be Lee's division.

Everything all right.



"J. H. WILSON,

"Brigadier-General Commanding.





During the night of the 7th General Meade arrived at Todd's Tavern

and modified the orders I had given Gregg and Merritt, directing

Gregg simply to hold Corbin's bridge, and Merritt to move out in

front of the infantry column marching on the Spottsylvania road.

Merritt proceeded to obey, but in advancing, our cavalry and infantry

became intermingled in the darkness, and much confusion and delay was

the consequence.  I had not been duly advised of these changes in

Gregg's and Merritt's orders, and for a time I had fears for the

safety of Wilson, but, while he was preparing to move on to form his

junction with Gregg and Merritt at Snell's bridge, the advance of

Anderson (who was now commanding Longstreet's corps) appeared on the

scene and drove him from Spottsylvania.



Had Gregg and Merritt been permitted to proceed as they were

originally instructed, it is doubtful whether the battles fought at

Spottsylvania would have occurred, for these two divisions would have

encountered the enemy at the Pa River, and so delayed his march as to

enable our infantry to reach Spottsylvania first, and thus force Lee

to take up a line behind the Po.  I had directed Wilson to move from

the left by "the Gate" through Spottsylvania to Snell's bridge, while

Gregg and Merritt were to advance to the same point by Shady Grove

and the Block House.  There was nothing to prevent at least a partial

success of these operations; that is to say, the concentration of the

three divisions in front of Snell's bridge, even if we could not

actually have gained it.  But both that important point and the

bridge on the Block House road were utterly ignored, and Lee's

approach to Spottsylvania left entirely unobstructed, while three

divisions of cavalry remained practically ineffective by reason of

disjointed and irregular instructions.



On the morning of the 8th, when I found that such orders had been

given, I made some strong remonstrances against the course that had

been pursued, but it was then too late to carry out the combinations

I had projected the night before, so I proceeded to join Merritt on

the Spottsylvania road.  On reaching Merritt I found General Warren

making complaint that the cavalry were obstructing his infantry

column, so I drew Merritt off the road, and the leading division of

the Fifth Corps pushed up to the front.  It got into line about  11

o'clock, and advanced to take the village, but it did not go very far

before it struck Anderson's corps, and was hurled back with heavy

loss.  This ended all endeavor to take Spottsylvania that day.



A little before noon General Meade sent for me, and when I reached

his headquarters I found that his peppery temper had got the better

of his good judgment, he showing a disposition to be unjust, laying

blame here and there for the blunders that had been committed.  He

was particularly severe on the cavalry, saying, among other things,

that it had impeded the march of the Fifth Corps by occupying the

Spottsylvania road.  I replied that if this were true, he himself had

ordered it there without my knowledge.  I also told him that he had

broken up my combinations, exposed Wilson's division to disaster, and

kept Gregg unnecessarily idle, and further, repelled his insinuations

by saying that such disjointed operations as he had been requiring of

the cavalry for the last four days would render the corps inefficient

and useless before long.  Meade was very much irritated, and I was

none the less so.  One word brought on another, until, finally, I

told him that I could whip Stuart if he (Meade) would only let me,

but since he insisted on giving the cavalry directions without

consulting or even notifying me, he could henceforth command the

Cavalry Corps himself--that I would not give it another order.



The acrimonious interview ended with this remark, and after I left

him he went to General Grant's headquarters and repeated the

conversation to him, mentioning that I had said that I could whip

Stuart.  At this General Grant remarked: "Did he say so? Then let him

go out and do it."  This intimation was immediately acted upon by

General Meade, and a little later the following order came to me:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC

"May 8th, 1864 1 P. M.



"GENERAL SHERIDAN,

"Commanding Cavalry Corps.



"The major-general commanding directs you to immediately concentrate

your available mounted force, and with your ammunition trains and

such supply trains as are filled (exclusive of ambulances) proceed

against the enemy's cavalry, and when your supplies are exhausted,

proceed via New Market and Green Bay to Haxall's Landing on the James

River, there communicating with General Butler, procuring supplies

and return to this army.  Your dismounted men will be left with the

train here.



"A. A. HUMPHREYS,

"Major-General, Chief-of-staff."





As soon as the above order was received I issued instructions for the

concentration of the three divisions of cavalry at Aldrich's to

prepare for the contemplated expedition.  Three days' rations for the

men were distributed, and half rations of grain for one day were

doled out for the horses.  I sent for Gregg, Merritt, and Wilson and

communicated the order to them, saying at the same time, "We are

going out to fight Stuart's cavalry in consequence of a suggestion

from me; we will give him a fair, square fight; we are strong, and I

know we can beat him, and in view of my recent representations to

General Meade I shall expect nothing but success."  I also indicated

to my division commanders the line of march I should take--moving in

one column around the right flank of Lee's army to get in its rear--

and stated at the same time that it was my intention to fight Stuart

wherever he presented himself, and if possible go through to Haxall's

Landing; but that if Stuart should successfully interpose between us

and that point we would swing back to the Army of the Potomac by

passing around the enemy's left flank by way of Gordonsville.  At

first the proposition seemed to surprise the division commanders

somewhat, for hitherto even the boldest, mounted expeditions had been

confined to a hurried ride through the enemy's country, without

purpose of fighting more than enough to escape in case of

molestation, and here and there to destroy a bridge.  Our move would

be a challenge to Stuart for a cavalry duel behind Lee's lines, in

his own country, but the advantages which it was reasonable to

anticipate from the plan being quickly perceived, each division

commander entered into its support unhesitatingly, and at once set

about preparing for the march next day.









CHAPTER XIX.



THE EXPEDITION STARTS--DESTROYING SUPPLIES--OPENING OF THE FIGHT AT

YELLOW TAVERN--GENERAL CUSTER'S BRILLIANT CHARGE--DEATH OF GENERAL

STUART--REMOVING TORPEDOES--EXCITEMENT IN RICHMOND--A NIGHT MARCH--

ENTERPRISING NEWSBOYS--THE EFFECTS OF STUART'S DEFEAT AND DEATH--END

OF THE FIRST EXPEDITION--ITS GREAT SUCCESS AND BENEFICIAL RESULTS.



The expedition which resulted in the battle of Yellow Tavern and the

death of General Stuart started from the vicinity of Aldrich's toward

Fredericksburg early on the morning of May 9, 1864, marching on the

plank-road, Merritt's division leading.  When the column reached

Tabernacle Church it headed almost due east to the telegraph road,

and thence down that highway to Thornburg, and from that point

through Childsburg to Anderson's crossing of the North Anna River, it

being my desire to put my command south of that stream if possible,

where it could procure forage before it should be compelled to fight.

The corps moved at a walk, three divisions on the same road, making a

column nearly thirteen miles in length, and marched around the right

flank of the enemy unsuspected until my rear guard , had passed

Massaponax Church.  Although the column was very long, I preferred to

move it all on one road rather than to attempt combinations for

carrying the divisions to any given point by different routes.

Unless the separate commands in an expedition of this nature are very

prompt in movement, and each fully equal to overcoming at once any

obstacle it may meet, combinations rarely work out as expected;

besides, an engagement was at all times imminent, hence it was

specially necessary to keep the whole force well together.



As soon as the Ny, Po, and Ta rivers were crossed, each ,of which

streams would have afforded an excellent defensive line to the enemy,

all anxiety as to our passing around Lee's army was removed, and our

ability to cross the North Anna placed beyond doubt. Meanwhile

General Stuart had discovered what we were about, and he set his

cavalry in motion, sending General Fitzhugh Lee to follow and attack

my rear on the Childsburg road, Stuart himself marching by way of

Davenport's bridge, on the North Anna, toward Beaver Dam Station,

near which place his whole command was directed to unite the next

day.



My column having passed the Ta River, Stuart attacked its rear with

considerable vigor, in the hope that he could delay my whole force

long enough to permit him to get at least a part of his command in my

front; but this scheme was frustrated by Davies's brigade, which I

directed to fight as a rear-guard, holding on at one position and

then at another along the line of march just enough to deter the

enemy from a too rapid advance.  Davies performed this responsible

and trying duty with tact and good judgment, following the main

column steadily as it progressed to the south, and never once

permitting Fitzhugh Lee's advance to encroach far enough to compel a

halt of my main body.  About dark Merritt's division crossed the

North Anna at Anderson's ford, while Gregg and Wilson encamped on the

north side, having engaged the enemy, who still hung on my rear up to

a late hour at night.



After Merritt's division passed the river, Custer's brigade proceeded

on to Beaver Dam Station to cut the Virginia Central railroad.

Before reaching the station he met a small force of the enemy, but

this he speedily drove off, recapturing from it about four hundred

Union prisoners, who had been taken recently in the Wilderness and

were being conducted to Richmond.  Custer also destroyed the station,

two locomotives, three trains of cars, ninety wagons, from eight to

ten miles of railroad and telegraph lines, some two hundred thousand

pounds of bacon and other supplies, amounting in all to about a

million and a half of rations, and nearly all they medical stores of

General Lee's army, which had been moved from Orange Court House

either because Lee wished to have them directly in his rear or

because he contemplated falling back to the North Anna.



On the morning of the l0th Gregg and Wilson, while crossing the North

Anna, were again attacked, but were covered by the division on the

south side of the stream; the passage was effected without much loss,

notwithstanding the approach of Stuart on the south bank from the

direction of Davenport's bridge.  The possession of Beaver Dam gave

us an important point, as it opened a way toward Richmond by the

Negro-foot road.  It also enabled us to obtain forage for our well-

nigh famished animals, and to prepare for fighting the enemy, who, I

felt sure, would endeavor to interpose between my column and

Richmond.



Stuart had hardly united his troops near Beaver Dam when he realized

that concentrating there was a mistake, so he began making

dispositions for remedying his error, and while we leisurely took the

Negro-foot toad toward Richmond, he changed his tactics and hauled

off from my rear, urging his horses to the death in order to get in

between Richmond and my column.  This he effected about 10 o'clock on

the morning of the 11th, concentrating at Yellow Tavern, six miles

from the city, on the Brook turnpike.  His change of tactics left my

march on the l0th practically unmolested, and we quietly encamped

that night on the south bank of the South Anna, near Ground Squirrel

Bridge.  Here we procured an abundance of forage, and as the distance

traveled that day had been only fifteen to eighteen miles, men and

horses were able to obtain a good rest during the night.



At 2 o'clock in the morning, May 11, Davies's brigade of Gregg's

division marched for Ashland to cut the Fredericksburg railroad.

Arriving there before the head of the enemy's column, which had to

pass through this same place to reach Yellow Tavern, Davies drove out

a small force occupying the town, burnt a train of cars and a

locomotive, destroyed the railroad for some distance, and rejoined

the main column at Allen's Station on the Fredericksburg and Richmond

railroad.  From Allen's Station the whole command moved on Yellow

Tavern, Merritt in the lead, Wilson following, and Gregg in the rear.



The appearance of Davies's brigade at Ashland in the morning had had

the effect of further mystifying the enemy as to my intentions; and

while he held it incumbent to place himself between me and Richmond,

yet he was still so uncertain of my movements that he committed the

same fault that he did the first day, when he divided his force and

sent a part to follow me on the Childsburg road.  He now divided his

command again, sending a portion to hang upon my rear, while he

proceeded with the rest to Yellow Tavern.  This separation not only

materially weakened the force which might have been thrown across my

line of march, but it also enabled me to attack with almost my entire

corps, while occupying the pursuers with a small rearguard.



By forced marches General Stuart succeeded in reaching Yellow Tavern

ahead of me on May 11; and the presence of, his troops, on the

Ashland and Richmond road becoming known to Merritt as he was

approaching the Brook turnpike, this general pressed forward at once

to the attack.  Pushing his division to the front, he soon got

possession of the turnpike and drove the enemy back several hundred

yards to the east of it.  This success had the effect of throwing the

head of my column to the east of the pike, and I quickly brought up

Wilson and one of Gregg's brigades to take advantage of the situation

by forming a line of battle on that side or the road.  Meanwhile the

enemy, desperate but still confident, poured in a heavy fire from his

line and from a battery which enfiladed the Brook road, and made

Yellow Tavern an uncomfortably hot place.  Gibbs's and Devin's

brigades, however, held fast there, while Custer, supported by

Chapman's brigade, attacked the enemy's left and battery in a mounted

charge.



Custer's charge, with Chapman on his flank and the rest of Wilson's

division sustaining him, was brilliantly executed.  Beginning at a

walk, he increased his gait to a trot, and then at full speed rushed

at the enemy.  At the same moment the dismounted troops along my

whole front moved forward, and as Custer went through the battery,

capturing two of the guns with their cannoneers and breaking up the

enemy's left, Gibbs and Devin drove his centre and right from the

field.  Gregg meanwhile, with equal success, charged the force in his

rear-Gordon's brigadeand the engagement ended by giving us complete

control of the road to Richmond.  We captured a number of prisoners,

and the casualties on both sides were quite severe, General Stuart

himself falling mortally wounded, and General James B. Gordon, one of

his brigade commanders, being killed.



After Custer's charge, the Confederate cavalry was badly broken up,

the main portion of it being driven in a rout toward Ashland and a

small part in the direction of Richmond, which latter force finally

rejoined Fitzhugh Lee near Mechanicsville.  A reconnoitring party

being now sent up the Brook turnpike toward the city, dashed across

the South Fork of the Chickahominy, drove a small force from the

enemy's exterior intrenchments and went within them.  I followed this

party, and after a little exploration found between the two lines of

works a country road that led across to the pike which runs from

Mechanicsville to Richmond.  I thought we could go around within the

outer line of works by this country road across to the Mechanicsville

pike on the south side of the Chickahominy, and encamp the next night

at Fair Oaks; so I determined to make the movement after dark, being

influenced in this to some extent by reports received during the

afternoon from colored people, to the effect that General B. F.

Butler's army had reached a small stream on the south side of the

James, about four miles south of Richmond.  If I could succeed in

getting through by this road, not only would I have a shorter line of

march to Haxall's landing, but there was also a possibility that I

could help Butler somewhat by joining him so near Richmond.

Therefore, after making the wounded as comfortable as possible, we

commenced the march about 11 o'clock on the night of the 1lth, and

massed the command on the plateau south of the Meadow bridge near

daylight on the 12th.



The enemy, anticipating that I would march by this route, had planted

torpedoes along it, and many of these exploded as the column passed

over them, killing several horses and wounding a few men, but beyond

this we met with no molestation.  The torpedoes were loaded shells

planted on each side of the road, and so connected by wires attached

to friction-tubes in the shells, that when a horse's hoof struck a

wire the shell was exploded by the jerk on the improvised lanyard.

After the loss of several horses and the wounding of some of the men

by these torpedoes, I gave directions to have them removed, if

practicable, so about twenty-five of the prisoners were brought up

and made to get down on their knees, feel for the wires in the

darkness, follow them up and unearth the shells.  The prisoners

reported the owner of one of the neighboring houses to be the

principal person who had engaged in planting these shells, and I

therefore directed that some of them be carried and placed in the

cellar of his house, arranged to explode if the enemy's column came

that way, while he and his family were brought off as prisoners and

held till after daylight.



Meanwhile the most intense excitement prevailed in Richmond.  The

Confederates, supposing that their capital was my objective point,

were straining every effort to put it in a state of defense, and had

collected between four and five thousand irregular troops, under

General Bragg, besides bringing up three brigades of infantry from

the force confronting General Butler south of the James River, the

alarm being intensified by the retreat, after the defeat at Yellow

Tavern, of Stuart's cavalry, now under General Fitzhugh Lee, by way

of Ashland to Mechanicsville, on the north side of the Chickahominy,

for falling back in that direction, left me between them and

Richmond.



Our march during the night of the 11th was very tedious, on account

of the extreme darkness and frequent showers of rain; but at daylight

on the 12th the head of my column, under Wilson, reached the

Mechanicsville pike.  Here Wilson, encountering the enemy's works and

batteries manned by General Bragg's troops, endeavored to pass.  In

this he failed, and as soon as I was notified that it was

impracticable to reach Fair Oaks by passing between the works and the

Chickahominy, Custer's brigade was directed to make the crossing to

the north side of the Chickahominy, at the Meadow bridge.  Custer

moved rapidly for the bridge, but found it destroyed, and that the

enemy's cavalry was posted on the north side, in front of

Mechanicsville.  When this information came back, I ordered Merritt

to take his whole division and repair the bridge, instructing him

that the crossing must be made at all hazards; for, in view of an

impending attack by the enemy's infantry in Richmond, it was

necessary that I should have the bridge as a means of egress in case

of serious disaster.



All the time that Merritt was occupied in this important duty, the

enemy gave great annoyance to the working party by sweeping the

bridge with a section of artillery and a fire from the supporting

troops, so a small force was thrown across to drive them away.  When

Merritt had passed two regiments over, they attacked, but were

repulsed.  The work on the, bridge continued, however, not-

withstanding this discomfiture; and when it was finished, Merritt

crossed nearly all his division, dismounted, and again attacked the

enemy, this time carrying the line, of temporary breastworks, built

with logs and rails, and pursuing his broken troops toward Gaines's

Mills.



While Merritt was engaged in this affair, the Confederates advanced

from behind their works at Richmond, and attacked Wilson and Gregg.

Wilson's troops were driven back in some confusion at first; but

Gregg, in anticipation of attack, had hidden a heavy line of

dismounted men in a bushy ravine on his front, and when the enemy

marched upon it, with much display and under the eye of the President

of the Confederacy, this concealed line opened a destructive fire

with repeating carbines; and at the same time the batteries of horse-

artillery, under Captain Robinson, joining in the contest, belched

forth shot and shell with fatal effect.  The galling fire caused the

enemy to falter, and while still wavering Wilson rallied his men, and

turning some of them against the right flank of the Confederates,

broke their line, and compelled them to withdraw for security behind

the heavy works thrown up for the defense of the city in 1862.



By destroying the Meadow bridge and impeding my column on the

Mechanicsville, pike, the enemy thought to corner us completely, for

he still maintained the force in Gregg's rear that had pressed it the

day before; but the repulse of his infantry ended all his hopes of

doing us any serious damage on the limited ground between the

defenses of Richmond and the Chickahominy.  He felt certain that on

account of the recent heavy rains we could not cross the Chickahominy

except by the Meadow bridge, and it also seemed clear to him that we

could not pass between the river and his intrenchments; therefore he

hoped to ruin us, or at least compel us to return by the same route

we had taken in coming, in which case we would run into Gordon's

brigade, but the signal repulse of Bragg's infantry dispelled these

illusions.



Even had it not been our good fortune to defeat him, we could have

crossed the Chickahominy if necessary at several points that were

discovered by scouting parties which, while the engagement was going

on, I had sent out to look up fords.  This means of getting out from

the circumscribed plateau I did not wish to use, however, unless

there was no alternative, for I wished to demonstrate to the Cavalry

Corps the impossibility of the enemy's destroying or capturing so

large a body of mounted troops.



The chances of seriously injuring, us were more favorable to the

enemy this time than ever they were afterward, for with the troops

from Richmond, comprising three brigades of veterans and about five

thousand irregulars on my front and right flank, with Gordon's

cavalry in the rear, and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry on my left flank,

holding the Chickahominy and Meadow bridge, I was apparently hemmed

in on every side, but relying on the celerity with which mounted

troops could be moved, I felt perfectly confident that the seemingly

perilous situation could be relieved under circumstances even worse

than those then surrounding us.  Therefore, instead of endeavoring to

get away without a fight, I concluded that there would be little

difficulty in withdrawing, even should I be beaten, and none whatever

if I defeated the enemy.



In accordance with this view I accepted battle; and the complete

repulse of the enemy's infantry, which assailed us from his

intrenchments, and of Gordon's cavalry, which pressed Gregg on the

Brook road, ended the contest in our favor.  The rest of the day we

remained on the battle-field undisturbed, and our time was spent in

collecting the wounded, burying the dead, grazing the horses, and

reading the Richmond journals, two small newsboys with commendable

enterprise having come within our lines from the Confederate capital

to sell their papers.  They were sharp youngsters, and having come

well supplied, they did a thrifty business.  When their stock in

trade was all disposed of they wished to return, but they were so

intelligent and observant that I thought their mission involved other

purposes than the mere sale of newspapers, so they were held till we

crossed the Chickahominy and then turned loose.



After Merritt had crossed the Chickahominy and reached

Mechanicsville, I sent him orders to push on to Gaines's Mills.  Near

the latter place he fell in with the enemy's cavalry again, and

sending me word, about 4 o'clock in the afternoon I crossed the

Chickahominy with Wilson and Gregg, but when we overtook Merritt he

had already brushed the Confederates away, and my whole command went

into camp between Walnut Grove and Gaines's Mills.



The main purposes of the expedition had now been executed. They were

"to break up General Lee's railroad communications, destroy such

depots of supplies as could be found in his rear, and to defeat

General Stuart's cavalry."  Many miles of the Virginia Central and of

the, Richmond and Fredericksburg railroads were broken up, and

several of the bridges on each burnt.  At Beaver Dam, Ashland, and

other places, about two millions of rations had been captured and

destroyed. The most important of all, however, was the defeat of

Stuart.  Since the beginning of the war this general had

distinguished himself by his management of the Confederate mounted

force.  Under him the cavalry of Lee's army had been nurtured, and

had acquired such prestige that it thought itself well-nigh

invincible; indeed, in the early years of the war it had proved to be

so.  This was now dispelled by the successful march we had made in

Lee's rear; and the discomfiture of Stuart at Yellow Tavern had

inflicted a blow from which entire recovery was impossible.



In its effect on the Confederate cause the defeat of Stuart was most

disheartening, but his death was even a greater calamity, as is

evidenced by the words of a Confederate writer (Cooke), who says:

"Stuart could be ill spared at this critical moment, and General Lee

was plunged into the deepest melancholy at the intelligence of his

death.  When it reached him he retired from those around him, and

remained for some time communing with his own heart and memory.  When

one of his staff entered and spoke of Stuart, General Lee said: 'I

can scarcely think of him without weeping.'"



>From the camp near Gaines's Mills I resumed the march to Haxall's

Landing, the point on the James River contemplated in my instructions

where I was to obtain supplies from General Butler.  We got to the

James on the 14th with all our wounded and a large number of

prisoners, and camped between Haxall's and Shirley.  The prisoners,

as well as the captured guns, were turned over to General Butler's

provost-marshal, and our wounded were quickly and kindly cared for by

his surgeons.  Ample supplies, also, in the way of forage and

rations, were furnished us by General Butler, and the work of

refitting for our return to the Army of the Potomac was vigorously

pushed. By the 17th all was ready, and having learned by scouting

parties sent in the direction of Richmond and as far as Newmarket

that the enemy's cavalry was returning to Lee's army I started that

evening on my return march, crossing the Chickahominy at Jones's

bridge, and bivouacking on the 19th near Baltimore crossroads.



My uncertainty of what had happened to the Army of the Potomac in our

absence, and as to where I should find it, made our getting back a

problem somewhat difficult of solution, particularly as I knew that

reinforcements for Lee had come up from the south to Richmond, and

that most likely some of these troops were being held at different

points on the route to intercept my column.  Therefore I determined

to pass the Pamunkey River at the White House, and sent to Fort

Monroe for a pontoon-bridge on which to make the crossing.  While

waiting for the pontoons I ordered Custer to proceed with his brigade

to Hanover Station, to destroy the railroad bridge over the South

Anna, a little beyond that place; at the same time I sent Gregg and

Wilson to Cold Harbor, to demonstrate in the direction of Richmond as

far as Mechanicsville, so as to cover Custer's movements.  Merritt,

with the remaining brigades of his division, holding fast at

Baltimore crossroads to await events.



After Gregg and Custer had gone, it was discovered that the railroad

bridge over the Pamunkey, near the White House, had been destroyed

but partially--the cross-ties and stringers being burned in places

only--and that it was practicable to repair it sufficiently to carry

us over.  In view of this information General Merritt's two brigades

were at once put on the duty of reconstructing the bridge.  By

sending mounted parties through the surrounding country, each man of

which would bring in a board or a plank, Merritt soon accumulated

enough lumber for the flooring, and in one day the bridge was made

practicable.  On the 22d Gregg, Wilson, and Custer returned.  The

latter had gone on his expedition as far as Hanover Station,

destroyed some commissary stores there, and burned two trestle

bridges over Hanover Creek.  This done, he deemed it prudent to

retire to Hanovertown.  The next morning he again marched to Hanover

Station, and there ascertained that a strong force of the enemy,

consisting of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, was posted at the

South Anna bridges.  These troops had gone there from Richmond en

route to reinforce Lee.  In the face of this impediment Custer's

mission could not be executed fully, so he returned to Baltimore

crossroads.



The whole command was drawn in by noon of the 22d, and that day it

crossed the Pamunkey by Merritt's reconstructed bridge, marching to

Ayletts, on the Mattapony River, the same night.  Here I learned from

citizens, and from prisoners taken during the day by scouting parties

sent toward Hanover Court House, that Lee had been, forced from his

position near Spottsylvania Court House and compelled to retire to

the line of the North Anna.  I then determined to rejoin the Army of

the Potomac at the earliest moment, which I did by making for

Chesterfield Station, where I reported to General Meade on the 24th

of May.



Our return to Chesterfield ended the first independent expedition the

Cavalry Corps had undertaken since coming under my command, and our

success was commended highly by Generals Grant and Meade, both

realizing that our operations in the rear of Lee had disconcerted and

alarmed that general so much as to aid materially in forcing his

retrograde march, and both acknowledged that, by drawing off the

enemy's cavalry during the past fortnight, we had enabled them to

move the Army of the Potomac and its enormous trains without

molestation in the manoeuvres that had carried it to the North Anna.

Then, too, great quantities of provisions and munitions of war had

been destroyed--stores that the enemy had accumulated at sub-depots

from strained resources and by difficult means; the railroads that

connected Lee with Richmond broken, the most successful cavalry

leader of the South killed, and in addition to all this there had

been inflicted on the Confederate mounted troops the most thorough

defeat that had yet befallen them in Virginia.



When the expedition set out the Confederate authorities in Richmond

were impressed, and indeed convinced, that my designs contemplated

the capture of that city, and notwithstanding the loss they sustained

in the defeat and death of Stuart, and their repulse the succeeding

day, they drew much comfort from the fact that I had not entered

their capital.  Some Confederate writers have continued to hold this

theory and conviction since the war.  In this view they were and are

in error.  When Stuart was defeated the main purpose of my

instructions had been carried out, and my thoughts then turned to

joining General Butler to get supplies.  I believed that I could do

this by cutting across to the Mechanicsville pike and Fair Oaks on

the south side of the Chickahominy, but the failure of Wilson's

column to get possession of the outwork which commanded the pike

necessitated my crossing at Meadow bridge, and then moving by

Mechanicsville and Gaines's Mills instead of by the shorter route.

Moreover, my information regarding General Butler's position was

incorrect, so that even had I been successful in getting to Fair Oaks

by the direct road I should still have gained nothing thereby, for I

should still have been obliged to continue down the James River to

Haxall's.









CHAPTER XX.



GENERAL WILSON'S ADVANCE TOWARD HANOVER COURT HOUSE--CROSSING THE

PAMUNKEY--ENGAGEMENT OF HAWE'S SHOP--FIGHT AT MATADEQUIN CREEK--

CAPTURE OF COLD HARBOR--THE FIGHT TO RETAIN THE PLACE--MOVEMENTS OF

GENERAL WILSON.



When I rejoined the Army of the Potomac, near Chesterfield Station,

the heavy battles around Spottsylvania had been fought, and the

complicated manoeuvres by which the whole Union force was swung

across the North Anna were in process of execution.  In conjunction

with these manoeuvres Wilson's division was sent to the right flank

of the army, where he made a reconnoissance south of the North Anna

as far as Little River, crossing the former stream near Jericho

Mills.  Wilson was to operate from day to day on that flank as it

swung to the south, covering to New Castle ferry each advance of the

infantry and the fords left behind on the march.  From the 26th to

the 30th these duties kept Wilson constantly occupied, and also

necessitated a considerable dispersion of his force, but by the 31st

he was enabled to get all his division together again, and crossing

to the south side of the Pamunkey at New Castle ferry, he advanced

toward Hanover Court House.  Near Dr Pride's house he encountered a

division of the enemy's cavalry under General W. H. F. Lee, and drove

it back across Mechamp's Creek, thus opening communication with the

right of our infantry resting near Phillips's Mills.  Just as this

had been done, a little before dark, Wilson received an order from

General Meade directing him to push on toward Richmond until he

encountered the Confederates in such strength that he could no longer

successfully contend against them, and in compliance with this order

occupied Hanover Court House that same day.  Resuming his march at

daylight on June 1, he went ahead on the Ashland road while sending

Chapman's brigade up the south bank of the South Anna to destroy the

bridges on that stream.  Chapman having succeeded in this work,

Wilson re-united his whole command and endeavored to hold Ashland,

but finding the Confederate cavalry and infantry there in strong

force, he was obliged to withdraw to Dr. Price's house.  Here he

learned that the army had gone to the left toward Cold Harbor, so on

the 2d of June he moved to Hawe's Shop.



While Wilson was operating thus on the right, I had to cover with

Gregg's and Torbert's divisions the crossing of the army over the

Pamunkey River at and near Hanovertown.  Torbert having recovered

from the illness which overtook him in the Wilderness, had now

returned to duty.  The march to turn the enemy's right began on the

26th.  Torbert and Gregg in advance, to secure the crossings of the

Pamunkey and demonstrate in such manner as to deceive the enemy as

much as possible in the movement, the two cavalry divisions being

supported by General D. A. Russell's division of the Sixth Corps.



To attain this end in the presence of an ever-watchful foe who had

just recently been reinforced in considerable numbers from Richmond

and further south--almost enough to make up the losses he had

sustained in the Wilderness and at Spottsylvania--required the most

vigorous and zealous work on the part of those to whom had been

allotted the task of carrying out the initial manoeuvres.  Torbert

started for Taylor's ford on the Pamunkey with directions to

demonstrate heavily at that point till after dark, as if the crossing

was to be made there, and having thus impressed the enemy, he was to

leave a small guard, withdraw quietly, and march to Hanovertown ford,

where the real crossing was to be effected.  Meanwhile Gregg marched

to Littlepage's crossing of the Pamunkey, with instructions to make

feints in the same manner as Torbert until after dark, when he was to

retire discreetly, leaving a small force to keep up the

demonstration, and then march rapidly to Hanovertown crossing, taking

with him the pontoon-bridge.



At the proper hour Russell took up the march and followed the

cavalry.  The troops were in motion all night, undergoing the usual

delays incident to night marches, and, early on the morning of the

27th the crossing was made, Custer's brigade of Torbert's division

driving from the ford about one hundred of the enemy's cavalry, and

capturing between thirty and forty prisoners.  The remainder of

Torbert's division followed this brigade and advanced to Hanovertown,

where General Gordon's brigade of Confederate cavalry was met.

Torbert attacked this force with Devin's brigade, while he sent

Custer to Hawe's Shop, from which point a road leading to the right

was taken that brought him in rear of the enemy's cavalry; when the

Confederates discovered this manoeuvre, they retired in the direction

of Hanover Court House.  Pursuit continued as far as a little stream

called Crump's Creek, and here Torbert was halted, Gregg moving up on

his line meanwhile, and Russell encamping near the crossing of the

river.  This completed our task of gaining a foothold south of the

Pamunkey, and on the 28th the main army crossed unharassed and took

up a position behind my line, extending south from the river, with

the Sixth Corps on the right across the Hanover Court House road at

Crump's Creek, the Second Corps on the left of the Sixth, and the

Fifth Corps about two miles in front of Hanovertown, its left

extending to the Tolopotomy.



There was now much uncertainty in General Grant's mind as to the

enemy's whereabouts, and there were received daily the most

conflicting statements as to the nature of Lee's movements.  It

became necessary, therefore, to find out by an actual demonstration

what Lee was doing, and I was required to reconnoitre in the

direction of Mechanicsville.  For this purpose I moved Gregg's

division out toward this town by way of Hawe's Shop, and when it had

gone about three-fourths of a mile beyond the Shop the enemy's

cavalry was discovered dismounted and disposed behind a temporary

breastwork of rails and logs.



This was the first occasion on which, since the battle of Yellow

Tavern, the Confederate troopers had confronted us in large numbers,

their mounted operations, like ours, having been dependent more or

less on the conditions that grew out of the movements in which Lee's

infantry had been engaged since the 14th of May.



On that date General Lee had foreshadowed his intention of using his

cavalry in connection with the manoeuvres of his infantry by issuing

an order himself, now that Stuart was dead, directing that the "three

divisions of cavalry serving with the army [Lee's] will constitute

separate commands, and will report directly to and receive orders

from the headquarters of the army."  The order indicates that since

Stuart's death the Confederate cavalry had been re-organized into

three divisions, that were commanded respectively by General Wade

Hampton, General Fitzhugh Lee, and General W. H. F. Lee, the

additional division organization undoubtedly growing out of the fact,

that General M. C. Butler's brigade of about four thousand men had

joined recently from South Carolina.



When this force developed in Gregg's front, he attacked the moment

his troops could be dismounted; and the contest became one of

exceeding stubborness, for he found confronting him Hampton's and

Fitzhugh Lee's divisions, supported by what we then supposed to be a

brigade of infantry, but which, it has since been ascertained, was

Butler's brigade of mounted troops; part of them armed with long-

range rifles.  The contest between the opposing forces was of the

severest character and continued till late in the evening.  The

varying phases of the fight prompted me to reinforce Gregg as much as

possible, so I directed Custer's brigade to report to him, sending,

meanwhile, for the other two brigades of Torbert, but these were not

available at the time--on account of delays which occurred in

relieving them from the line at Crump's Creek--and did not get up

till the fight was over.  As soon as Custer joined him, Gregg

vigorously assaulted the Confederate position along his whole front;

and notwithstanding the long-range rifles of the South Carolinians,

who were engaging in their first severe combat it appears, and fought

most desperately, he penetrated their barricades at several points.



The most determined and obstinate efforts for success were now made

on both sides, as the position at Hawe's Shop had become of very

great importance on account of the designs of both Lee and Grant.

Lee wished to hold this ground while he manoeuvred his army to the

line of the Tolopotomy, where he could cover the roads to Richmond,

while Grant, though first sending me out merely to discover by a

strong reconnoissance the movements of the enemy, saw the value of

the place to cover his new base at the White House, and also to give

us possession of a direct road to Cold Harbor.  Hawe's Shop remained

in our possession finally, for late in the evening Custer's brigade

was dismounted and formed in close column in rear of Gregg, and while

it assaulted through an opening near the centre of his line, the

other two brigades advanced and carried the temporary works.  The

enemy's dead and many of his wounded fell into our hands; also a

considerable number of prisoners, from whom we learned that

Longstreet's and Ewell's corps were but four miles to the rear.



The battle was a decidedly severe one, the loss on each side being

heavy in proportion to the number of troops engaged.  This fight took

place almost immediately in front of our infantry, which, during the

latter part of the contest, was busily occupied in throwing up

intrenchments.  Late in the afternoon I reported to General Meade the

presence of the enemy's infantry, and likewise that Hampton's and

Fitzhugh Lee's divisions were in my front also, and asked, at the

same time; that some of our infantry, which was near at hand, be sent

to my assistance.  I could not convince Meade that anything but the

enemy's horse was fighting us, however, and he declined to push out

the foot-troops, who were much wearied by night marches.  It has been

ascertained since that Meade's conclusions were correct in so far as

they related to the enemy's infantry; but the five cavalry brigades

far outnumbered my three, and it is to be regretted that so much was

risked in holding a point that commanded the roads to Cold Harbor and

Meadow bridge, when there was at hand a preponderating number of

Union troops which might have been put into action.  However, Gregg's

division and Custer's brigade were equal to the situation, all

unaided as they were till dark, when Torbert and Merritt came on the

ground.  The contest not only gave us the crossroads, but also

removed our uncertainty regarding Lee's movements, clearly

demonstrating that his army was retiring by its right flank, so that

it might continue to interpose between Grant and the James River; as

well as cover the direct route to Richmond.



General Lee reported this battle to his Government as a Confederate

victory, but his despatch was sent early in the day, long before the

fight ended, and evidently he could not have known the final result

when he made the announcement, for the fight lasted until dark.

After dark, our own and the Confederate dead having been buried, I

withdrew, and moving to the rear of our infantry, marched all night

and till I reached the vicinity of Old Church, where I had been

instructed to keep a vigilant watch on the enemy with Gregg's and

Torbert's divisi6ns.  As soon as I had taken position at Old Church

my pickets were pushed out in the direction of Cold Harbor, and the

fact that the enemy was holding that point in some force was clearly

ascertained.  But our occupation of Cold Harbor was of the utmost

importance; indeed, it was absolutely necessary that we should

possess it, to secure our communications with the White House, as

well as to cover the extension of our line to the left toward the

James River.  Roads from Bethesda Church, Old Church, and the White

House centred at Cold Harbor, and from there many roads diverged also

toward different crossings of the Chickahominy, which were

indispensable to us.



The enemy too realized the importance of the place, for as soon as he

found himself compelled to take up the line of the Tolopotomy he

threw a body of troops into Cold Harbor by forced marches, and

followed it up by pushing a part of this force out on the Old Church

road as far as Matadequin Creek, where he established a line of

battle, arranging the front of it parallel to the road along the

south bank of the Pamunkey; this for the purpose of endangering our

trains as they moved back and forth between the army and the White

House.



Meanwhile I had occupied Old Church and pushed pickets down toward

Cold Harbor.  The outposts struck each other just north of Matadequin

Creek, and a spirited fight immediately took place.  At first our

pickets were sorely pressed, but Torbert, who was already preparing

to make a reconnoissance, lost no time in reinforcing them on the

north side of the creek with Devin's brigade.  The fight then became

general, both sides, dismounted, stubbornly contesting the ground.

Of the Confederates, General Butler's South Carolinians bore the

brunt of the fight, and, strongly posted as they were on the south

bank of the creek, held their ground with the same obstinacy they had

previously shown at Hawe's Shop.  Finally, however, Torbert threw

Merritt's and Custer's brigades into the action, and the enemy

retired, we pursuing to within a mile and a half of Cold Harbor and

capturing a number of prisoners.  Gregg's division took no part in

the actual fighting, but remained near Old Church observing the roads

on Torberts flanks, one leading toward Bethesda Church on his right,

the other to his left in the direction of the White House.  This

latter road Gregg was particularly instructed to keep open, so as to

communicate with General W. F. Smith, who was then debarking his

corps at the White House, and on the morning of the 3ist this

general's advance was covered by a brigade which Gregg had sent him

for the purpose.



Torbert having pursued toward Cold Harbor the troops he fought at

Matadequin Creek, had taken up a position about a mile and a half

from that place, on the Old Church road.  The morning of the 31st I

visited him to arrange for his further advance, intending thus to

anticipate an expected attack from Fitzhugh Lee, who was being

reinforced by infantry.  I met Torbert at Custer's headquarters, and

found that the two had already been talking over a scheme to capture

Cold Harbor, and when their plan was laid before me it appeared so

plainly feasible that I fully endorsed it, at once giving directions

for its immediate execution, and ordering Gregg to come forward to

Torbert's support with such troops as he could spare from the duty

with which he had been charged.



Torbert moved out promptly, Merritt's brigade first, followed by

Custer's, on the direct road to Cold Harbor, while Devin's brigade

was detached, and marched by a left-hand road that would bring him in

on the right and rear of the enemy's line, which was posted in front

of the crossroads.  Devin was unable to carry his part of the

programme farther than to reach the front of the Confederate right,

and as Merritt came into position to the right of the Old Church road

Torbert was obliged to place a part of Custer's brigade on Merritt's

left so as to connect with Devin.  The whole division was now in

line, confronted by Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry, supported by Clingman's

brigade from Hoke's division of infantry; and from the Confederate

breastworks, hastily constructed out of logs, rails, and earth, a

heavy fire was already being poured upon us that it seemed impossible

to withstand.  None of Gregg's division had yet arrived, and so

stubborn was the enemy's resistance that I began to doubt our ability

to carry the place before reinforcements came up, but just then

Merritt reported that he could turn the enemy's left, and being

directed to execute his proposition, he carried it to a most

successful issue with the First and Second regular cavalry.  Just as

these two regiments passed around the enemy's left and attacked his

rear, the remainder of the division assailed him in front.  This

manoeuvre of Merritt's stampeded the Confederates, and the defenses

falling into our hands easily, we pushed ahead on the Bottom's bridge

road three-fourths of a mile beyond Cold Harbor.



Cold Harbor was now mine, but I was about nine miles away from our

nearest infantry, and had been able to bring up only Davies's brigade

of cavalry, which arrived after the fight.  My isolated position

therefore made me a little uneasy.  I felt convinced that the enemy

would attempt to regain the place, for it was of as much importance

to him as to us, and the presence of his infantry disclosed that he

fully appreciated this.  My uneasiness increased as the day grew

late, for I had learned from prisoners that the balance of Hoke's

division was en route to Cold Harbor, and Kershaw near at hand,

interposing between the Union left near Bethesda Church and my

position.  In view of this state of affairs, I notified General Meade

that I had taken Cold Harbor, but could not with safety to my command

hold it, and forthwith gave directions to withdraw during the night.

The last of my troops had scarcely pulled out, however, when I

received a despatch from Meade directing me to hold Cold Harbor at

every hazard.  General Grant had expected that a severe battle would

have to be fought before we could obtain possession of the place; and

its capture by our cavalry not being anticipated, no preparation had

been made for its permanent occupancy.  No time was to be lost,

therefore, if the advantages which possession of Cold Harbor gave us

were to be improved, so at the same hour that Meade ordered me to

hold the place at all hazards the Sixth Corps was started on a forced

march, by Grant's directions, to aid in that object, and on arrival

to relieve my cavalry.



The moment Meade's order was received, I directed a reoccupation of

Cold Harbor, and although a large portion of Torbert's command was

already well on its way back to the line we held on the morning of

the 31st, this force speedily retraced its steps, and re-entered the

place before daylight; both our departure and return having been

effected without the enemy being aware of our movements.  We now

found that the temporary breastworks of rails and logs which the

Confederates had built were of incalculable benefit to us in

furnishing material with which to establish a line of defense, they

being made available by simply reversing them at some points, or at

others wholly reconstructing them to suit the circumstances of the

ground: The troops, without reserves, were then placed behind our

cover dismounted, boxes of ammunition distributed along the line, and

the order passed along that the place must be held.  All this was

done in the darkness, and while we were working away at our cover the

enemy could be distinctly heard from our skirmish-line giving

commands and making preparations to attack.



Just after daylight on the 1st of June the Confederate infantry under

General Kershaw endeavored to drive us out, advancing against my

right from the Bethesda Church road.  In his assault he was permitted

to come close up to our works, and when within short range such afire

was opened on him from our horse-artillery and repeating carbines

that he recoiled in confusion after the first onset; still, he seemed

determined to get the place, and after reorganizing, again attacked;

but the lesson of the first repulse was not without effect, and his

feeble effort proved wholly fruitless.  After his second failure we

were left undisturbed, and at 9 A.M. I sent the following despatch to

army headquarters:



"HEADQUARTERS CAVALRY CORPS,

"ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.

"Cold Harbor, Va., June 1, 1864--9 A.M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL HUMPHREYS,

"Chief-of-Staff.



"GENERAL: In obedience to your instructions I am holding Cold Harbor.

I have captured this morning more prisoners; they belong to three

different infantry brigades.  The enemy assaulted the right of my

lines this morning, but were handsomely repulsed.  I have been very

apprehensive, but General Wright is now coming up.  I built slight

works for my men; the enemy came up to them, and were driven back.

General Wright has just arrived.



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General Commanding."





About 10 o'clock in the morning the Sixth Corps relieved Torbert and

Davies, having marched all night, and these two generals moving out

toward the Chickahominy covered the left of the infantry line till

Hancock's corps took their place in the afternoon.  By this time

Gregg had joined me with his two brigades, and both Torbert and Gregg

were now marched to Prospect Church, from which point I moved them to

a position on the north side of the Chickahominy at Bottom's bridge.

Here the enemy's cavalry confronted us, occupying the south bank of

the stream, with artillery in position at the fords prepared to

dispute our passage; but it was not intended that we should cross; so

Gregg and Torbert lay quiet in camp at Bottom's bridge and at Old

Church without noteworthy event until the 6th of June.



As before related, Wilson's division struck the enemy's infantry as

well as W. H. F. Lee's cavalry near Ashland on the 1st of June, and

although Chapman destroyed the bridges over the South Anna, which was

his part of the programme, Wilson found it necessary to return to

Price's Store.  From this point he continued to cover the right of

the Army of the Potomac, on the 2d of June driving the rear-guard of

the enemy from Hawe's Shop, the scene of the battle of May 28.  The

same day he crossed Tolopotomy Creek, and passed around the enemy's

left flank so far that Lee thought his left was turned by a strong

force, and under cover of darkness withdrew from a menacing position

which he was holding in front of the Ninth Corps.  This successful

manoeuvre completed, Wilson returned to Hawe's Shop, and on the 4th

went into camp at New Castle ferry, in anticipation of certain

operations of the Cavalry Corps, which were to take place while the

Army of the Potomac was crossing to the south side of the James.









CHAPTER XXI.



THE MOVEMENT TO THE JAMES--THE SECOND EXPEDITION--BATTLE OF

TREVILLIAN STATION--DEFEAT OF GENERAL WADE HAMPTON--MALLORY'S

CROSSROADS--SUFFERING OF THE WOUNDED--SECURING THE TRAINS--GENERAL

GREGG'S STUBBORN FIGHT.



By the 6th of June General Grant again determined to continue the

movement of the army by its left flank to the south bank of the James

River, his unsuccessful attack on the enemy's works near Cold Harbor

having demonstrated that Lee's position north of the Chickahominy

could not be carried by assault with results that would compensate

for the enormous loss of life which must follow; therefore a further

attempt to fight a decisive battle north of Richmond was abandoned.

In carrying the army to the James River the hazardous manoeuvres

would be hampered by many obstacles, such as the thick timber,

underbrush, and troublesome swamps to be met in crossing the

Chickahominy.  Besides, Lee held an interior line, from which all the

direct roads to Richmond could be covered with his infantry, leaving

his cavalry free to confront our advance on the south bank of the

Chickahominy as far down as Jones's bridge, and thence around to

Charles City Court House.  In view of these difficulties it became

necessary to draw off the bulk of the enemy's cavalry while the

movement to the James was in process of execution, and General Meade

determined to do this by requiring me to proceed with two divisions

as far as Charlottesville to destroy the railroad bridge over the

Rivanna River near that town, the railroad itself from the Rivanna to

Gordonsville, and, if practicable, from Gordonsville back toward

Hanover Junction also.





"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC,

"June 5, 1864.  3.30 P. M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Commanding Cavalry Corps.



"I am directed by the major-general commanding to furnish the

following instructions for your guidance in the execution of the duty

referred to in the order for movements and changes of position to-

night, a copy of which order accompanies this communication.



"With two divisions of your corps you will move on the morning of the

7th instant to Charlottesville and destroy the railroad bridge over

the Rivanna near that town; you will then thoroughly destroy the

railroad from that point to Gordonsville, and from Gordonsville

toward Hanover Junction, and to the latter point, if practicable.

The chief engineer, Major Duane, will furnish you a canvas pontoon-

train of eight boats.  The chief quartermaster will supply you with

such tools, implements, and materials as you may require for the

destruction of the road.  Upon the completion of this duty you will

rejoin this army.



"A. HUMPHREYS,

"Major-General, Chief-of-Staff."





After Meade's instructions reached me they were somewhat modified by

General Grant, who on the same evening had received information that

General Hunter, commanding the troops in West Virginia, had reached

Staunton and engaged with advantage the Confederate commander,

General Jones, near that place.  General Grant informed me orally

that he had directed Hunter to advance as far as Charlottesville,

that he expected me to unite with him there, and that the two

commands, after destroying the James River canal and the Virginia

Central road, were to join the Army of the Potomac in the manner

contemplated in my instructions from General Meade; and that in view

of what was anticipated, it would be well to break up as much of the

railroad as possible on my way westward.  A copy of his letter to

Hunter comprised my written instructions.  A junction with this

general was not contemplated when the expedition was first conceived,

but became an important though not the paramount object after the

reception of the later information.  The diversion of the enemy's

cavalry from the south side of the Chickahominy was its main purpose,

for in the presence of such a force as Lee's contracted lines would

now permit him to concentrate behind the Chickahominy, the

difficulties of crossing that stream would be largely increased if he

also had at hand a strong body of horse, to gain the time necessary

for him to oppose the movement at the different crossings with masses

of his infantry.



The order calling for two divisions for the expedition, I decided to

take Gregg's and Torbert's, leaving Wilson's behind to continue with

the infantry in its march to the James and to receive instructions

directly from, the headquarters of the army.  All my dismounted men

had been sent to the White House some days before, and they were

directed to report to Wilson as they could be provided with mounts.







"COLD HARBOR, VA., June 6, 1964.



"MAJOR-GENERAL D. HUNTER, Commanding Dept West Virginia.



"General Sheridan leaves here to-morrow morning with instructions to

proceed to Charlottesville, Va., and to commence there the

destruction of the Virginia Central railroad, destroying this way as

much as possible.  The complete destruction of this road and of the

canal on James River is of great importance to us.  According to the

instructions I sent to General Halleck for your guidance, you will

proceed to Lynchburg and commence there.  It would be of great value

to us to get possession of Lynchburg for a single day.  But that

point is of so much importance to the enemy, that in attempting to

get it such resistance may be met as to defeat your getting into the

road or canal at all.  I see, in looking over the letter to General

Halleck on the subject of your instructions, that it rather indicates

that your route should be from Staunton via Charlottesville.  If you

have so understood it, you will be doing just what I want.  The

direction I would now give is, that if this letter reaches you in the

valley between Staunton and Lynchburg, you immediately turn east by

the most practicable road until you strike the Lynchburg branch of

the Virginia Central road.  From there move eastward along the line

of the road, destroying it completely and thoroughly, until you join

General Sheridan.  After the work laid out for General Sheridan and

yourself is thoroughly done, proceed to join the Army of the Potomac

by the route laid out in General Sheridan's instructions.  If any

portion of your force, especially your cavalry, is needed back in

your department, you are authorized to send it back.  If on receipt

of this you should be near to Lynchburg and deem it practicable to

reach that point, you will exercise your judgment about going there.

If you should be on the railroad between Charlottesville and

Lynchburg, it may be practicable to detach a cavalry force to destroy

the canal.  Lose no opportunity to destroy the canal.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."





Owing to the hard service of the preceding month we had lost many

horses, so the number of dismounted men was large; and my strength

had also been much reduced by killed and wounded during the same

period of activity.  The effective mounted force of my two divisions

was therefore much diminished, they mustering only about six thousand

officers and men when concentrated on June 6 at New Castle ferry.

Here they were provided with three days' rations, intended to last

five days, and with two days' grain for the horses.  The rations and

forty rounds of ammunition per man were to be carried on the persons

of the troopers, the grain on the pommel of the saddle, and the

reserve ammunition in wagons.  One medical wagon and eight ambulances

were also furnished, and one wagon was authorized for each division

and brigade headquarters; enough canvas-covered boats for a small

pontoon-bridge were also provided.



My instructions permitting latitude in the route I should take, I

decided to march along the north bank of the North Anna River, cross

that stream at Carpenter's ford, strike the Virginia Central railroad

at Trevillian Station, destroy it toward Louisa Court House, march

past Gordonsville, strike the railroad again at Cobham's Station, and

destroy it thence to Charlottesville as we proceeded west.  The

success of the last part of this programme would of course depend on

the location of General Hunter when I should arrive in the region

where it would be practicable for us to communicate with each other.



>From my camp at New Castle ferry we crossed the Pamunkey, marched

between Aylett's and Dunkirk on the Mattapony River, and on the 8th

of June encamped at Polecat Station.  The next day we resumed the

march along the North Anna--our advance guard skirmishing with a few

mounted men of the enemy, who proved to be irregulars--and bivouacked

on Northeast Creek, near Young's Mills.  This day I learned from some

of these irregulars whom we made prisoners that Breckenridge's

division of infantry, en route to the Shenandoah Valley by way of

Gordonsville, was passing slowly up the railroad parallel to me, and

that the enemy's cavalry had left its position on the south side of

the Chickahominy, and was marching on the old Richmond and

Gordonsville road toward Gordonsville, under command of General Wade

Hampton, the information being confirmed by a scouting party sent out

to cut the telegraph wires along the railroad in the night.

Breckenridge had been ordered back to the valley by General Lee as

soon as he heard of Hunter's victory near Staunton, but now that my

expedition had been discovered, the movement of Breckenridge's troops

on the railroad was being timed to correspond with the marches of my

command till Hampton could get more nearly parallel with me.



On the 10th we resumed the march, passing by Twyman's store, crossing

the North Anna at Carpenter's ford and encamping on the road leading

along the south fork of the North Anna to Trevillian Station.  During

the evening and night of the Loth the boldness of the enemy's

scouting parties, with which we had been coming into collision more

or less every day, perceptibly increased, thus indicating the

presence of a large force, and evidencing that his shorter line of

march had enabled him to bring to my front a strong body of cavalry,

although it started from Lee's army nearly two days later than I did

from Grant's.  The arrival of this body also permitted Breckenridge

to pass on to Gordonsville, and from there to interpose between

General Hunter and me at either Charlottesville or Waynesboro' as

circumstances might determine.



On the night of the Loth General Hampton's division camped about

three miles northwest of Trevillian, at a place called Green Spring

Valley and Fitzhugh Lee's division not far from Louisa Court House,

some six miles east of Trevillian.  Learning that I was at

Carpenter's ford, Hampton marched his division by way of Trevillian

Station toward Clayton's store, on the road from Trevillian to

Carpenter's ford, intending to attack me at Clayton's.  Fitzhugh

Lee's division was to join Hampton at Clayton's store from Louisa

Court House; but on the morning of the 11th the two generals were

separated by several miles.



At daylight of the 11th my march, to Trevillian Station was resumed

on the direct road to that point, and engaging the enemy's pickets

and advanced parties soon after setting out, we began to drive them

in.  Torbert had the lead with Merritt's and Devin's brigades, and as

he pressed back the pickets he came upon the enemy posted behind a

line of barricades in dense timber about three miles from Trevillian.

Meanwhile Custer's brigade had been sent from where we bivouacked, by

a wood road found on our left, to destroy Trevillian Station.  In

following this road Custer got to the rear of Hampton's division,

having passed between its right flank and Fitzhugh Lee's division,

which was at the time marching on the road leading from Louisa Court

House to Clayton's store to unite with Hampton.



Custer, the moment he found himself in Hampton's rear, charged the

led horses, wagons, and caissons found there, getting hold of a vast

number of each, and also of the station itself.  The stampede and

havoc wrought by Custer in Hampton's rear compelled him to turn

Rosser's brigade in that direction, and while it attacked Custer on

one side, Fitzhugh Lee's division, which had followed Custer toward

Trevillian, attacked him on the other.  There then ensued a desperate

struggle for the possession of the captured property, resulting

finally in its being retaken by the enemy.  Indeed, the great number

of horses and vehicles could not be kept on the limited space within

Custer's line, which now formed almost a complete circle; and while

he was endeavoring to remove them to a secure place they, together

with Custer's headquarters wagon and four of his caissons, fell into

the hands of their original owners.



As soon as the firing told that Custer had struck the enemy's rear, I

directed Torbert to press the line in front of Merritt and Devin,

aided by one brigade of Gregg's division on their left, Gregg's other

brigade in the meantime attacking Fitzhugh Lee on the Louisa Court

House road.  The effect of this was to force Hampton back, and his

division was so hard pushed that a portion of it was driven pell-mell

into Custer's lines, leaving there about five hundred prisoners.  The

rest of Hampton's men did not rally till they got some distance west

of Trevillian, while, in the meantime, Gregg had driven Fitzhugh Lee

toward Louisa Court House so far that many miles now intervened

between the two Confederate divisions, precluding their union until

about noon the next day, when Fitzhugh Lee effected the junction

after a circuitous march in the night.  The defeat of Hampton at the

point where he had determined to resist my further advance, and his

retreat westward, gave me undisturbed possession of the station; and

after destroying the railroad to some extent toward Gordonsville, I

went into camp.



>From prisoners taken during the day, I gathered that General Hunter,

instead of coming toward Charlottesville, as I had reason to expect,

both from the instructions given me and the directions sent him by

General Grant, was in the neighborhood of Lexington--apparently

moving on Lynchburg--and that Breckenridge was at Gordonsville and

Charlottesville.  I also heard, from the same source, that Ewell's

corps was on its way to Lynchburg, but this intelligence proved

afterward to be incorrect, for these troops, commanded by General

Early, did not leave Richmond till two days later.



There was no doubt as to the information about Hunter's general

location, however.  He was marching toward Lynchburg, away from

instead of toward me, thus making the junction of our commands beyond

all reasonable probability.  So in view of this, I made up my mind to

abandon that part of the scheme, and to return by leisurely marches,

which would keep Hampton's cavalry away from Lee while Grant was

crossing the James River.  I was still further influenced to this

course by the burden which was thrown on me in the large number of

wounded--there being about five hundred cases of my own--and the five

hundred prisoners that I would probably be forced to abandon, should

I proceed farther.  Besides, the recent battle had reduced my supply

of ammunition to a very small amount--not more than enough for one

more respectable engagement; and as the chances were that I would

have to fight a great deal before I could reach Hunter, now that the

enemy's cavalry and Breckenridge's infantry were between us, the

risks of the undertaking seemed too great to warrant it.



The morning of June 12 Gregg's division commenced destroying the

railroad to Louisa Court House, and continued the work during the

day, breaking it pretty effectually.  While Gregg was thus occupied,

I directed Torbert to make a reconnoissance up the Gordonsville road,

to secure a by-road leading over Mallory's ford, on the North Anna,

to the Catharpen road, as I purposed following that route to

Spottsylvania Court House on my return, and thence via Bowling Green

and Dunkirk to the White House.  About a mile beyond Trevillian the

Gordonsville road fork--the left fork leading to Charlottesville--and

about a mile beyond the fork Hampton had taken up and strongly

intrenched a line across both roads, being reinforced by Fitzhugh

Lee, who, as before related, had joined him about noon by a

roundabout march.  Torbert soon hotly engaged this line, and by the

impetuosity of his first attack, gained some advantage; but the

appearance of Fitzhugh Lee's troops on the right, and Hampton's

strong resistance in front, rendered futile all efforts to carry the

position; and, although I brought up one of Gregg's brigades to

Torbert's assistance, yet the by-road I coveted was still held by the

enemy when night closed in.



This engagement, like that off the day before around Trevillian, was

mostly fought dismounted by both sides, as had also been the earlier

fights of the cavalry during the summer in the Wilderness, at Todd's

Tavern, Hawe's Shop, and Matadequin Creek.  Indeed, they could hardly

have been fought otherwise than on foot, as there was little chance

for mounted fighting in eastern Virginia, the dense woods, the

armament of both parties, and the practice of barricading making it

impracticable to use the sabre with anything like a large force; and

so with the exception of Yellow Tavern the dismounted method

prevailed in almost every engagement.



The losses at Mallory's Crossroads were very heavy on both sides.

The character of the fighting, together with the day's results,

demonstrated that it was impossible to make the passage of the North

Anna at Mallory's ford without venturing another battle the next day.

This would consume the little ammunition left, and though we might

gain the road, yet the possibility of having no ammunition whatever

to get back with was too great a hazard, so I gave orders to withdraw

during the night of the 12th.  We retired along the same road by

which we had come, taking with us the prisoners, and all of our

wounded who could be moved.  Those who could not be transported, some

ninety in number, and all the Confederate wounded in my hands, were

left at Trevillian in hospitals, under charge of one of our surgeons,

with plenty of medical and other stores.



We recrossed the North Anna at Carpenter's ford the following

morning, and halting there, unsaddled and turned the horses out to

graze, for they were nearly famished, having had neither food nor

water during the preceding forty-eight hours.  Late in the afternoon

we saddled up and proceeded to Twyman's Store, while General

Hampton's main body moved down the south bank of the North Anna, with

the purpose of intervening between me and the Army of the Potomac, in

the hope of preventing my return to it; but his movements took no

definite shape beyond watching me, however, till several days later,

near St. Mary's Church, when I was crossing the peninsula to the

James River.



On the 14th the march was continued, and we reached the Catharpen

road, upon which it was originally intended to move if we had been

able to cross at Mallory's ford, and this conducted me to Shady Grove

Church.  The next day we passed over the battle-field of

Spottsylvania Court House.  The marks of the recent conflicts about

there were visible on every hand, and in the neighboring houses were

found many Union and Confederate wounded, who had been too severely

hurt to be removed from the field-hospitals at the time of the

battles.  Such of our wounded as were able to travel were brought

away.



On the 16th I marched from Edge Hill on the Ta River through Bowling

Green to Dr. Butler's, on the north side of the Mattapony.  When I

arrived here I was unable to ascertain the position of the Army of

the Potomac, and was uncertain whether or not the base at the White

House had been discontinued.  I had heard nothing from the army for

nine days except rumors through Southern sources, and under these

circumstances did not like to venture between the Mattapony and

Pamunkey rivers, embarrassed as I was with some four hundred wounded,

five hundred prisoners, and about two thousand negroes that had

joined my column in the hope of obtaining their freedom.  I therefore

determined to push down the north bank of the Mattapony far enough to

enable me to send these impediments directly to West Point, where I

anticipated finding some of our gunboats and transports, that could

carry all to the North.  Following this plan, we proceeded through

Walkerton to King and Queen Court House, and bivouacked in its

vicinity the night of the 18th.  Next day I learned that the depot at

the White House had not yet been broken up entirely, and that

supplies were in store for me there; so after sending the wounded,

prisoners, and negroes to West Point under an escort of two

regiments, I turned back to Dunkirk, on the Mattapony, and crossed to

the south side at a place where the stream was narrow enough to

bridge with my pontoon-boats.



In returning from Trevillian, as the most of our wounded were hauled

in old buggies, carts, and such other vehicles as could be made

available in the absence of a sufficient number of ambulances, the

suffering was intense, the heat of the season and dusty roads adding

much to the discomfort.  Each day we halted many times to dress the

wounds of the injured and to refresh them as much as possible, but

our means for mitigating their distress were limited.  The fortitude

and cheerfulness of the poor fellows under such conditions were

remarkable, for no word of complaint was heard.  The Confederate

prisoners and colored people being on foot, our marches were

necessarily made short, and with frequent halts also, but they too

suffered considerably from the heat and dust, though at times the

prisoners were relieved by being mounted on the horses of some of our

regiments, the owners meantime marching on foot.  Where all the

colored people came from and what started them was inexplicable, but

they began joining us just before we reached Trevillian--men, women,

and children with bundles of all sorts containing their few worldly

goods, and the number increased from day to day until they arrived at

West Point.  Probably not one of the poor things had the remotest

idea, when he set out, as to where he would finally land, but to a

man they followed the Yankees in full faith that they would lead to

freedom, no matter what road they took.



On the morning of the 20th, at an early hour, we resumed our march,

and as the column proceeded sounds of artillery were heard in the

direction of the White House, which fact caused us to quicken the

pace.  We had not gone far when despatches from General Abercrombie,

commanding some fragmentary organizations at the White House,

notified me that the place was about to be attacked.  I had

previously sent an advance party with orders to move swiftly toward

the cannonading and report to me by couriers the actual condition of

affairs.  From this party I soon learned that there was no occasion

to push our jaded animals, since the crisis, if there had been one,

was over and the enemy repulsed, so the increased gait was reduced to

a leisurely march that took us late in the afternoon to the north

bank of the Pamunkey, opposite Abercrombie's camp.  When I got to the

river the enemy was holding the bluffs surrounding the White House

farm, having made no effort to penetrate General Abercrombie's line

or do him other hurt than to throw a few shells among the teamsters

there congregated.



Next day Gregg's division crossed the Pamunkey dismounted, and

Torbert's crossed mounted. As soon as the troops were over, Gregg,

supported by Merritt's brigade, moved out on the road to Tunstall's

Station to attack Hampton, posted an the west side of Black Creek,

Custer's brigade meanwhile moving, mounted, on the road to

Cumberland, and Devin's in like manner on the one to Baltimore

crossroads.  This offer of battle was not accepted, however, and

Hampton withdrew from my front, retiring behind the Chickahominy,

where his communications with Lee would be more secure.



While at the White House I received orders to break up that depot

wholly, and also instructions to move the trains which the Army of

the Potomac had left there across the peninsula to the pontoon-bridge

at Deep Bottom on the James River.  These trains amounted to hundreds

of wagons and other vehicles, and knowing full well the dangers which

would attend the difficult problem of getting them over to

Petersburg, I decided to start them with as little delay as

circumstances would permit, and the morning of the 22d sent Torbert's

division ahead to secure Jones's bridge on the Chickahominy, so that

the wagons could be crossed at that point.  The trains followed

Torbert, while Gregg's division marched by a road parallel to the one

on which the wagons were moving, and on their right flank, as they

needed to be covered and protected in that direction only.



The enemy made no effort to attack us while we were moving the trains

that day, and the wagons were all safely parked for the night on the

south side of the Chickahominy, guarded by General Getty, who had

relieved Abercrombie from command of the infantry fragments before we

started off from the White House.



To secure the crossing at Jones's bridge, Torbert had pushed Devin's

brigade out on the Long Bridge road, on the side of the Chickahominy

where, on the morning of the 23d, he was attacked by Chambliss's

brigade of W. H. F. Lee's division.  Devin was driven in some little

distance, but being reinforced by Getty with six companies of colored

troops, he quickly turned the tables on Chambliss and re-established

his picketposts.  From this affair I learned that Chambliss's brigade

was the advance of the Confederate cavalry corps, while Hampton

discovered from it that we were already in possession of the Jones's

bridge crossing of the Chickahominy; and as he was too late to

challenge our passage of the stream at this point he contented

himself with taking up a position that night so as to cover the roads

leading from Long Bridge to Westover, with the purpose of preventing

the trains from following the river road to the pontoon-bridge at

Deep Bottom.



My instructions required me to cross the trains over the James River

on this pontoon-bridge if practicable, and to reach it I should be

obliged to march through Charles City Court House, and then by

Harrison's Landing and Malvern Hill, the latter point being held by

the enemy.  In fact, he held all the ground between Long Bridge on

the Chickahominy and the pontoon-bridge except the Tete de pont at

the crossing.  Notwithstanding this I concluded to make the attempt,

for all the delays of ferrying the command and trains would be

avoided if we got through to the bridge; and with this object in view

I moved Torbert's division out on the Charles City road to conduct

the wagons.  Just beyond Charles City Court House Torbert encountered

Lomax's brigade, which he drove across Herring Creek on the road to

Westover Church; and reporting the affair to me, I surmised, from the

presence of this force in my front, that Hampton would endeavor to

penetrate to the long column of wagons, so I ordered them to go into

park near Wilcox's landing, and instructed Gregg, whose division had

been marching in the morning along the road leading from Jones's

bridge to St.  Mary's Church for the purpose of covering the exposed

flank of the train, to hold fast near the church without fail till

all the transportation had passed Charles City Court House.



Meanwhile, General Hampton, who had conjectured that I would try to

get the train across the James by the pontoonbridge at Deep Bottom,

began concentrating all his troops except Lomax's brigade, which was

to confront the head of my column on the river road, in the vicinity

of Nance's Shop.  This was discovered by Gregg at an early hour, and

divining this purpose he had prepared to meet it by constructing

hasty cover for his men before receiving my instructions.  About 4

o'clock in the afternoon Hampton got his force in hand, and with

Fitzhugh Lee's division assailed the whole front of Gregg's line, and

his left flank with Chambliss's and Geary's brigades.  For two hours

he continued to attack, but made little impression on Gregg--gain at

one point being counterbalanced by failure at another.  Because of

the evident strength of Hampton, Gregg had placed all his troops in

line of battle from the first, and on discovery of the enemy's

superior numbers sent message after message to me concerning the

situation, but the messengers never arrived, being either killed or

captured, and I remained in total ignorance till dark of the strait

his division was in.



Toward night it became clear to Gregg that he could maintain the

unequal contest no longer, and he then decided to retreat, but not

until convinced that the time won had enabled all the trains to pass

Charles City Court House in safety.  When he had got all his led

horses fairly on the way, and such of the wounded as could be

transported, he retired by his right flank-in some confusion, it is

true, but stubbornly resisting to Hopewell Church, where Hampton

ceased to press him.



Gregg's losses were heavy, and he was forced to abandon his dead and

most seriously wounded, but the creditable stand made ensured the

safety of the train, the last wagon of which was now parked at

Wilcox's Landing.  His steady, unflinching determination to gain time

for the wagons to get beyond the point of danger was characteristic

of the man, and this was the third occasion on which he had exhibited

a high order of capacity and sound judgment since coming under my

command.  The firmness and coolness with which he always met the

responsibilities of a dangerous place were particularly strong points

in Gregg's make-up, and he possessed so much professional though

unpretentious ability, that it is to be regretted he felt obliged a

few months later to quit the service before the close of the war.



Gregg's fight fully satisfied me that we could not get the trains up

to the pontoon-bridge, for of course Hampton would now throw all his

cavalry in my front, on the river road, where it could be backed up

by Lee's infantry.  Meanwhile, General Meade had become assured of

the same thing, and as he was now growing anxious about the fate of

Wilson's division--which, during my absence, had been sent out to

break the enemy's communications south of Petersburg, by destroying

the Southside and Danville railroads--he sent ferryboats to cross me

over the James.  During the night'of the 24th, and next morning, the

immense train--which ought never to have been left for the cavalry to

escort, after a fatiguing expedition of three weeks--was moved back

through Charles City Court House to Douthard's landing, and there

ferried over the river, followed by my troops in like manner.  When

General Hampton discovered this, he moved to Drury's Bluff, and

there, on the morning of the 27th, crossed the James by the

Confederate pontoon-bridge.









CHAPTER XXII.



GENERAL WILSON'S RAID--DESTROYING RAILROADS--HIS DISCOMFITURE--

RESULTS OF HIS RAID--REMOUNTS--MOVEMENT TO THE NORTH SIDE OF THE

JAMES--DECEIVING LEE--MY ISOLATED POSITION--ESTIMATE OF HANCOCK--

SUCCESS OF THE CAVALRY--THEIR CONSTANT DUTIES.



While I was absent on the expedition to Trevillian, the movement of

the Army of the Potomac across the James River was effected, and

Wilson, whom I had left behind for the purpose, was engaged in the

duty of covering its front and rear.  Late on the night of June 12

he, with Chapman's brigade, crossed the Chickahominy at Long Bridge,

in advance of the Fifth Corps, and by 7 o'clock next morning had

driven the enemy's pickets up to White Oak bridge, where he waited

for our infantry.  When that came up, he pushed on as far as Riddle's

Shop, but late that evening the Confederate infantry forced him to

withdraw to St. Mary's Church; for early in the morning General Lee

had discovered the movement of our army, and promptly threw this

column of infantry south of the Chickahominy to White Oak Swamp, with

the design of covering Richmond.  From St. Mary's Church Wilson

guarded all the roads toward White Oak Swamp and Riddle's Shop,

McIntosh's brigade joining him on the 14th, by way of Long Bridge, as

the rear of the Army of the Potomac passed the Chickahominy.  In the

performance of this duty Wilson did not have to fight any engagement

of magnitude, for the bulk of the enemy's cavalry had followed me to

Trevillian.  During the 15th and 16th Wilson drew his troops in

toward the James River, and next day crossed it on the pontoon-bridge

and camped on the Blackwater, near Mt. Sinai Church.  Here he

remained till the 22d of June--the same day I reached the White House

with Gregg and Torbert--when, under orders from General Meade, he set

out to cut the enemy's communications to the south and southwest of

Petersburg.



His instructions implied that the breaking up of the Petersburg and

Lynchburg, and Richmond and Danville railroads at Burkeville was the

most important part of his mission, and that when the work of

destruction began, it should be continued till he was driven off by

the enemy.  Wilson's force consisted of about 5,500 men, General A.

V. Kautz, with the cavalry of the Army of the James, having joined

him for the expedition.  In moving out Wilson crossed the Weldon road

near Ream's Station, first destroying it effectually at that point.

About fourteen miles west of Petersburg he struck the Southside

railroad, and broke it up clear to Burkeville, a distance of thirty

miles.  Having destroyed everything at Burkeville Junction, he moved

along the Danville road to Staunton River, completely wrecking about

thirty miles of that line also.  At Staunton River he found the

railroad bridge strongly guarded, and seeing that he could not burn

it, he began his return march that night, and reached Nottoway River,

some thirty miles south of Petersburg, at noon of the next day--the

28th.



In this expedition Wilson was closely followcd from the start by

Barringer's brigade of W. H. F. Lee's cavalry, but the operations

were not interfered with materially, his success being signal till he

reached the vicinity of Stony Creek depot on his return.  At this

point General Hampton, with his own and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry, got

between Wilson and the Army of the Potomac, there being behind them

at Ream's Station, at the same time, two brigades of infantry under

General Mahone.  A severe battle ensued, resulting in Wilson's

defeat, with the loss of twelve guns and all his wagons.  In

consequence of this discomfiture he was obliged to fall back across

the Nottoway River with his own division, and rejoined the army by

way of Peter's bridge on that stream, while Kautz's division, unable

to unite with Wilson after the two commands had become separated in

the fight, made a circuit of the enemy's left, and reached the lines

of our army in the night of the 28th.



Neither the presence of Hampton's cavalry at Stony Creek depot, nor

the possession of Ream's Station by the Confederate infantry, seems

to have been anticipated by Wilson, for in the report of the

expedition he states:



"Foreseeing the probability of having to return northward, I wrote to

General Meade the evening before starting that I anticipated no

serious difficulty in executing his orders; but unless General

Sheridan was required to keep Hampton's cavalry engaged, and our

infantry to prevent Lee from making detachments, we should probably

experience great difficulty in rejoining the army.  In reply to this

note, General Humphreys, chief-of-staff, informed me it was intended

the Army of the Potomac should cover the Weldon road the next day,

the Southside road the day after, and that Hampton having followed

Sheridan toward Gordonsville, I need not fear any trouble from him."



I doubt that General Meade's letter of instructions and Wilson's note

of the same evening, warrant what General Wilson here says.  It is

true that the Weldon railroad near Ream's Station was not covered by

our infantry, as General Humphreys informed him it would be, but

Wilson is in error when he intimates that he was assured that I would

look after Hampton.  I do not think General Meade's instructions are

susceptible of this interpretation.  I received no orders requiring

me to detain Hampton.  On the contrary, when I arrived at the White

House my instructions required me to break up the depot there, and

then bring the train across the Peninsula as soon as practicable, nor

were these instructions ever modified.  I began the duty imposed on

me on the morning of the 23d, totally in the dark as to what was

expected of Wilson, though it seems, from some correspondence between

Generals Grant and Meade, which I never saw till after the war, that

Grant thought Wilson could rely on Hampton's absence from his field

of operations throughout the expedition.





"HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC,

"June 21, 1864. 9:20 A. M.



"BRIGADIER-GENERAL WILSON,

"Commanding Third Division Cavalry Corps.



"The major-general commanding directs that you move your command at

2 A. M. to-morrow, the 22d instant, in execution of the duty assigned

you of destroying certain railroads.  Despatches received from the

White House state that Hampton's cavalry was before that place

yesterday evening, and that General Sheridan had also reached there,

hence it is desirable that you should march at the earliest moment.

In passing Petersburg you will endeavor to avoid the observation of

the enemy, and then move by the shortest routes to the intersection

of the Petersburg and Lynchburg, and the Richmond and Danville

railroads, and destroy both these roads to the greatest extent

possible, continuing their destruction until driven from it by such

attacks of the enemy as you can no longer resist.  The destruction of

those roads to such an extent that they cannot be used by the enemy

in connection with Richmond during the remainder of the campaign is

an important part of the plan of campaign.  The latest information

from Major-General Hunter represents him to be a few miles west of

Lynchburg.  He may endeavor to form a junction with this army; you

will communicate with him if practicable, and have delivered to him

verbally the contents of the following copy of a communication from

Lieutenant-General Grant to the major-general commanding this army.

Lieutenant Brooks, who will accompany your expedition part of the

way, should be informed where General Hunter will probably be found.



"The success of your expedition will depend upon the secrecy with

which it is commenced, and the celerity with which its movements are

conducted; your command will, therefore, have with it the lightest

supplies and smallest number of wheels consistent with the thorough

execution of the duty, the supplies of the section of country you

will operate in being taken into account.  Upon the completion of the

work assigned you, you will rejoin this army.



"The chief quartermaster was directed yesterday to supply you with

the implements and material for the destruction of railroads obtained

for General Sheridan.



[Signed] "A. A. HUMPHREYS,

"Major-General, Chief-of-Staff."







"HEADQUARTERS CAVALRY FORCES,

Mount Sinai Church, June 21, 1864--6 P.M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL HUMPHREYS,"

"Chief-of-Staff.

"The instructions of the major-general commanding, of this date, are

received.  I shall march in obedience thereto at 2 A. M. to-morrow.

Before starting I would like to know if our infantry forces cover the

Weldon road.



"I propose striking the Southside road first at Sutherland Station,

or some point in that vicinity, tearing up the track sufficiently to

delay railroad communication ten or twelve hours.  At this place I

shall detach a force to strike the Richmond and Danville road, by a

rapid march, at the nearest point, tearing up the track at every

practicable point between there and Burkeville.



"From Sutherlands I shall move the main body of my command by the

Great road (breaking the railroad at every convenient point) directly

to Burkeville, which, if we succeed in capturing, will afford us the

opportunity of prosecuting our work with great advantage.  As soon as

I have made dispositions for communicating with Hunter and done all

the damage possible, I shall move with all possible rapidity for

Danville and Grenboro'.



"Circumstances must, however, is a great degree control our movements

after leaving Burkeville.



"If Sheridan will look after Hampton, I apprehend no difficulty, and

hope to be able to do the enemy great damage.  The ammunition issued

to my command is very defective.  The implements for destroying roads

have not yet arrived, but I learn from General Ingalls that they will

certainly be here early to-morrow.



[Signed] J. H. WILSON,

"Brigadier-General Commanding.





The moment I received orders from General Meade to go to the relief

of Wilson, I hastened with Torbert and Gregg by way of Prince George

Court House and Lee's Mills to Ream's Station.  Here I found the

Sixth Corps, which Meade had pushed out on his left flank immediately

on hearing of Wilson's mishap, but I was too late to render any

material assistance, Wilson having already disappeared, followed by

the enemy.  However, I at once sent out parties to gather

information, and soon learned that Wilson had got safe across the

Nottoway at Peter's bridge and was making for the army by way of

Blunt's bridge, on the Blackwater.



The benefits derived from this expedition, in the destruction of the

Southside and Danville railroads, were considered by General Grant as

equivalent for the losses sustained in Wilson's defeat, for the

wrecking of the railroads and cars was most complete, occasioning at

this, time serious embarrassment to the Confederate Government; but I

doubt if all this compensated for the artillery and prisoners that

fell into the hands of the enemy in the swamps of Hatcher's Run and

Rowanty Creek.  Wilson's retreat from the perilous situation at

Ream's station was a most creditable performance--in the face of two

brigades of infantry and three divisions of cavalry--and in the

conduct of the whole expedition the only criticism that can hold

against him is that he placed too much reliance on meeting our

infantry at Ream's station, seeing that uncontrollable circumstances

might, and did, prevent its being there.  He ought to have marched on

the 28th by Jarrett's Station to Peter's bridge, on the Nottoway, and

Blunts bridge on the Blackwater, to the rear of the Army of the

Potomac.



When the safety of Wilson's command was assured, I was ordered back

to Light House Point, where I had gone into camp after crossing the

James River to rest and recruit my command, now very much reduced in

numbers by reason of casualties to both horses and men.  It had been

marching and fighting for fifty consecutive days, and the fatiguing

service had told so fearfully on my animals that the number of

dismounted men in the corps was very large.  With the exception of

about four hundred horses that I received at the White House, no

animals were furnished to supply the deficiencies which had arisen

from the wearing marches of the past two months until I got to this

camp at Light House Point; here my needs were so obvious that they

could no longer be neglected.



I remained at Light House Point from the 2d to the 26th of July,

recuperating the cavalry, the intensely warm weather necessitating

almost an entire suspension of hostilities on the part of the Army of

the Potomac.  Meanwhile fifteen hundred horses were sent me here, and

these, with the four hundred already mentioned, were all that my

troops received while I held the personal command of the Cavalry

Corps, from April 6 to August 1, 1864.  This was not near enough to

mount the whole command, so I disposed the men who could not be

supplied in a dismounted camp.



By the 26th of July our strength was pretty well restored, and as

General Grant was now contemplating offensive operations for the

purpose of keeping Lee's army occupied around Richmond, and also of

carrying Petersburg by assault if possible, I was directed to move to

the north side of the James River in conjunction with General

Hancock's corps, and, if opportunity offered, to make a second

expedition against the Virginia Central railroad, and again destroy

the bridges on the North Anna, the Little and the South Anna rivers.



I started out on the afternoon of the 26th and crossed the Appomattox

at Broadway landing.  At Deep Bottom I was joined by Kautz's small

division from the Army of the James, and here massed the whole

command, to allow Hancock's corps to take the lead, it crossing to

the north bank of the James River by the bridge below the mouth of

Bailey's Creek.  I moved late in the afternoon, so as not to come

within the enemy's view before dark, and after night-fall Hancock's

corps passed me and began crossing the pontoon-bridge about 2 o'clock

in the morning.



By daylight Hancock was across, the cavalry following.  Soon a

portion of his corps attacked the enemy's works on the east side of

Bailey's Creek, and, aided by the cavalry moving on its right,

captured four pieces of artillery.  This opened the way for Hancock

to push out his whole corps, and as he advanced by a wheel, with his

left as a pivot, the cavalry joined in the movement, pressing forward

on the New Market and Central or Charles City roads.



We did not go far before we found the enemy's infantry posted across

these two roads behind a strong line of intrenchments on the west

bank of Bailey's Creek.  His videttes in front of Ruffin's house on

the New Market road were soon driven in on their main line, and the

high ground before the house was immediately occupied by Torbert and

Gregg, supported by Kautz's division.  By the time the cavalry line

was formed the Confederate General Kershaw, with his own division of

infantry and those of Wilcox and Heath, advanced to attack us.

Directing the most of his troops against the cavalry, which was still

mounted, Kershaw drove it back some distance over the high ground.

When it reached the eastern face of the ridge, however, it was

quickly dismounted, and the men directed to lie down in line of

battle about fifteen yards from the crest, and here the onset of the

enemy was awaited.  When Kershaw's men reached the crest such a

severe fire was opened on them, and at such close quarters, that they

could not withstand it, and gave way in disorder.  They were followed

across the plain by the cavalry, and lost about two hundred and fifty

prisoners and two battle-flags.  The counter attack against the

infantry by Torbert and Gregg re-established our line and gave us the

victory of Darbytown, but it also demonstrated the fact that General

Lee had anticipated the movement around his left flank by

transferring to the north side of the James a large portion of his

infantry and W. H. F. Lee's division of cavalry.



This development rendered useless any further effort on Hancock's

part or mine to carry out the plan of the expedition, for General

Grant did not intend Hancock to assault the enemy's works unless

there should be found in them but a very thin line of infantry which

could be surprised.  In such event, Hancock was to operate so that

the cavalry might turn the Confederates on the Central or Charles

City road, but the continually increasing force of the enemy showed

this to be impracticable.  The long front presented by Hancock's

corps and the cavalry deceived General Lee, and he undoubtedly

thought that nearly all of Grant's army had been moved to the north

side of the James River; and to meet the danger he transferred the

most of his own strength to the same side to confront his adversary,

thinning the lines around Petersburg to reinforce those opposing us

on the Central and New Market roads.  This was what Grant hoped Lee

would do in case the operations of Hancock and myself became

impracticable, for Grant had an alternative plan for carrying

Petersburg by assault in conjunction with the explosion of a mine

that had been driven under the enemy's works from the front of

Burnside's corps.



Now that there was no longer a chance for the cavalry to turn the

enemy's left, our attention was directed to keeping up the deception

of Lee, and on the afternoon of the 28th Hancock's corps withdrew to

a line nearer the head of the bridge, the cavalry drawing back to a

position on his right.  From now on, all sorts of devices and

stratagems were practiced--anything that would tend to make the

Confederates believe we were being reinforced, while Hancock was

preparing for a rapid return to Petersburg at the proper time.  In

order to delude the enemy still more after night-fall of the 28th I

sent one of my divisions to the south side of the James, first

covering the bridgeway with refuse hay to keep the tram of the horses

from being heard.  After daylight the next morning, I marched this

division back again on foot, in full view of the enemy, to create the

impression of a continuous movement large bodies of infantry to the

north side, while the same time Kautz was made to skirmish with the

enemy on our extreme right.  These various artifices had the effect

intended, for by the evening of the 29th Lee had transferred all his

infantry to the north bank of the James, except three divisions, and

all his cavalry save one.



The morning of the 30th had been fixed upon to explode the mine and

assault the enemy's works, so after dark on the evening of the 29th

Hancock hastily but quietly withdrew his corps to the south side to

take part in the engagement which was to succeed the explosion, and I

was directed to follow Hancock.  This left me on the north side of

the river confronting two-thirds of Lee's army in a perilous

position, where I could easily be driven into Curl's Neck and my

whole command annihilated.  The situation, therefore, was not a

pleasant one to contemplate, but it could not be avoided.  Luckily

the enemy did not see fit to attack, and my anxiety was greatly

relieved by getting the whole command safely across the bridge

shortly after daylight, having drawn in the different brigades

successively from my right.  By 10 o'clock on the morning of the 3oth

my leading division was well over toward the left of our army in

front of Petersburg, marching with the purpose to get around the

enemy's right flank during the operations that were to succeed the

mine explosion, but when I reached General Meade's headquarters I

found that lamentable failure had attended the assault made when the

enemy's works were blown up in the morning.  Blunder after blunder

had rendered the assault abortive, and all the opportunities opened

by our expedition to the north side were irretrievably lost, so

General Meade at once arrested the movement of the cavalry.



In the expedition to Deep Bottom I was under the command of Major-

General Hancock, who, by seniority, was to control my corps as well

as his own until the way was opened for me to get out on the Virginia

Central railroad.  If this opportunity was gained, I was to cut loose

and damage Lee's communications with the Shenandoah Valley in such

manner as best suited the conditions, but my return was not to be

jeopardized nor long delayed.  This necessitated that Hancock's line

should extend to Bottom's bridge on the Chickahominy.  The enemy's

early discovery of the movement and his concentration of troops on

the north side prevented Hancock from accomplishing the programme

laid out for him.  Its impracticability was demonstrated early on the

27th, and Hancock's soldierly instincts told him this the moment he

unexpectedly discovered Kershaw blocking the New Market and Charles

City roads.  To Hancock the temptation to assault Kershaw's position

was strong indeed, but if he carried it there would still remain the

dubious problem of holding the line necessary for my safe return, so

with rare judgment he desisted zealously turning to the alternative

proposition--the assault on Petersburg--for more significant results.

This was the only occasion during the war in which I was associated

with Hancock in campaign.  Up till then we had seldom met, and that

was the first opportunity I had to observe his quick apprehension,

his physical courage, and the soldierly personality which had long

before established his high reputation.



On the 1st of August, two days after the mine explosion, I was.

relieved from the personal command of the Cavalry Corps, and ordered

to the Shenandoah Valley, where at a later date Torbert's and

Wilson's divisions joined me.  Practically, after I went to the

valley, my command of the Cavalry Corps became supervisory merely.

During the period of my immediate control of the corps, I tried to

carry into effect, as far as possible, the views I had advanced

before and during the opening of the Wilderness campaign, i.e., "that

our cavalry ought to fight the enemy's cavalry, and our infantry the

enemy's infantry"; for there was great danger of breaking the spirit

of the corps if it was to be pitted against the enemy's compact

masses of foot-troops posted behind intrenchments, and unless there

was some adequate tactical or strategical advantage to be gained,

such a use of it would not be justified.  Immediately succeeding the

battles of the Wilderness, opportunity offered to put this plan into

execution to some extent, and from that time forward--from the battle

of Yellow Tavern--our success was almost continuous, resulting

finally, before the close of the war, in the nearly total

annihilation of the enemy's cavalry.



The constant activity of the corps from May 5 till August 1 gave

little opportunity for the various division and brigade commanders to

record its work in detail; so there exists but meagre accounts of the

numerous skirmishes and graver conflicts in which, in addition to the

fights mentioned in this narrative, it engaged.  A detailed history

of its performances is not within the province of a work of this

nature; but in review, it can be said, without trespassing on the

reader's time, that the Cavalry Corps led the advance of the Army of

the Potomac into the Wilderness in the memorable campaign of 1864;

that on the expedition by way of Richmond to Haxall's it marked out

the army's line of march to the North Anna; that it again led the

advance to the Tolopotomy, and also to Cold Harbor, holding that

important strategic point at great hazard; and that by the Trevillian

expedition it drew away the enemy's cavalry from the south side of

the Chickahominy, and thereby assisted General Grant materially in

successfully marching to the James River and Petersburg.

Subsequently, Wilson made his march to Staunton bridge, destroying

railroads and supplies of inestimable value, and though this was

neutralized by his disaster near Ream's Station, the temporary set-

back there to one division was soon redeemed by victory over the

Confederate infantry at the battle of Darbytown.



In the campaign we were almost always on the march, night and day,

often unable to care properly for our wounded, and obliged to bury

our dead where they fell; and innumerable combats attest the part the

cavalry played in Grant's march from the Rapidan to Petersburg.  In

nearly all of these our casualties were heavy, particularly so when,

as was often the case, we had to engage the Confederate infantry; but

the enemy returned such a full equivalent in dead and wounded in

every instance, that finally his mounted power, which from the

beginning of the war had been nurtured with a wise appreciation of

its value, was utterly broken.









CHAPTER XXIII.



GENERAL HUNTER'S SUCCESSFUL MARCH AND SUBSEQUENT RETREAT--GENERAL

JUBAL A. EARLY THREATENS WASHINGTON--CHAMBERSBURG, PA., BURNED--

SELECTED TO OPERATE AGAINST GENERAL EARLY--THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY--

THE CONFEDERATE ARMY.



When the attempt to take Petersburg in conjunction with the mine

explosion resulted in such a dismal failure, all the operations

contemplated in connection with that project came to a standstill,

and there was every prospect that the intensely hot and sultry

weather would prevent further activity in the Army of the Potomac

till a more propitious season.  Just now, however, the conditions

existing in the Shenandoah Valley and along the upper Potomac

demanded the special attention of General Grant, for, notwithstanding

the successful march that Major-General David Hunter had made toward

Lynchburg early in the summer, what he had first gained was

subsequently lost by strategical mistakes, that culminated in

disaster during the retreat he was obliged to make from the vicinity

of Lynchburg to the Kanawha Valley.  This route of march uncovered

the lower portion of the Valley of the Shenandoah, and with the

exception of a small force of Union troops under General Franz Sigel

posted aft Martinsburg for the purpose of covering the Baltimore and

Ohio railroad, there was nothing at hand to defend the lower valley.



The different bodies of Confederates which compelled Hunter's retreat

were under command of General Jubal A. Early, who had been sent to

Lynchburg with Ewell's corps after the defeat of the Confederate

General W. C. Jones near Staunton on the 5th of June, to take command

of the Valley District.  When Early had forced Hunter into the

Kanawha region far enough to feel assured that Lynchburg could not

again be threatened from that direction, he united to his own corps

General John C. Breckenridge's infantry division and the cavalry of

Generals J. H. Vaughn, John McCausland.  B. T. Johnson, and J. D.

Imboden, which heretofore had been operating in southwest and western

Virginia under General Robert Ransom, Jr., and with the column thus

formed, was ready to turn his attention to the lower Shenandoah

Valley.  At Early's suggestion General Lee authorized him to move

north at an opportune moment, cross the upper Potomac into Maryland

and threaten Washington.  Indeed, General Lee had foreshadowed such a

course when Early started toward Lynchburg for the purpose of

relieving the pressure in front of Petersburg, but was in some doubt

as to the practicability of the movement later, till persuaded to it

by the representations of Early after that general had driven Hunter

beyond the mountains and found little or nothing opposing except the

small force of Sigel, which he thought he could readily overcome by

celerity of movement.



By rapid marching Early reached Winchester on the 2d of July, and on

the 4th occupied Martinsburg, driving General Sigel out of that place

the same day that Hunter's troops, after their fatiguing retreat

through the mountains, reached Charlestown, West Virginia.  Early was

thus enabled to cross the Potomac without difficulty, when, moving

around .  Harper's Ferry, through the gaps of the South Mountain, he

found his path unobstructed till he reached the Monocacy, where

Ricketts's division of the Sixth Corps, and some raw troops that had

been collected by General Lew Wallace, met and held the Confederates

till the other reinforcements that had been ordered to the capital

from Petersburg could be brought up.  Wallace contested the line of

the Monocacy with obstinacy, but had to retire finally toward

Baltimore.  The road was then open to Washington, and Early marched

to the outskirts and began against the capital the demonstrations

which were designed to divert the Army of the Potomac from its main

purpose in front of Petersburg.



Early's audacity in thus threatening Washington had caused some

concern to the officials in the city, but as the movement was looked

upon by General Grant as a mere foray which could have no decisive

issue, the Administration was not much disturbed till the

Confederates came in close proximity.  Then was repeated the alarm

and consternation of two years before, fears for the safety of the

capital being magnified by the confusion and discord existing among

the different generals in Washington and Baltimore; and the imaginary

dangers vanished only with the appearance of General Wright, who,

with the Sixth Corps and one division of the Nineteenth Corps, pushed

out to attack Early as soon as he could get his arriving troops in

hand, but under circumstances that precluded celerity of movement;

and as a consequence the Confederates escaped with little injury,

retiring across the Potomac to Leesburg, unharassed save by some

Union cavalry that had been sent out into Loudoun County by Hunter,

who in the meantime had arrived at Harper's Ferry by the Baltimore

and Ohio railroad.  From Leesburg Early retired through Winchester

toward Strasburg, but when the head of his column reached this place

he found that he was being followed by General Crook with the

combined troops of Hunter and Sigel only, Wright having returned to

Washington under orders to rejoin Meade at Petersburg.  This

reduction of the pursuing force tempting Early to resume the

offensive, he attacked Crook at Kernstown, and succeeded in

administering such a check as to necessitate this general's retreat

to Martinsburg, and finally to Harper's Ferry.  Crook's withdrawal

restored to Early the line of the upper Potomac, so, recrossing this

stream, he advanced again into Maryland, and sending McCausland on to

Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, laid that town in ashes, leaving three

thousand non-combatants without shelter or food.



When Early fell back from the vicinity of Washington toward

Strasburg, General Grant believed that he would rejoin Lee, but later

manoeuvres of the enemy indicated that Early had given up this idea,

if he ever, entertained it, and intended to remain in the valley,

since it would furnish Lee and himself with subsistence, and also

afford renewed opportunities for threatening Washington.  Indeed, the

possession of the Valley of the Shenandoah at this time was of vast

importance to Lee's army, and on every hand there were indications

that the Confederate Government wished to hold it at least until

after the crops could be gathered in to their depots at Lynchburg and

Richmond.  Its retention, besides being of great advantage in the

matter of supplies, would also be a menace to the North difficult for

General Grant to explain, and thereby add an element of considerable

benefit to the Confederate cause; so when Early's troops again

appeared at Martinsburg it was necessary for General Grant to

confront them with a force strong enough to put an end to incursions

north of the Potomac, which hitherto had always led to National

discomfiture at some critical juncture, by turning our army in

eastern Virginia from its chief purpose--the destruction of Lee and

the capture of the Confederate capital.



This second irruption of Early, and his ruthless destruction of

Chambersburg led to many recommendations on the part of General Grant

looking to a speedy elimination of the confusion then existing among

the Union forces along the upper Potomac, but for a time the

authorities at Washington would approve none of his propositions.

The President and Secretary Stanton seemed unwilling to adopt his

suggestions, and one measure which he deemed very important--the

consolidation into a single command of the four geographical

districts into which, to relieve political pressure no doubt, the

territory had been divided--met with serious opposition.  Despite

Grant's representations, he could not prevail on the Administration

to approve this measure, but finally the manoeuvres of Early and the

raid to Chambersburg compelled a partial compliance, though Grant had

somewhat circumvented the difficulty already by deciding to appoint a

commander for the forces in the field that were to operate against

Early.



On the 31st of July General Grant selected me as this commander, and

in obedience to his telegraphic summons I repaired to his

headquarters at City Point.  In the interview that followed, he

detailed to me the situation of affairs on the upper Potomac, telling

me that I was to command in the field the troops that were to operate

against Early, but that General Hunter, who was at the head of the

geographical department, would be continued in his position for the

reason that the Administration was reluctant to reconstruct or

consolidate the different districts.  After informing me that one

division of the Cavalry Corps would be sent to my new command, he

went on to say that he wanted me to push the enemy as soon as this

division arrived, and if Early retired up the Shenandoah Valley I was

to pursue, but if he crossed the Potomac I was to put myself south of

him and try to compass his destruction.  The interview having ended,

I returned to Hancock Station to prepare for my departure, and on the

evening of August 1 I was relieved from immediate duty with the Army

of the Potomac, but not from command of the cavalry as a corps

organization.



I arrived at Washington on the 4th of August, and the next day

received instructions from General Halleck to report to General Grant

at Monocacy Junction, whither he had gone direct from City Point, in

consequence of a characteristic despatch from the President

indicating his disgust with the confusion, disorder, and helplessness

prevailing along the upper Potomac, and intimating that Grant's

presence there was necessary.



In company with the Secretary of War I called on the President before

leaving Washington, and during a short conversation Mr. Lincoln

candidly told me that Mr. Stanton had objected to my assignment to

General Hunter's command, because he thought me too young, and that

he himself had concurred with the Secretary; but now, since General

Grant had "ploughed round" the difficulties of the situation by

picking me out to command the "boys in the field," he felt satisfied

with what had been done, and "hoped for the best."  Mr. Stanton

remained silent during these remarks, never once indicating whether

he, too, had become reconciled to my selection or not; and although,

after we left the White House, he conversed with me freely in regard

to the campaign I was expected to make, seeking to impress on me the

necessity for success from the political as well as from the military

point of view, yet he utterly ignored the fact that he had taken any

part in disapproving the recommendation of the general-in-chief.



August 6, I reported to General Grant at the Monocacy, and he there

turned over to me the following instructions, which he had previously

prepared for General Hunter in the expectation that general would

continue to command the department:



"HEADQUARTERS IN THE FIELD,

"Monocacy Bridge, Md., Aug.  5, 1864.



"GENERAL: Concentrate all your available force without delay in the

vicinity of Harper's Ferry, leaving only such railroad guards and

garrisons for public property as may be necessary.



"Use in this concentration the railroad, if by so doing time can be

saved.  From Harper's Ferry, if it is found that the enemy has moved

north of the Potomac in large force, push north, following and

attacking him wherever found; following him, if driven south of the

Potomac, as long as it is safe to do so.  If it is ascertained that

the enemy has but a small force north of the Potomac, then push south

the main force, detaching, under a competent commander, a sufficient

force to look after the raiders and drive them to their homes.  In

detaching such a force, the brigade of cavalry now en route from

Washington via Rockville may be taken into account.



"There are now on the way to join you three other brigades of the

best of cavalry, numbering at least five thousand men and horses.

These will be instructed, in the absence of further orders, to join

you by the south side of the Potomac.  One brigade will probably

start to-morrow.



"In pushing up the Shenandoah Valley, as it is expected you will have

to go first or last, it is desirable that nothing should be left to

invite the enemy to return.  Take all provisions, forage, and stock

wanted for the use of your command.  Such as cannot be consumed,

destroy.  It is not desirable that the buildings should be destroyed-

-they should, rather, be protected; but the people should be informed

that so long as an army can subsist among them recurrences of these

raids must be expected, and we are determined to stop them at all

hazards.



"Bear in mind, the object is to drive the enemy south; and to do this

you want to keep him always in sight.  Be guided in your course by

the course he takes.



"Make your own arrangements for supplies of all kinds, giving regular

vouchers for such as may be taken from loyal citizens in the country

through which you march.



"Very respectfully,

"U. S. GRANT, Lieut.-General."



"Major-General D. HUNTER,

"Commanding Department of West Virginia."





When I had read the letter addressed to Hunter, General Grant said I

would be expected to report directly to him, as Hunter had asked that

day to be wholly relieved, not from any chagrin at my assignment to

the control of the active forces of his command, but because he

thought that his fitness for the position he was filling was

distrusted by General Halleck, and he had no wish to cause

embarrassment by remaining where he could but remove me one degree

from the headquarters of the army.  The next day Hunter's unselfish

request was complied with, and an order was issued by the President,

consolidating the Middle Department, the Department of Washington,

the Department of the Susquehanna, and the Department of West

Virginia.



Under this order these four geographical districts constituted the

Middle Military Division, and I was temporarily assigned to command

it.  Hunter's men had been bivouacking for some days past in the

vicinity of Monocacy Junction and Frederick, but before General

Grant's instructions were written out, Hunter had conformed to them

by directing the concentration at Halltown, about four miles in front

of Harper's Ferry, of all his force available for field service.

Therefore the different bodies of troops, with the exception of

Averell's cavalry, which had followed McCausland toward Moorefield

after the burning of Chambersburg, were all in motion toward Halltown

on August 6.



Affairs at Monocacy kept me but an hour or two, and these disposed

of, I continued on to Harper's Ferry by the special train which had

brought me from Washington, that point being intended as my

headquarters while making preparations to advance.  The enemy was

occupying Martinsburg, Williamsport, and Shepherdstown at the time;

sending occasional raiding parties into Maryland as far as

Hagerstown.  The concentration of my troops at Halltown being an

indication to Early that we intended to renew the offensive, however,

he immediately began counter preparations by drawing in all his

detached columns from the north side of the Potomac, abandoning a

contemplated raid into Maryland, which his success against Crook at

Kernstown had prompted him to project, and otherwise disposing

himself for defense.



At Harper's Ferry I made my headquarters in the second story of a

small and very dilapidated hotel, and as soon as settled sent for

Lieutenant John R. Meigs, the chief engineer officer of the command,

to study with him the maps of my geographical division.  It always

came rather easy to me to learn the geography of a new section, and

its important topographical features as well; therefore I found that,

with the aid of Meigs, who was most intelligent in his profession,

the region in which I was to operate would soon be well fixed in my

mind.  Meigs was familiar with every important road and stream, and

with all points worthy of note west of the Blue Ridge, and was

particularly well equipped with knowledge regarding the Shenandoah

Valley, even down to the farmhouses.  He imparted with great

readiness what he knew of this, clearly pointing out its

configuration and indicating the strongest points for Confederate

defense, at the same time illustrating scientifically and forcibly

the peculiar disadvantages under which the Union army had hitherto

labored.



The section that received my closest attention has its northern limit

along the Potomac between McCoy's ferry at the eastern base of the

North Mountain, and Harper's Ferry at the western base of the Blue

Ridge.  The southern limit is south of Staunton, on the divide which

separates the waters flowing into the Potomac from those that run to

the James.  The western boundary is the eastern slope of the

Alleghany Mountains, the eastern, the Blue Ridge; these two distinct

mountain ranges trending about southwest inclose a stretch of quite

open, undulating country varying in width from the northern to the

southern extremity, and dotted at frequent intervals with patches of

heavy woods: At Martinsburg the valley is about sixty miles broad,

and on an east and west line drawn through Winchester about forty-

five, while at Strasburg it narrows down to about twenty-five.  Just

southeast of Strasburg, which is nearly midway between the eastern

and western walls of the valley, rises an abrupt range of mountains

called Massanutten, consisting of several ridges which extend

southward between the North and South Forks of the Shenandoah River

until, losing their identity, they merge into lower but broken ground

between New Market and Harrisonburg.  The Massanutten ranges, with

their spurs and hills, divide the Shenandoah Valley into two valleys,

the one next the Blue Ridge being called the Luray, while that next

the North Mountain retains the name of Shenandoah.



A broad macadamized road, leading south from Williamsport, Maryland,

to Lexington, Virginia, was built at an early day to connect the

interior of the latter State with the Chesapeake and Ohio canal, and

along this road are situated the principal towns and villages of the

Shenandoah Valley, with lateral lines of communication extending to

the mountain ranges on the east and west.  The roads running toward

the Blue Ridge are nearly all macadamized, and the principal ones

lead to the railroad system of eastern Virginia through Snicker's,

Ashby's Manassas, Chester, Thornton's Swift Run, Brown's and Rock-

fish gaps, tending to an ultimate centre at Richmond.  These gaps are

low and easy, offering little obstruction to the march of an army

coming from eastern Virginia, and thus the Union troops operating

west of the Blue Ridge were always subjected to the perils of a flank

attack; for the Confederates could readily be brought by rail to

Gordonsville and Charlottesville, from which points they could move

with such celerity through the Blue Ridge that, on more than one

occasion, the Shenandoah Valley had been the theatre of Confederate

success, due greatly to the advantage of possessing these interior

lines.



Nature had been very kind to the valley, making it rich and

productive to an exceptional degree, and though for three years

contending armies had been marching up and down it, the fertile soil

still yielded ample subsistence for Early's men, with a large surplus

for the army of Lee.  The ground had long been well cleared of

timber, and the rolling surface presented so few obstacles to the

movement of armies that they could march over the country in any

direction almost as well as on the roads, the creeks and rivers being

everywhere fordable, with little or no difficulty beyond that of

leveling the approaches.



I had opposing me an army largely composed of troops that had

operated in this region hitherto under "Stonewall" Jackson with

marked success, inflicting defeat on the Union forces almost every

time the two armies had come in contact. These men were now commanded

by a veteran officer of the Confederacy-General Jubal A. Early--whose

past services had so signalized his ability that General Lee

specially selected him to take charge of the Valley District, and,

notwithstanding the misfortunes that befell him later, clung to him

till the end, of the war.  The Confederate army at this date was

about twenty thousand strong, and consisted of Early's own corps,

with Generals Rodes, Ramseur, and Gordon commanding its divisions;

the infantry of Breckenridge from southwestern Virginia; three

battalions of artillery; and the cavalry brigades of Vaughn, Johnson,

McCausland, and Imboden.  This cavalry was a short time afterward

organized into a division under the command of General Lomax.



After discovering that my troops were massing in front of Harper's

Ferry, Early lost not a moment in concentrating his in the vicinity

of Martinsburg, in positions from which he could continue to obstruct

the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, and yet be enabled to retire up the

valley under conditions of safety when I should begin an offensive

campaign.



When I took command of the Army of the Shenandoah its infantry force

comprised the Sixth Corps, one division of the Nineteenth Corps, and

two divisions from West Virginia.  The Sixth Corps was commanded by

Major-General Horatio G. Wright; its three divisions by Brigadier-

Generals David A. Russell, Geo.  W. Getty, and James B. Ricketts.

The single division of the Nineteenth Corps had for its immediate

chief Brigadier-General William Dwight, the corps being commanded by

Brigadier-General Wm.  H. Emory.  The troops from West Virginia were

under Brigadier-General George Crook, with Colonels Joseph Thoburn

and Isaac H. Duval as division commanders, and though in all not more

than one fair-sized division, they had been designated, on account of

the department they belonged to, the Army of West Virginia.  General

Torbert's division, then arriving from the Cavalry Corps of the Army

of the Potomac, represented the mounted arm of the service, and in

the expectation that Averell would soon join me with his troopers, I

assigned General Torbert as chief of cavalry, and General Wesley

Merritt succeeded to the command of Torbert's division.



General Wright, the commander of the Sixth Corps, was an officer of

high standing in the Corps of Engineers, and had seen much active

service during the preceding three years.  He commanded the

Department of the Ohio throughout the very trying period of the

summer and fall of 1862, and while in that position he, with other

prominent officers, recommended my appointment as a brigadier-

general.  In 1863 he rendered valuable service at the battle of

Gettysburg, following which he was assigned to the Sixth Corps, and

commanded it at the capture of the Confederate works at Rappahannock

Station and in the operations at Mine Run.  He ranked me as a major-

general of volunteers by nearly a year in date of commission, but my

assignment by the President to the command of the army in the valley

met with Wright's approbation, and, so far as I have ever known, he

never questioned the propriety of the President's action.  The Sixth

Corps division commanders, Getty, Russell, and Ricketts, were all

educated soldiers, whose records, beginning with the Mexican War, had

already been illustrated in the war of the rebellion by distinguished

service in the Army of the Potomac.



General Emory was a veteran, having graduated at the Military Academy

in 1831, the year I was born.  In early life he had seen much service

in the Artillery, the Topographical Engineers, and the Cavalry, and

in the war of the rebellion had exhibited the most soldierly

characteristics at Port Hudson and on the Red River campaign.  At

this time he had but one division of the Nineteenth Corps present,

which division was well commanded by General Dwight, a volunteer

officer who had risen to the grade of brigadier-general through

constant hard work.  Crook was a classmate of mine--at least, we

entered the Military Academy the same year, though he graduated a

year ahead of me.  We had known each other as boys before we entered

the army, and later as men, and I placed implicit faith in his

experience and qualifications as a general.



The transfer of Torbert to the position of chief of cavalry left

Merritt, as I have already said, in command of the First Cavalry

Division.  He had been tried in the place before, and from the day he

was selected as one of a number of young men to be appointed general

officers, with the object of giving life to the Cavalry Corps, he

filled the measure of expectation.  Custer was one of these young men

too, and though as yet commanding a brigade under Merritt, his

gallant fight at Trevillian Station, as well as a dozen others during

the summer, indicated that he would be equal to the work that was to

fall to him when in a few weeks he should succeed Wilson.  But to go

on down the scale of rank, describing the officers who commanded in

the Army of the Shenandoah, would carry me beyond all limit, so I

refrain from the digression with regret that I cannot pay to each his

well-earned tribute.



The force that I could take with me into the field at this time

numbered about 26,000 men.  Within the limits of the geographical

division there was a much greater number of troops than this.

Baltimore, Washington, Harper's Ferry, Hagerstown, Frederick,

Cumberland, and a score of other points; besides the strong

detachments that it took to keep the Baltimore and Ohio railroad open

through the mountains of West Virginia, and escorts for my trains,

absorbed so many men that the column which could be made available

for field operations was small when compared with the showing on

paper.  Indeed, it was much less than it ought to have been, but for

me, in the face of the opposition made by different interests

involved, to detach troops from any of the points to which they had

been distributed before I took charge was next to impossible.



In a few days after my arrival preparations were completed, and I was

ready to make the first move for the possession of the Shenandoah

Valley.  For the next five weeks the operations on my part consisted

almost wholly of offensive and defensive manoeuvring for certain

advantages, the enemy confining himself meanwhile to measures

intended to counteract my designs.  Upon the advent of Torbert, Early

immediately grew suspicious, and fell back twelve miles south of

Martinsburg, to Bunker Hill and vicinity, where his right flank would

be less exposed, but from which position he could continue to

maintain the break in the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, and push

reconnoitring parties through Smithfield to Charlestown.  These

reconnoitring parties exhibited considerable boldness at times, but

since they had no purpose in view save to discover whether or not we

were moving, I did not contest any ground with them except about our

outposts.  Indeed, I desired that Early might remain at some point

well to the north till I was fully prepared to throw my army on his

right and rear and force a battle, and hence I abstained from

disturbing him by premature activity, for I thought that if I could

beat him at Winchester, or north of it, there would be far greater

chances of weighty results.  I therefore determined to bring my

troops, if it were at all possible to do so, into such a position

near that town as to oblige Early to fight.  The sequel proved,

however, that he was accurately informed of all my movements.  To

anticipate them, therefore, he began his retreat up the valley the

day that I moved out from Halltown, and (consequently was able to

place himself south of Winchester before I could get there.









CHAPTER XXIV.



MOVING ON GENERAL EARLY--GENERAL GRANT'S LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS--

DESTROYING THE RESOURCES OF THE VALLEY--REASON FOR THE DESTRUCTION--

WITHDRAWAL TO HALLTOWN--ALARM IN THE NORTH OVER THE RETROGRADE

MOVEMENT--RENEWING THE ADVANCE UP THE VALLEY--GENERAL ANDERSON'S

ATTEMPT TO RETURN TO PETERSBURG--STRENGTH OF THE ARMIES.



For a clear understanding of the operations which preceded the

victories that resulted in almost annihilating General Early's army

in the Shenandoah Valley, it is necessary to describe in considerable

detail the events that took place prior to the 19th of September.  My

army marched from Harper's Ferry on the l0th of August, 1864, General

Torbert with Merritt's division of cavalry moving in advance through

Berryville, going into position near White Post.  The Sixth Corps,

under General Wright, moved by way of Charlestown and Summit Point to

Clifton; General Emory, with Dwight's division of the Nineteenth

Corps, marched along the Berryville pike through Berryville to the

left of the position of the Sixth Corps at Clifton; General Crook's

command, moving on the Kabletown road, passed through Kabletown to

the vicinity of Berryville, and went into position on the left of

Dwight's division, while Colonel Lowell, with a detached force of two

small regiments of cavalry, marched to Summit Point; so that on the

night of August 10 my infantry occupied a line stretching from

Clifton to Berryville, with Merritt's cavalry at White Post and

Lowell's at Summit Point.  The enemy, as stated before, moved at the

same time from Bunker Hill and vicinity, and stretched his line from

where the Winchester and Potomac railroad crosses Opequon Creek to

the point at which the Berryville and Winchester pike crosses the

same stream, thus occupying the west bank to cover Winchester.



On the morning of the 11th the Sixth Corps was ordered to move across

the country toward the junction of the Berryville-Winchester pike and

the Opequon, and to take the crossing and hold it, Dwight's division

being directed to move through Berryville on the White Post road for

a mile, then file to the right by heads of regiments at deploying

distances, and carry the crossing of Opequon Creek at a ford about

three-fourths of a mile from the left of the Sixth Corps, while Crook

was instructed to move out on the White Post road, a mile and a half

beyond Berryville, then head to the right and secure the ford about a

mile to the left of Dwight; Torbert's orders were to push Merritt's

division up the Millwood pike toward Winchester, attack any force he

might run against, and ascertain the movements of the Confederate

army; and lastly, Lowell received instructions to close in from

Summit Point on the right of the Sixth Corps.



My object in securing the fords was to further my march on Winchester

from the southeast, since, from all the information gathered during

the l0th, I still thought Early could be brought to a stand at that

point; but in this I was mistaken, as Torbert's reconnoissance

proved, for on the morning of the 11th, when Merritt had driven the

Confederate cavalry, then covering the Millwood pike west of the

Opequon, off toward Kernstown, he found that their infantry and

artillery were retreating south, up the Valley pike.



As soon as this information was obtained Torbert moved quickly

through the toll-gate on the Front Royal and Winchester road to

Newtown, to strike the enemy's flank and harass him in his retreat,

Lowell following up through Winchester, on the Valley pike; Crook was

turned to the left and ordered to Stony Point, while Emory and

Wright, marching to the left also, were directed to take post on the

night of the 11th between the Millwood and Front Royal roads, within

supporting distance of Crook.  Merritt meeting some of the enemy's

cavalry at the tollgate, drove it in the direction of Newtown till it

got inside the line of Gordon's division of infantry, which had been

thrown out and posted behind barricades to cover the flank of the

main force in its retreat.  A portion of Merritt's cavalry attacked

this infantry and drove in its skirmish-line, and though not able to

dislodge Gordon, Merritt held the ground gained till night-fall, when

the Confederate infantry moved off under cover of darkness to Hupp's

Hill, between Strasburg and Cedar Creek



The next morning Crook marched from Stony Point to Cedar Creek, Emory

followed with Dwight, and the cavalry moved to the same point by way

of Newtown and the Valley pike, the Sixth Corps following the

cavalry.  That night Crook was in position at Cedar Creek, on the

left of the Valley pike, Emory on the right of the pike, the Sixth

Corps on the right of Emory, and the cavalry on the flanks.  In the

afternoon a heavy skirmish-line had been thrown forward to the

heights on the south side of Cedar Creek, and a brisk affair with the

enemy's pickets took place, the Confederates occupying with their

main force the heights north of Strasburg.  On the morning of the

13th my cavalry went out to reconnoitre toward Strasburg, on the

middle road, about two and a half miles west of the Valley pike, and

discovered that Early's infantry was at Fisher's Hill, where he had

thrown up behind Tumbling Run earthworks extending clear across the

narrow valley between the Massanutten and North mountains.  On the

left of these works he had Vaughan's, McCausland's, and Johnson's

brigades of cavalry under General Lomax, who at this time relieved

General Ramseur from the command of the Confederate mounted forces.



Within the past day or two I had received information that a column

of the enemy was moving up from Culpeper Court House and approaching

Front Royal through Chester Gap, and although the intelligence was

unconfirmed, it caused me much solicitude; for there was strong

probability that such a movement would be made, and any considerable

force advancing through Front Royal toward Winchester could fall upon

my rear and destroy my communication with Harper's Ferry, or, moving

along the base of Massanutten Mountain, could attack my flank in

conjunction with the force at Fisher's Hill without a possibility of

my preventing it.



Neither Wilson's cavalry nor Grower's infantry had yet joined me, and

the necessities, already explained, which obliged me to hold with

string garrisons Winchester and other points heretofore mentioned.

had so depleted my line of battle strength that I knew the enemy

would outnumber me when Anderson's corps should arrive in the valley.

I deemed it advisable, therefore, to act with extreme caution, so,

with the exception of a cavalry reconnoissance on the 13th, I

remained on the defensive, quietly awaiting developments.  In the

evening of that day the enemy's skirmishers withdrew to Tumbling Run,

his main force remaining inactive behind the intrenchments at

Fisher's Hill waiting for the arrival of Anderson.



The rumors in regard to the force advancing from Culpeper kept

increasing every hour, so on the morning of the 14th I concluded to

send a brigade of cavalry to Front Royal to ascertain definitely what

was up.  At the same time I crossed the Sixth Corps to the south side


of Cedar Creek, and occupied the heights near Strasburg.  That day I

received from the hands of Colonel Chipman, of the Adjutant-General's

Department, the following despatch, to deliver which he had ridden in

great haste from Washington through Snicker's Gap, escorted by a

regiment of cavalry:



"CITY POINT, August 12, 1864--9 A. M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK



"Inform General Sheridan that it is now certain two (2) divisions of

infantry have gone to Early, and some cavalry and twenty (20) pieces

of artillery.  This movement commenced last Saturday night.  He must

be cautious, and act now on the defensive until movements here force

them to detach to send this way.  Early's force, with this increase,

cannot exceed forty thousand men, but this is too much for General

Sheridan to attack.  Send General Sheridan the remaining brigade of

the Nineteenth Corps.



"I have ordered to Washington all the one-hundred-day men.  Their

time will soon be out, but for the present they will do to serve in

the defenses.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."





The despatch explained the movement from Culpeper, and on the morning

of the 15th Merritt's two remaining brigades were sent to Front Royal

to oppose Anderson, and the Sixth Corps withdrawn to the north side

of Cedar Creek, where it would be in a position enabling me either to

confront Anderson or to act defensively, as desired by General Grant.



To meet the requirements of his instructions I examined the map of

the valley for a defensive line--a position where a smaller number of

troops could hold a larger number--for this information led me to

suppose that Early's force would greatly exceed mine when Anderson's

two divisions of infantry and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry had joined him.

I could see but one such position, and that was at Halltown, in front

of Harper's Ferry.  Subsequent experience convinced me that there was

no other really defensive line in the Shenandoah Valley, for at

almost any other point the open country and its peculiar topography

invites rather than forbids flanking operations.



This retrograde movement would also enable me to strengthen my

command by Grower's division of the Nineteenth Corps and Wilson's

cavalry, both of which divisions were marching from Washington by way

of Snicker's Gap.



After fully considering the matter, I determined to move back to

Halltown, carrying out, as I retired, my instructions to destroy all

the forage and subsistence the country afforded.  So Emory was

ordered to retire to Winchester on the night of the 15th, and Wright

and Crook to follow through Winchester to Clifton the next night.



For the cavalry, in this move to the rear, I gave the following

instructions:



"....In pushing up the Shenandoah Valley, as it is expected you will

have to go first or last, it is desirable that nothing should be left

to invite the enemy to return.  Take all provisions, forage, and

stock wanted for the use of your command.  Such as cannot be

consumed, destroy.  It is not desirable that buildings should be

destroyed--they should, rather, be protected; but the people should

be informed that so long as an army can subsist among them,

recurrences of these raids must be expected, and we are determined to

stop them at all hazards...." [Grant's letter of instructions.]





"HEADQUARTERS MIDDLE MILITARY DIVISION,

"Cedar Creek, Va., August 16, 1864.



"GENERAL: In compliance with instructions of the Lieutenant-General

commanding, you will make the necessary arrangements and give the

necessary orders for the destruction of the wheat and hay south of a

line from Millwood to Winchester and Petticoat Gap.  You will seize

all mules, horses, and cattle that may be useful to our army.  Loyal

citizens can bring in their claims against the Government for this

necessary destruction.  No houses will be burned, and officers in

charge of this delicate but necessary duty must inform the people

that the object is to make this valley untenable for the raiding

parties of the rebel army.



"Very respectfully,



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General Commanding.



"BRIGADIER-GENERAL A. T. A. TORBERT,

"Chief of Cavalry, Middle Military Division."





During his visit to General Hunter at the Monocacy, General Grant had

not only decided to retain in the Shenandoah Valley a large force

sufficient to defeat Early's army or drive it back to Lee, but he had

furthermore determined to make that sections by the destruction of

its supplies, untenable for continued occupancy by the Confederates.

This would cut off one of Lee's main-stays in the way of subsistence,

and at the same time diminish the number of recruits and conscripts

he received; the valley district while under his control not only

supplying Lee with an abundance of food, but also furnishing him many

men for his regular and irregular forces.  Grant's instructions to

destroy the valley began with the letter of August 5 to Hunter, which

was turned over to me, and this was followed at intervals by more

specific directions, all showing the earnestness of his purpose.





"CITY POINT, Va., Aug. 16--3:30 P. M., 1864.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Winchester, Va.:



"If you can possibly spare a division of cavalry, send them through

Loudoun County to destroy and carry off the crops, animals, negroes,

and all men under fifty years of age capable of bearing arms.  In

this way you will get many of Mosby's men.  All male citizens under

fifty can fairly be held as prisoners of war, not as citizen

prisoners.  If not already soldiers, they will be made so the moment

the rebel army gets hold of them.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."







"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"CITY POINT, Aug. 21, 1864.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Charlestown, Va.:



"In stripping Loudoun County of supplies, etc., impress from all

loyal persons so that they may receive pay for what is taken from

them.  I am informed by the Assistant Secretary of War that Loudoun

County has a large population of Quakers, who are all favorably

disposed to the Union.  These people may be exempted from arrest.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."







"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES

"CITY POINT, Va., Aug. 26,2:30 P. M. 1864.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Halltown, Va.:



"Telegraphed you that I had good reason for believing that Fitz Lee

had been ordered back here.  I now think it likely that all troops

will be ordered back from the valley except what they believe to be

the minimum number to detain you.  My reason for supposing this is

based upon the fact that yielding up the Weldon road seems to be a

blow to the enemy he cannot stand.  I think I do not overstate the

loss of the enemy in the last two weeks at 10,000 killed and wounded.

We have lost heavily, mostly in captured when the enemy gained

temporary advantages.  Watch closely, and if you find this theory

correct, push with all vigor.  Give the enemy no rest, and if it is

possible to follow to the Virginia Central road, follow that far.  Do

all the damage to railroads and crops you can.  Carry off stock of

all descriptions and negroes, so as to prevent further planting.  If

the war is to last another year we want the Shenandoah Valley to

remain a barren waste.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General.







"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"CITY POINT, Va., Sept. 4,--10 A. M.--1864.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Charlestown, Va.:



"In cleaning out the arms-bearing community of Loudoun County and the

subsistence for armies, exercise your own judgment as to who should

be exempt from arrest, and as to who should receive pay for their

stock, grain, etc.  It is our interest that that county should not be

capable of subsisting a hostile army, and at the same time we want to

inflict as little hardship upon Union men as possible.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."







"CITY POINT, Va., Nov. 9, 1864.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN, Cedar Creek, Va.:



"Do you not think it advisable to notify all citizens living east of

the Blue Ridge to move out north of the Potomac all their stock,

grain, and provisions of every description?  There is no doubt about

the necessity of clearing out that country so that it will not

support Mosby's gang.  And the question is whether it is not better

that the people should save what they can.  So long as the war lasts

they must be prevented from raising another crop, both there and as

high up the valley as we can control.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."







He had rightly concluded that it was time to bring the war home to a

people engaged in raising crops from a prolific soil to feed the

country's enemies, and devoting to the Confederacy its best youth.  I

endorsed the programme in all its parts, for the stores of meat and

grain that the valley provided, and the men it furnished for Lee's

depleted regiments, were the strongest auxiliaries he possessed in

the whole insurgent section.  In war a territory like this is a

factor of great importance, and whichever adversary controls it

permanently reaps all the advantages of its prosperity.  Hence, as I

have said, I endorsed Grant's programme, for I do not hold war to

mean simply that lines of men shall engage each other in battle, and

material interests be ignored.  This is but a duel, in which one

combatant seeks the other's life; war means much more, and is far

worse than this.  Those who rest at home in peace and plenty see but

little of the horrors attending such a duel, and even grow

indifferent to them as the struggle goes on, contenting themselves

with encouraging all who are able-bodied to enlist in the cause, to

fill up the shattered ranks as death thins them.  It is another

matter, however, when deprivation and suffering are brought to their

own doors.  Then the case appears much graver, for the loss of

property weighs heavy with the most of mankind; heavier often, than

the sacrifices made on the field of battle.  Death is popularly

considered the maximum of punishment in war, but it is not; reduction

to poverty brings prayers for peace more surely and more quickly than

does the destruction of human life, as the selfishness of man has

demonstrated in more than one great conflict.



In the afternoon of the 16th I started back to Winchester, whence I

could better supervise our regressive march.  As I was passing

through Newtown, I heard cannonading from the direction of Front

Royal, and on reaching Winchester, Merritt's couriers brought me word

that he had been attacked at the crossing of the Shenandoah by

Kershaw's division of Anderson's corps and two brigades of Fitzhugh

Lee's cavalry, but that the attack had been handsomely repulsed, with

a capture of two battle-flags and three hundred prisoners.  This was

an absolute confirmation of the despatch from Grant; and I was now

more than satisfied with the wisdom of my withdrawal.



At daylight of the 17th Emory moved from Winchester to Berryville,

and the same morning Crook and Wright reached Winchester, having

started from Cedar Creek the day before.  From Winchester, Crook and

Wright resumed their march toward Clifton, Wright, who had the rear

guard, getting that day as far as the Berryville crossing of the

Opequon, where he was ordered to remain, while Crook went ahead till

he reached the vicinity of Berryville.  On the afternoon of the 17th

Lowell with his two regiments of troopers came into Winchester, where

he was joined by Wilson's mounted division, which had come by a rapid

march from Snicker's ferry.  In the mean time Merritt, after his

handsome engagement with Kershaw near Front Royal, had been ordered

back to the neighborhood of White Post, so that my cavalry outposts

now extended from this last point around to the west of Winchester.



During all these operations the enemy had a signal-station on Three

Top Mountain, almost overhanging Strasburg, from which every movement

made by our troops could be plainly seen; therefore, early on the

morning of the 17th he became aware of the fact that we were retiring

down the valley, and at once made after us, and about sundown drove

Torbert out of Winchester, he having been left there-with Wilson and

Lowell, and the Jersey brigade of the Sixth Corps, to develop the

character of the enemy's pursuit.  After a severe skirmish Wilson and

Lowell fell back to Summit Point, and the Jersey brigade joined its

corps at the crossing of the Opequon.  This affair demonstrated that

Early's whole army had followed us from Fisher's Hill, in concert

with Anderson and Fitzhugh Lee from Front Royal, and the two columns

joined near Winchester the morning of the 18th.



That day I moved the Sixth Corps by way of Clifton to Flowing Spring,

two and a half miles west of Charlestown, on the Smithfield pike; and

Emory, with Dwight's and Grower's divisions (Grower's having joined

that morning from Washington), to a position about the same distance

south of Charlestown, on the Berryville pike.  Following these

movements, Merritt fell back to Berryville, covering the Berryville

pike crossing of the Opequon, and Wilson was stationed at Summit

Point, whence he held a line along the Opequon as far north as the

bridge at Smithfield.  Crook continued to hold on near Clifton until

the next day, and was then moved into place on the left of Emory.



This line was practically maintained till the 21st, when the enemy,

throwing a heavy force across the Opequon by the bridge at

Smithfield, drove in my cavalry pickets to Summit Point, and followed

up with a rapid advance against the position of the Sixth Corps near

Flowing Spring.  A sharp and obstinate skirmish with a heavy picket-

line of the Sixth Corps grew out of this manoeuvre, and resulted very

much in our favor, but the quick withdrawal of the Confederates left

no opportunity for a general engagement.  It seems that General Early

thought I had taken position near Summit Point, and that by moving

rapidly around through Smithfield he could fall upon my rear in

concert with an attack in front by Anderson, but the warm reception

given him disclosed his error, for he soon discovered that my line

lay in front of Charlestown instead of where he supposed.



In the manoeuvre Merritt had been attacked in front of Berryville and

Wilson at Summit Point, the former by cavalry and the latter by

Anderson's infantry.  The exposed positions of Merritt and Wilson

necessitated their withdrawal if I was to continue to act on the

defensive; so, after the army had moved back to Halltown the

preceding night, without loss or inconvenience, I called them in and

posted them on the right of the infantry.



My retrograde move from Strasburg to Halltown caused considerable

alarm in the North, as the public was ignorant of the reasons for it;

and in the excited state of mind then prevailing, it was generally

expected that the reinforced Confederate army would again cross the

Potomac, ravage Maryland and Pennsylvania, and possibly capture

Washington.  Mutterings of dissatisfaction reached me from many

sources, and loud calls were made for my removal, but I felt

confident that my course would be justified when the true situation

was understood, for I knew that I was complying with my instructions.

Therefore I paid small heed to the adverse criticisms pouring down

from the North almost every day, being fully convinced that the best

course was to bide my time, and wait till I could get the enemy into

a position from which he could not escape without such serious

misfortune as to have some bearing on the general result of the war.

Indeed, at this time I was hoping that my adversary would renew the

boldness he had exhibited the early part of the month, and strike for

the north side of the Potomac, and wrote to General Grant on the 20th

of August that I had purposely left everything in that direction open

to the enemy.



On the 22d the Confederates moved to Charlestown and pushed well up

to my position at Halltown.  Here for the next three days they

skirmished with my videttes and infantry pickets, Emory and Cook

receiving the main attention; but finding that they could make no

impression, and judging it to be an auspicious time to intensify the

scare in the North, on the 25th of August Early despatched Fitzhugh

Lee's cavalry to Williamsport, and moved all the rest of his army but

Anderson's infantry and McCausland's cavalry to Kerneysville.  This

same day there was sharp picket firing along the whole front of my

infantry line, arising, as afterward ascertained, from a heavy

demonstration by Anderson.  During this firing I sent Torbert, with

Merritt's and Wilson's divisions, to Kerrteysville, whence he was to

proceed toward Leetown and learn what had become of Fitz. Lee.



About a mile from Leetown Torbert met a small force of Confederate

cavalry, and soon after encountering it, stumbled on Breckenridge's

corps of infantry on the march, apparently heading for Shepherdstown.

The surprise was mutual, for Torbert expected to meet only the

enemy's cavalry, while the Confederate infantry column was

anticipating an unobstructed march to the Potomac.  Torbert attacked

with such vigor as at first to double up the head of Breckenridge's

corps and throw it into confusion, but when the Confederates realized

that they were confronted only by cavalry, Early brought up the whole

of the four infantry divisions engaged in his manoeuvre, and in a

sharp attack pushed Torbert rapidly back.



All the advantages which Torbert had gained by surprising the enemy

were nullified by this counter-attack, and he was obliged to withdraw

Wilson's division toward my right, to the neighborhood of Duffield's

Station, Merritt drawing back to the same point by way of the

Shepherdstown ford.  Custer's brigade becoming isolated after the

fight while assisting the rear guard, was also obliged to retire,

which it did to Shepherdstown and there halted, picketing the river

to Antietam ford.



When Torbert reported to me the nature of his encounter, and that a

part of Early's infantry was marching to the north, while Fitzhugh

Lee's cavalry had gone toward Martinsburg, I thought that the

Confederate general meditated crossing his cavalry into Maryland, so

I sent Wilson by way of Harper's Ferry to watch his movements from

Boonesboro', and at the same time directed Averell, who had reported

from West Virginia some days before, to take post at Williamsport and

hold the crossing there until he was driven away.  I also thought it

possible that Early might cross the Potomac with his whole army, but

the doubts of a movement like this outweighed the probabilities

favoring it.  Nevertheless, to meet such a contingency I arranged to

throw my army on his rear should the occasion arise, and deeming my

position at Halltown the most advantageous in which to await

developments, my infantry was retained there.



If General Early had ever intended to cross the Potomac, Torbert's

discovery of his manoeuvre put an end to his scheme of invasion, for

he well knew that and success he might derive from such a course

would depend on his moving with celerity, and keeping me in ignorance

of his march till it should be well under way; so he settled all the

present uncertainties by retiring with all his troops about

Kerneysville to his old position at Bunker Hill behind the Opequon,

and on the night of the 26th silently withdrew Anderson and

McCausland from my front at Halltown to Stephenson's depot.



By the 27th all of Early's infantry was in position at Brucetown and

Bunker Hill, his cavalry holding the outposts of Leetown and

Smithfield, and on that day Merritt's division attacked the enemy's

horse at Leetown, and pressed it back through Smithfield to the west

side of the Opequon.  This reconnoissance determined definitely that

Early had abandoned the projected movement into Maryland, if he ever

seriously contemplated it; and I marched my infantry out from

Halltown to the front of Charlestown, with the intention of occupying

a line between Clifton and Berryville the moment matters should so

shape themselves that I could do so with advantage.  The night of the

28th Wilson joined me near Charlestown from his points of observation

in Maryland, and the next day Averell crossed the Potomac at

Williamsport and advanced to Martinsburg.



Merritt's possession of Smithfield bridge made Early somewhat uneasy,

since it afforded opportunity for interposing a column between his

right and left flanks, so he concluded to retake the crossing, and,

to this end, on the 29th advanced two divisions of infantry.  A

severe fight followed, and Merritt was forced to retire, being driven

through the village toward Charlestown with considerable loss.  As

Merritt was nearing my infantry line, I ordered.  Ricketts's division

of the Sixth Corps to his relief, and this in a few minutes turned

the tide, the Smithfield crossing of the Opequon being regained, and

afterward held by Lowell's brigade, supported by Ricketts.  The next

morning I moved Torbert, with Wilson and Merritt, to Berryville, and

succeeding their occupation of that point there occurred along my

whole line a lull, which lasted until the 3d of September, being

undisturbed except by a combat near Bunker Hill between Averell's

cavalry and a part of McCausland's, supported by Rodes's division of

infantry, in which affair the Confederates were defeated with the

loss of about fifty prisoners and considerable property in the shape

of wagons and beef-cattle.



Meanwhile Torbert's movement to Berryville had alarmed Early, and as

a counter move on the 2d of September he marched with the bulk of his

army to Summit Point, but while reconnoitring in that region on the

3d he learned of the havoc that Averell was creating in his rear, and

this compelled him to recross to the west side of the Opequon and

mass his troops in the vicinity of Stephenson's depot, whence he

could extend down to Bunker Hill, continue to threaten the Baltimore

and Ohio railroad, and at the same time cover Winchester.



The same day I was moving my infantry to take up the Clifton-

Berryville line, and that afternoon Wright went into position at

Clifton, Crook occupied Berryville, and Emory's corps came in between

them, forming almost a continuous line.  Torbert had moved to White

Post meanwhile, with directions to reconnoitre as far south as the

Front Royal Pike.



My infantry had just got fairly into this position about an hour

before sunset, when along Crook's front a combat took place that at

the time caused me to believe it was Early's purpose to throw a

column between Crook and Torbert, with the intention of isolating the

latter; but the fight really arose from the attempt of General

Anderson to return to Petersburg with Kershaw's division in response

to loud calls from General Lee.  Anderson started south on the 3d of

September, and possibly this explains Early's reconnoissance that day

to Summit Point as a covering movement, but his rapid withdrawal left

him in ignorance of my advance, and Anderson marched on heedlessly

toward Berryville, expecting to cross the Blue Ridge through Ashby's

Gap.  At Berryville however, he blundered into Crook's lines about

sunset, and a bitter little fight ensued, in which the Confederates

got so much the worst of it that they withdrew toward Winchester.

When General Early received word of this encounter he hurried to

Anderson's assistance with three divisions, but soon perceiving what

was hitherto unknown to him, that my whole army was on a new line, he

decided, after some slight skirmishing, that Anderson must remain at

Winchester until a favorable opportunity offered for him to rejoin

Lee by another route.



Succeeding the discomfiture of Anderson, some minor operations took

place on the part of, Averell on the right and McIntosh's brigade of

Wilson's division on the left, but from that time until the 19th of

September no engagement of much importance occurred.  The line from

Clifton to Berryville was occupied by the Sixth Corps and Grower's

and Dwight's divisions of the Nineteenth, Crook being transferred to

Summit Point, whence I could use him to protect my right flank and my

communication with Harper's Ferry, while the cavalry threatened the

enemy's right flank and line of retreat up the valley.



The difference of strength between the two armies at this date was

considerably in my favor, but the conditions attending my situation

in a hostile region necessitated so much detached service to protect

trains, and to secure Maryland and Pennsylvania from raids, that my

excess in numbers was almost canceled by these incidental demands

that could not be avoided, and although I knew that I was strong,

yet, in consequence of the injunctions of General Grant, I deemed it

necessary to be very cautious; and the fact that the Presidential

election was impending made me doubly so, the authorities at

Washington having impressed upon me that the defeat of my army might

be followed by the overthrow of the party in power, which event, it

was believed, would at least retard the progress of the war, if,

indeed, it did not lead to the complete abandonment of all coercive

measures.  Under circumstances such as these I could not afford to

risk a disaster, to say nothing of the intense disinclination every

soldier has for such results; so, notwithstanding my superior

strength, I determined to take all the time necessary to equip myself

with the fullest information, and then seize an opportunity under

such conditions that I could not well fail of success.











End 
