



Personal Memoirs of P.H.Sheridan V2 of 2


by Philip Henry Sheridan









VOLUME II.









CHAPTER I.



ORGANIZING SCOUTS--MISS REBECCA WRIGHT--IMPORTANT INFORMATION--DECIDE

TO MOVE ON NEWTOWN--MEETING GENERAL GRANT--ORGANIZATION OF THE UNION

ARMY--OPENING OF THE BATTLE OF THE OPEQUON--DEATH OF GENERAL RUSSELL-

-A TURNING MOVEMENT--A SUCCESSFUL CAVALRY CHARGE--VICTORY--THREE

LOYAL GIRLS--APPOINTED A BRIGADIER-GENERAL IN THE REGULAR ARMY--

REMARKS ON THE BATTLE.



While occupying the ground between Clifton and Berryville, referred

to in the last chapter of the preceding volume, I felt the need of an

efficient body of scouts to collect information regarding the enemy,

for the defective intelligence-establishment with which I started out

from Harper's Ferry early in August had not proved satisfactory.  I

therefore began to organize my scouts on a system which I hoped would

give better results than bad the method hitherto pursued in the

department, which was to employ on this service doubtful citizens and

Confederate deserters.  If these should turn out untrustworthy, the

mischief they might do us gave me grave apprehension, and I finally

concluded that those of our own soldiers who should volunteer for the

delicate and hazardous duty would be the most valuable material, and

decided that they should have a battalion organization and be

commanded by an officer, Major H. K. Young, of the First Rhode Island

Infantry.  These men were disguised in Confederate uniforms whenever

necessary, were paid from the Secret-Service Fund in proportion to

the value of the intelligence they furnished, which often stood us in

good stead in checking the forays of Gilmore, Mosby, and other

irregulars.  Beneficial results came from the plan in many other ways

too, and particularly so when in a few days two of my scouts put me

in the way of getting news conveyed from Winchester.  They had

learned that just outside of my lines, near Millwood, there was

living an old colored man, who had a permit from the Confederate

commander to go into Winchester and return three times a week, for

the purpose of selling vegetables to the inhabitants.  The scouts had

sounded this man, and, finding him both loyal and shrewd, suggested

that he might be made useful to us within the enemy's lines; and the

proposal struck me as feasible, provided there could be found in

Winchester some reliable person who would be willing to co-operate

and correspond with me.  I asked General Crook, who was acquainted

with many of the Union people of Winchester, if he knew of such a

person, and he recommended a Miss Rebecca Wright, a young lady whom

he had met there before the battle of Kernstown, who, he said, was a

member of the Society of Friends and the teacher of a small private

school.  He knew she was faithful and loyal to the Government, and

thought she might be willing to render us assistance, but he could

not be certain of this, for on account of her well known loyalty she

was under constant surveillance.  I hesitated at first, but finally

deciding to try it, despatched the two scouts to the old negro's

cabin, and they brought him to my headquarters late that night.  I

was soon convinced of the negro's fidelity, and asking him if he was

acquainted with Miss Rebecca Wright, of Winchester, he replied that

he knew her well.  There upon I told him what I wished to do, and

after a little persuasion he agreed to carry a letter to her on his

next marketing trip.  My message was prepared by writing it on tissue

paper, which was then compressed into a small pellet, and protected

by wrapping it in tin-foil so that it could be safely carried in the

man's mouth.  The probability, of his being searched when he came to

the Confederate picket-line was not remote, and in such event he was

to swallow the pellet.  The letter appealed to Miss Wright's loyalty

and patriotism, and requested her to furnish me with information

regarding the strength and condition of Early's army.  The night

before the negro started one of the scouts placed the odd-looking

communication in his hands, with renewed injunctions as to secrecy

and promptitude.  Early the next morning it was delivered to Miss

Wright, with an intimation that a letter of importance was enclosed

in the tin-foil, the negro telling her at the same time that she

might expect him to call for a message in reply before his return

home.  At first Miss Wright began to open the pellet nervously, but

when told to be careful, and to preserve the foil as a wrapping for

her answer, she proceeded slowly and carefully, and when the note

appeared intact the messenger retired, remarking again that in the

evening he would come for an answer.



On reading my communication Miss Wright was much startled by the

perils it involved, and hesitatingly consulted her mother, but her

devoted loyalty soon silenced every other consideration, and the

brave girl resolved to comply with my request, notwithstanding it

might jeopardize her life.  The evening before a convalescent

Confederate officer had visited her mother's house, and in

conversation about the war had disclosed the fact that Kershaw's

division of infantry and Cutshaw's battalion of artillery had started

to rejoin General Lee.  At the time Miss Wright heard this she

attached little if any importance to it, but now she perceived the

value of the intelligence, and, as her first venture, determined to

send it to me at once, which she did with a promise that in the

future she would with great pleasure continue to transmit information

by the negro messenger.







"SEPTEMBER 15, 1864.



"I learn from Major-General Crook that you are a loyal lady, and

still love the old flag.  Can you inform me of the position of

Early's forces, the number of divisions in his army, and the strength

of any or all of them, and his probable or reported intentions?  Have

any more troops arrived from Richmond, or are any more coming, or

reported to be coming?



"You can trust the bearer."



"I am, very respectfully, your most obedient servant,



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General Commanding.







"SEPTEMBER 16, 1864.



"I have no communication whatever with the rebels, but will tell you

what I know.  The division of General Kershaw, and Cutshaw's

artillery, twelve guns and men, General Anderson commanding, have

been sent away, and no more are expected, as they cannot be spared

from Richmond.  I do not know how the troops are situated, but the

force is much smaller than represented.  I will take pleasure

hereafter in learning all I can of their strength and position, and

the bearer may call again.



"Very respectfully yours,

............







Miss Wright's answer proved of more value to me than she anticipated,

for it not only quieted the conflicting reports concerning Anderson's

corps, but was most important in showing positively that Kershaw was

gone, and this circumstance led, three days later, to the battle of

the Opequon, or Winchester as it has been unofficially called.  Word

to the effect that some of Early's troops were under orders to return

to Petersburg, and would start back at the first favorable

opportunity, had been communicated to me already from many sources,

but we had not been able to ascertain the date for their departure.

Now that they had actually started, I decided to wait before offering

battle until Kershaw had gone so far as to preclude his return,

feeling confident that my prudence would be justified by the improved

chances of victory; and then, besides, Mr. Stanton kept reminding me

that positive success was necessary to counteract the political

dissatisfaction existing in some of the Northern States.  This course

was advised and approved by General Grant, but even with his powerful

backing it was difficult to resist the persistent pressure of those

whose judgment, warped by their interests in the Baltimore and Ohio

railroad, was often confused and misled by stories of scouts (sent

out from Washington), averring that Kershaw and Fitzhugh Lee had

returned to Petersburg, Breckenridge to southwestern Virginia, and at

one time even maintaining that Early's whole army was east of the

Blue Ridge, and its commander himself at Gordonsville.



During the inactivity prevailing in my army for the ten days

preceding Miss Wright's communication the infantry was quiet, with

the exception of Getty's division, which made a reconnoissance to the

Opequon, and developed a heavy force of the enemy at Edwards's

Corners.  The cavalry, however, was employed a good deal in this

interval skirmishing heavily at times to maintain a space about six

miles in width between the hostile lines, for I wished to control

this ground so that when I was released from the instructions of

August 12, I could move my men into position for attack without the

knowledge of Early.  The most noteworthy of these mounted encounters

was that of McIntosh's brigade, which captured the Eighth South

Carolina at Abraham's Creek September 13.



It was the evening of the 16th of September that I received from Miss

Wright the positive information that Kershaw was in march toward

Front Royal on his way by Chester Gap to Richmond.  Concluding that

this was my opportunity, I at once resolved to throw my whole force

into Newtown the next day, but a despatch from General Grant

directing me to meet him at Charlestown, whither he was coming to

consult with me, caused me to defer action until after I should see

him.  In our resulting interview at Charlestown, I went over the

situation very thoroughly, and pointed out with so much confidence

the chances of a complete victory should I throw my army across the

Valley pike near Newtown that he fell in with the plan at once,

authorized me to resume the offensive, and to attack Early as soon as

I deemed it most propitious to do so; and although before leaving

City Point he had outlined certain operations for my army, yet he

neither discussed nor disclosed his plans, my knowledge of the

situation striking him as being so much more accurate than his own.





[Extract from Grant's Memoirs," page 328.]



"....Before starting I had drawn up a plan of campaign for Sheridan,

which I had brought with me; but seeing that he was so clear and so

positive in his views, and so confident of success, I said nothing

about this, and did not take it out of my pocket...."







The interview over, I returned to my army to arrange for its movement

toward Newtown, but while busy with these preparations, a report came

to me from General Averell which showed that Early was moving with

two divisions of infantry toward Martinsburg.  This considerably

altered the state of affairs, and I now decided to change my plan and

attack at once the two divisions remaining about Winchester and

Stephenson's depot, and later, the two sent to Martinsburg; the

disjointed state of the enemy giving me an opportunity to take him in

detail, unless the Martinsburg column should be returned by forced

marches.



While General Early was in the telegraph office at Martinsburg on the

morning of the 18th, he learned of Grant's visit to me; and

anticipating activity by reason of this circumstance, he promptly

proceeded to withdraw so as to get the two divisions within

supporting distance of Ramseur's, which lay across the Berryville

pike about two miles east of Winchester, between Abraham's Creek and

Red Bud Run, so by the night of the 18th Wharton's division, under

Breckenridge, was at Stephenson's depot, Rodes near there, and

Gordon's at Bunker Hill.  At daylight of the 19th these positions of

the Confederate infantry still obtained, with the cavalry of Lomax,

Jackson, and Johnson on the right of Ramseur, while to the left and

rear of the enemy;s general line was Fitzhugh Lee, covering from

Stephenson's depot west across the Valley pike to Applepie Ridge.



My army moved at 3 o'clock that morning.  The plan was for Torbert to

advance with Merritt's division of cavalry from Summit Point, carry

the crossings of the Opequon at Stevens's and Lock's fords, and form

a junction near Stephenson's depot, with Averell, who was to move

south from Darksville by the Valley pike.  Meanwhile, Wilson was to

strike up the Berryville pike, carry the Berryville crossing of the

Opequon, charge through the gorge or canyon on the road west of the

stream, and occupy the open ground at the head of this defile.

Wilson's attack was to be supported by the Sixth and Nineteenth

corps, which were ordered to the Berryville crossing, and as the

cavalry gained the open ground beyond the gorge, the two infantry

corps, under command of General Wright, were expected to press on

after and occupy Wilson's ground, who was then to shift to the south

bank of Abraham's Creek and cover my left; Crook's two divisions,

having to march from Summit Point, were to follow the Sixth and

Nineteenth corps to the Opcquon, and should they arrive before the

action began, they were to be held in reserve till the proper moment

came, and then, as a turning-column, be thrown over toward the Valley

pike, south of Winchester.



McIntosh's brigade of Wilson's division drove the enemy's pickets

away from the Berryville crossing at dawn, and Wilson following

rapidly through the gorge with the rest of the division, debouched

from its western extremity with such suddenness as to capture a small

earthwork in front of General Ramseur's main line; and not-

withstanding the Confederate infantry, on recovering from its

astonishment, tried hard to dislodge them, Wilson's troopers

obstinately held the work till the Sixth Corps came up.  I followed

Wilson to select the ground on which to form the infantry.  The Sixth

Corps began to arrive about 8 o'clock, and taking up the line Wilson

had been holding, just beyond the head of the narrow ravine, the

cavalry was transferred to the south side of Abraham's Creek.



The Confederate line lay along some elevated ground about two miles

east of Winchester, and extended from Abraham's Creek north across

the Berryville pike, the left being hidden in the heavy timber on Red

Bud Run.  Between this line and mine, especially on my right, clumps

of woods and patches of underbrush occurred here and there, but the

undulating ground consisted mainly of open fields, many of which were

covered with standing corn that had already ripened.



Much time was lost in getting all of the Sixth and Nineteenth corps

through the narrow defile, Grover's division being greatly delayed

there by a train of ammunition wagons, and it was not until late in

the forenoon that the troops intended for the attack could be got

into line ready to advance.  General Early was not slow to avail

himself of the advantages thus offered him, and my chances of

striking him in detail were growing less every moment, for Gordon and

Rodes were hurrying their divisions from Stephenson's depot--across-

country on a line that would place Gordon in the woods south of Red

Bud Run, and bring Rodes into the interval between Gordon and

Ramseur.



When the two corps had all got through the canyon they were formed

with Getty's division of the Sixth to the left of the Berryville

pike, Rickett's division to the right of the pike, and Russell's

division in reserve in rear of the other two.  Grover's division of

the Nineteenth Corps came next on the right of Rickett's, with Dwight

to its rear in reserve, while Crook was to begin massing near the

Opequon crossing about the time Wright and Emory were ready to

attack.



Just before noon the line of Getty, Ricketts, and Grover moved

forward, and as we advanced, the Confederates, covered by some heavy

woods on their right, slight underbrush and corn-fields along their

Centre, and a large body of timber on their left along the Red Bud,

opened fire from their whole front.  We gained considerable ground at

first, especially on our left but the desperate resistance which the

right met with demonstrated that the time we had unavoidably lost in

the morning had been of incalculable value to Early, for it was

evident that he had been enabled already to so far concentrate his

troops as to have the different divisions of his army in a connected

line of battle, in good shape to resist.



Getty and Ricketts made some progress toward Winchester in connection

with Wilson's cavalry, which was beyond the Senseny road on Getty's

left, and as they were pressing back Ramseur's infantry and Lomax's

cavalry Grover attacked from the right with decided effect.  Grover

in a few minutes broke up Evans's brigade of Gordon's division, but

his pursuit of Evans destroyed the continuity of my general line, and

increased an interval that had already been made by the deflection of

Ricketts to the 1eft, in obedience to instructions that had been

given him to guide his division on the Berryville pike.  As the line

pressed forward, Ricketts observed this widening interval and

endeavored to fill it with the small brigade of Colonel Keifer, but

at this juncture both Gordon and Rodes struck the weak spot where the

right of the Sixth Corps and the left of the Nineteenth should have

been in conjunction, and succeeded in checking my advance by driving

back a part of Ricketts's division, and the most of Grover's.  As

these troops were retiring I ordered Russell's reserve division to be

put into action, and just as the flank of the enemy's troops in

pursuit of Grover was presented, Upton's brigade, led in person by

both Russell and Upton, struck it in a charge so vigorous as to drive

the Confederates back in turn to their original ground.



The success of Russell enabled me to re-establish the right of my

line some little distance in advance of the position from which it

started in the morning, and behind Russell's division (now commanded

by Upton) the broken regiments of Ricketts's division were rallied.

Dwight's division was then brought up on the right, and Grover's men

formed behind it.



The charge of Russell was most opportune, but it cost many men in

killed and wounded.  Among the former was the courageous Russell

himself; killed by a piece of shell that passed through his heart,

although he had previously been struck by a bullet in the left

breast, which wound, from its nature, must have proved mortal, yet of

which he had not spoken.  Russell's death oppressed us all with

sadness, and me particularly.  In the early days of my army life he

was my captain and friend, and I was deeply indebted to him, not only

for sound advice and good example, but for the inestimable service he

had just performed, and sealed with his life, so it may be inferred

how keenly I felt his loss.



As my lines were being rearranged, it was suggested to me to put

Crook into the battle, but so strongly had I set my heart on using

him to take possession of the Valley pike and cut off the enemy, that

I resisted this advice, hoping that the necessity for putting him in

would be obviated by the attack near Stephenson's depot that

Torbert's cavalry was to make, and from which I was momentarily

expecting to hear.  No news of Torbert's progress came, however, so,

yielding at last, I directed Crook to take post on the right of the

Nineteenth Corps and, when the action was renewed, to push his

command forward as a turning-column in conjunction with Emory.  After

some delay in the annoying defile, Crook got his men up, and posting

Colonel Thoburn's division on the prolongation of the Nineteenth

Corps, he formed Colonel Duval's division to the right of Thoburn.

Here I joined Crook, informing him that I had just got word that

Torbert was driving the enemy in confusion along the Martinsburg pike

toward Winchester; at the same time I directed him to attack the

moment all of Duval's men were in line.  Wright was instructed to

advance in concert with Crook, by swinging Emory and the right of the

Sixth Corps to the left together in a half-wheel.  Then leaving

Crook, I rode along the Sixth and Nineteenth corps, the open ground

over which they were passing affording a rare opportunity to witness

the precision with which the attack was taken up from right to left.

Crook's success began the moment he started to turn the enemy's left;

and assured by the fact that Torbert had stampeded the Confederate

cavalry and thrown Breckenridge's infantry into such disorder that it

could do little to prevent the envelopment of Gordon's left, Crook

pressed forward without even a halt.



Both Emory and Wright took up the fight as ordered, and as they did

so I sent word to Wilson, in the hope that he could partly perform

the work originally laid out for Crook, to push along the Senseny

road and, if possible, gain the valley pike south of Winchester.  I

then returned toward my right flank, and as I reached the Nineteenth

Corps the enemy was contesting the ground in its front with great

obstinacy; but Emory's dogged persistence was at length rewarded with

success, just as Crook's command emerged from the morass of Red Bud

Run, and swept around Gordon, toward the right of Breckenridge, who,

with two of Wharton's brigades, was holding a line at right angles

with the Valley pike for the protection of the Confederate rear.

Early had ordered these two brigades back from Stephenson's depot in

the morning, purposing to protect with them his right flank and line

of retreat, but while they were en route to this end, he was obliged

to recall them to his left to meet Crook's attack.



To confront Torbert, Patton's brigade of infantry and some of

Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry had been left back by Breckenridge, but, with

Averell on the west side of the Valley pike and Merritt on the east,

Torbert began to drive this opposing force toward Winchester the

moment he struck it near Stephenson's depot, keeping it on the go

till it reached the position held by Breckenridge, where it

endeavored to make a stand.



The ground which Breckenridge was holding was open, and offered an

opportunity such as seldom had been presented during the war for a,

mounted attack, and Torbert was not slow to take advantage of it.

The instant Merritt's division could be formed for the charge, it

went at Breckenridge's infantry and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry with such

momentum as to break the Confederate left, just as Averell was

passing around it.  Merritt's brigades, led by Custer, Lowell, and

Devin, met from the start with pronounced success, and with sabre or

pistol in hand literally rode down a battery of five guns and took

about 1,200 prisoners.  Almost simultaneously with this cavalry

charge, Crook struck Breckenridge's right and Gordon's left, forcing

these divisions to give way, and as they retired, Wright, in a

vigorous attack, quickly broke Rodes up and pressed Ramseur so hard

that the whole Confederate army fell back, contracting its lines

within some breastworks which had been thrown up at a former period

of the war, immediately in front of Winchester.



Here Early tried hard to stem the tide, but soon Torbert's cavalry

began passing around his left flank, and as Crook, Emory, and Wright

attacked in front, panic took possession of the enemy, his troops,

now fugitives and stragglers, seeking escape into and through

Winchester.



When this second break occurred, the Sixth and Nineteenth corps were

moved over toward the Millwood pike to help Wilson on the left, but

the day was so far spent that they could render him no assistance,

and Ramseur's division, which had maintained some organization, was

in such tolerable shape as to check him.  Meanwhile Torbert passed

around to the west of Winchester to join Wilson, but was unable to do

so till after dark.  Crook's command pursued the enemy through the

town to Mill Greek, I going along.



Just after entering the town, Crook and I met, in the main street,

three young girls, who gave us the most hearty reception.  One of

these young women was a Miss Griffith, the other two Miss Jennie and

Miss Susie Meredith.  During the day they had been watching the

battle from the roof of the Meredith residence, with tears and

lamentations, they said, in the morning when misfortune appeared to

have overtaken the Union troops, but with unbounded exultation when,

later, the, tide set in against the Confederates.  Our presence was,

to them, an assurance of victory, and their delight being

irrepressible, they indulged in the most unguarded manifestations and

expressions.  When cautioned by Crook, who knew them well, and

reminded that the valley had hitherto been a race-course--one day in

the'possession of friends, and the next of enemies--and warned of the

dangers they were incurring by such demonstrations, they assured him

that they had no further fears of that kind now, adding that Early's

army was so demoralized by the defeat it had just sustained that it

would never be in condition to enter Winchester again.  As soon as we

had succeeded in calming the excited girls a little I expressed a

desire to find some place where I could write a telegram to General

Grant informing him of the result of the battle, and General Crook

conducted me to the home of Miss Wright, where I met for the first

time the woman who had contributed so much to our success, and on a

desk in her school-room wrote the despatch announcing that we had

sent Early's army whirling up the valley.



My losses in the battle of the Opequon were heavy, amounting to about

4,500 killed, wounded, and missing.  Among the killed was General

Russell, commanding a division, and the wounded included Generals

Upton, McIntosh and Chapman, and Colonels Duval and Sharpe.  The

Confederate loss in killed, wounded, and prisoners about equaled

mine, General Rodes being of the killed, while Generals Fitzhugh Lee

and York were severely wounded.



We captured five pieces of artillery and nine battle-flags.  The

restoration of the lower valley--from the Potomac to Strasburg--to

the control of the Union forces caused great rejoicing in the North,

and relieved the Administration from further solicitude for the

safety of the Maryland and Pennsylvania borders.  The President's

appreciation of the victory was expressed in a despatch so like Mr.

Lincoln that I give a facsimile of it to the reader:



[In the handwriting of President Lincoln]

"EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

"WASHINGTON, Sep.  20, 1864



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERMAN

"WINCHESTER, VA.



"Have just heard of your geat victory.  God bless you all, officers

and men.  Strongly inclined to come up and see you.



"A. LINCOLN





This he supplemented by promoting me to the grade of brigadier-

general in the regular army, and assigning me to the permanent

command of the Middle Military Department, and following that came

warm congratulations from Mr. Stanton and from Generals Grant,

Sherman, and Meade.



The battle was not fought out on the plan in accordance with which

marching orders were issued to my troops, for I then hoped to take

Early in detail, and with Crook's force cut off his retreat.  I

adhered to this purpose during the early part of the contest, but was

obliged to abandon the idea because of unavoidable delays by which I

was prevented from getting the Sixth and Nineteenth corps through the

narrow defile and into position early enough to destroy Ramseur while

still isolated.  So much delay had not been anticipated, and this

loss of time was taken advantage of by the enemy to recall the troops

diverted to Bunker Hill and Martinsburg on the 17th, thus enabling

him to bring them all to the support of Ramseur before I could strike

with effect.  My idea was to attack Ramseur and Wharton,

successively, at a very early hour and before they could get succor,

but I was not in condition to do it till nearly noon, by which time

Gordon and Rodes had been enabled to get upon the ground at a point

from which, as I advanced, they enfiladed my right flank, and gave it

such a repulse that to re-form this part of my line I was obliged to

recall the left from some of the ground it had gained.  It was during

this reorganization of my lines that I changed my plan as to Crook,

and moved him from my left to my right.  This I did with great

reluctance, for I hoped to destroy Early's army entirely if Crook

continued on his original line of march toward the Valley pike, south

of Winchester; and although the ultimate results did, in a measure

vindicate the change, yet I have always thought that by adhering to

the original plan we might have captured the bulk of Early's army.









CHAPTER 11.



PURSUING EARLY--A SECRET MARCH--FISHER'S HILL--A GREAT SUCCESS--

REMOVAL OF AVERELL--THE RETREAT--CAPTURING AN OLD COMRADE--THE MURDER

OF LIEUTENANT MEIGS.



The night of the 19th of September I gave orders for following Early

up the valley next morning--the pursuit to begin at daybreak--and in

obedience to these directions Torbert moved Averell out on the Back

road leading to Cedar Creek, and Merritt up the Valley pike toward

Strasburg, while Wilson was directed on Front Royal by way of

Stevensburg.  Merritt's division was followed by the infantry,

Emory's and Wright's columns marching abreast in the open country to

the right and left of the pike, and Crook's immediately behind them.

The enemy having kept up his retreat at night, presented no

opposition whatever until the cavalry discovered him posted at

Fisher's Hill, on the first defensive line where he could hope to

make any serious resistance.  No effort was made to dislodge him, and

later in the day, after Wright and Emory came up, Torbert shifted

Merritt over toward the Back road till he rejoined Averell.  As

Merritt moved to the right, the Sixth and Nineteenth corps crossed

Cedar Creek and took up the ground the cavalry was vacating, Wright

posting his own corps to the west of the Valley pike overlooking

Strasburg, and Emory's on his left so as to extend almost to the road

leading from Strasburg to Front Royal.  Crook, as he came up the same

evening, went into position in some heavy timber on the north bank of

Cedar Creek.



A reconnoissance made pending these movements convinced me that the

enemy's position at Fisher's Hill was so strong that a direct assault

would entail unnecessary destruction of life, and, besides, be of

doubtful result.  At the point where Early's troops were in position,

between the Massanutten range and Little North Mountain, the valley

is only about three and a half miles wide.  All along the precipitous

bluff which overhangs Tumbling Run on the south side, a heavy line of

earthworks had been constructed when Early retreated to this point in

August, and these were now being strengthened so as to make them

almost impregnable; in fact, so secure did Early consider himself

that, for convenience, his ammunition chests were taken from the

caissons and placed behind the breastworks.  Wharton, now in command

of Breckenridge's division--its late commander having gone to

southwest Virginia--held the right of this line, with Gordon next

him; Pegram, commanding Ramseur's old division, joined Gordon.

Ramseur with Rodes's division, was on Pegram's left, while Lomax's

cavalry, now serving as foot-troops, extended the line to the Back

road.  Fitzhugh Lee being wounded, his cavalry, under General

Wickham, was sent to Milford to prevent Fisher's Hill from being

turned through the Luray Valley.



In consequence of the enemy's being so well protected from a direct

assault, I resolved on the night of the 20th to use again a turning-

column against his left, as had been done on the 19th at the Opequon.

To this end I resolved to move Crook, unperceived if possible, over

to the eastern face of Little North Mountain, whence he could strike

the left and rear of the Confederate line, and as he broke it up, I

could support him by a left half-wheel of my whole line of battle.

The execution of this plan would require perfect secrecy, however,

for the enemy from his signal-station on Three Top could plainly see

every movement of our troops in daylight.  Hence, to escape such

observation, I marched Crook during the night of the 20th into some

heavy timber north of Cedar Creek, where he lay concealed all day the

21st.  This same day Wright and Emory were moved up closer to the

Confederate works, and the Sixth Corps, after a severe fight, in

which Ricketts's and Getty were engaged, took up some high ground on

the right of the Manassas Gap railroad in plain view of the

Confederate works, and confronting a commanding point where much of

Early's artillery was massed.  Soon after General Wright had

established this line I rode with him along it to the westward, and

finding that the enemy was still holding an elevated position further

to our right, on the north side of Tumbling Run, I directed this also

to be occupied.  Wright soon carried the point, which gave us an

unobstructed view of the enemy's works and offered good ground for

our artillery.  It also enabled me to move the whole of the Sixth

Corps to the front till its line was within about seven hundred yards

of the enemy's works; the Nineteenth Corps, on the morning of the

22d, covering the ground vacated by the Sixth by moving to the front

and extending to the right, but still keeping its reserves on the

railroad.



In the darkness of the night of the gist, Crook was brought across

Cedar Creek and hidden in a clump of timber behind Hupp's Hill till

daylight of the 22d, when, under cover of the intervening woods and

ravines, he was marched beyond the right of the Sixth Corps and again

concealed not far from the Back road.  After Crook had got into this

last position, Ricketts's division was pushed out until it confronted

the left of the enemy's infantry, the rest of the Sixth Corps

extending from Ricketts's left to the Manassas Gap railroad, while

the Nineteenth Corps filled in the space between the left of the

Sixth and the North Fork of the Shenandoah.



When Ricketts moved out on this new line, in conjunction with

Averell's cavalry on his right, the enemy surmising, from information

secured from his signal-station, no doubt, that my attack was to be

made from Ricketts's front, prepared for it there, but no such

intention ever existed.  Ricketts was pushed forward only that he

might readily join Crook's turning-column as it swung into the

enemy's rear.  To ensure success, all that I needed now was enough

daylight to complete my arrangements, the secrecy of movement imposed

by the situation consuming many valuable hours.



While Ricketts was occupying the enemy's attention, Crook, again

moving unobserved into the dense timber on the eastern face of Little

North Mountain, conducted his command south in two parallel columns

until he gained the rear of the enemy's works, when, marching his

divisions by the left flank, he led them in an easterly direction

down the mountain-side.  As he emerged from the timber near the base

of the mountain, the Confederates discovered him, of course, and

opened with their batteries, but it was too late--they having few

troops at hand to confront the turning-column.  Loudly cheering,

Crook's men quickly crossed the broken stretch in rear of the enemy's

left, producing confusion and consternation at every step.



About a mile from the mountain's base Crook's left was joined by

Ricketts, who in proper time had begun to swing his division into the

action, and the two commands moved along in rear of the works so

rapidly that, with but slight resistance, the Confederates abandoned

the guns massed near the centre.  The swinging movement of Ricketts

was taken up successively from right to left throughout my line, and

in a few minutes the enemy was thoroughly routed, the action, though

brief, being none the less decisive.  Lomax's dismounted cavalry gave

way first, but was shortly followed by all the Confederate infantry

in an indescribable panic, precipitated doubtless by fears of being

caught and captured in the pocket formed by Tumbling Run and the

North Fork of the Shenandoah River.  The stampede was complete, the

enemy leaving the field without semblance of organization, abandoning

nearly all his artillery and such other property as was in the works,

and the rout extending through the fields and over the roads toward

Woodstock, Wright and Emory in hot pursuit.



Midway between Fisher's Hill and Woodstock there is some high ground,

where at night-fall a small squad endeavored to stay us with two

pieces of artillery, but this attempt at resistance proved fruitless,

and, notwithstanding the darkness, the guns were soon captured.  The

chase was then taken up by Devin's brigade as soon as it could be

passed to the front, and continued till after daylight the next

morning, but the delays incident to a night pursuit made it

impossible for Devin to do more than pick up stragglers.



Our success was very great, yet I had anticipated results still more

pregnant.  Indeed, I had high hopes of capturing almost the whole of

Early's army before it reached New Market, and with this object in

view, during the manoeuvres of the 21st I had sent Torbert up the

Luray Valley with Wilson's division and two of Merritt's brigades, in

the expectation that he would drive Wickham out of the Luray Pass by

Early's right, and by crossing the Massanutten Mountain near New

Market, gain his rear.  Torbert started in good season, and after

some slight skirmishing at Gooney Run, got as far as Milford, but

failed to dislodge Wickham.  In fact, he made little or no attempt to

force Wickham from his position, and with only a feeble effort

withdrew.  I heard nothing at all from Torbert during the 22d, and

supposing that everything was progressing favorably, I was astonished

and chagrined on the morning of the 23d, at Woodstock, to receive the

intelligence that he had fallen back to Front Royal and Buckton ford.

My disappointment was extreme, but there was now no help for the

situation save to renew and emphasize Torbert's orders, and this was

done at once, notwithstanding that I thought, the delay, had so much

diminished the chances of his getting in the rear of Early as to make

such a result a very remote possibility, unless, indeed, far greater

zeal was displayed than had been in the first attempt to penetrate

the Luray Valley.



The battle of Fisher's Hill was, in a measure, a part of the battle

of the Opequon; that is to say, it was an incident of the pursuit

resulting from that action.  In many ways, however, it was much more

satisfactory, and particularly so because the plan arranged on the

evening of the 20th was carried out to the very letter by Generals

Wright, Crook, and Emory, not only in all their preliminary

manoeuvres, but also during the fight itself.  The only drawback was

with the cavalry, and to this day I have been unable to account

satisfactorily for Torbert's failure.  No doubt, Wickham's position

near Milford was a strong one, but Torbert ought to have made a

fight.  Had he been defeated in this, his withdrawal then to await

the result at Fisher's Hill would have been justified, but it does

not appear that he made any serious effort of all to dislodge the

Confederate cavalry: his impotent attempt not only chagrined me very

much, but occasioned much unfavorable comment throughout the army.



We reached Woodstock early on the morning of the 23d, and halted

there some little time to let the troops recover their organization,

which had been broken in the night march they had just made.  When

the commands had closed up we pushed on toward Edinburg, in the hope

of making more captures at Narrow Passage Creek; but the

Confederates, too fleet for us, got away; so General Wright halted

the infantry not far from Edinburg, till rations could be brought the

men.  Meanwhile I, having remained at Woodstock, sent Dedin's brigade

to press the enemy under every favorable opportunity, and if possible

prevent him from halting long enough to reorganize.  Notwithstanding

Devin's efforts the Confederates managed to assemble a considerable

force to resist him, and being too weak for the rearguard, he awaited

the arrival of Averell, who, I had informed him, would be hurried to

the front with all possible despatch, for I thought that Averell must

be close at hand.  It turned out, however, that he was not near by at

all, and, moreover, that without good reason he had refrained from

taking any part whatever in pursuing the enemy in the flight from

Fisher's Hill; and in fact had gone into camp and left to the

infantry the work of pursuit.



It was nearly noon when Averell came up, and a great deal of precious

time had been lost.  We had some hot words, but hoping that he would

retrieve the mistake of the night before, I directed him to proceed

to the front at once, and in conjunction with Devin close with the

enemy.  He reached Devin's command about 3 o'clock in the afternoon,

just as this officer was pushing the Confederates so energetically

that they were abandoning Mount Jackson, yet Averell utterly failed

to accomplish anything.  Indeed, his indifferent attack was not at

all worthy the excellent soldiers he commanded, and when I learned

that it was his intention to withdraw from the enemy's front, and

this, too, on the indefinite report of a signal-officer that a

"brigade or division" of Confederates was turning his right flank,

and that he had not seriously attempted to verify the information, I

sent him this order:



"HEADQUARTERS MIDDLE MILITARY DIVISION,

"Woodstock, Va., Sept.  23, 1864



"BREVET MAJOR-GENERAL AVERELL



"Your report and report of signal-officer received.  I do not want

you to let the enemy bluff you or your command, and I want you to

distinctly understand this note.  I do not advise rashness, but I do

desire resolution and actual fighting, with necessary casualties,

before you retire.  There must now be no backing or filling by you

without a superior force of the enemy actually engaging you.



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General Commanding.'





Some little time after this note went to Averell, word was brought me

that he had already carried out the programme indicated when

forwarding the report of the expected turning of his right, and that

he had actually withdrawn and gone into camp near Hawkinsburg.  I

then decided to relieve him from the command of his division, which I

did, ordering him to Wheeling, Colonel William H. Powell being

assigned to succeed him.



The removal of Averell was but the culmination of a series of events

extending back to the time I assumed command of the Middle Military

Division.  At the outset, General Grant, fearing discord on account

of Averell's ranking Torbert, authorized me to relieve the former

officer, but I hoped that if any trouble of this sort arose, it could

be allayed, or at least repressed, during the campaign against Early,

since the different commands would often have to act separately.

After that, the dispersion of my army by the return of the Sixth

Corps and Torbert's cavalry to the Army of the Potomac would take

place, I thought, and this would restore matters to their normal

condition ; but Averell's dissatisfaction began to show itself

immediately after his arrival at Martinsburg, on the 14th of August,

and, except when he was conducting some independent expedition, had

been manifested on all occasions since.  I therefore thought that the

interest of the service would be subserved by removing one whose

growing indifference might render the best-laid plans inoperative.





"HEADQUARTERS MIDDLE MILITARY DIVISION.

"HARRISONBURG, VA., SEPT.  25, 1864 11:30 P. M.

"LIEUT-GENERAL GRANT, Comd'g, City Point, Va.



"I have relieved Averell from his command.  Instead of following the

enemy when he was broken at Fisher's Hill (so there was not a cavalry

organization left), he went into camp and let me pursue the enemy for

a distance of fifteen miles, with infantry, during the night.



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General."





The failure of Averell to press the enemy the evening of the 23d gave

Early time to collect his scattered forces and take up a position on

the east side of the North Fork of the Shenandoah, his left resting

on the west side of that stream at Rude's Hill, a commanding point

about two miles south of Mt.  Jackson.  Along this line he had

constructed some slight works during the night, and at daylight on

the 24th, I moved the Sixth and Nineteenth corps through Mt. Jackson

to attack him, sending Powell's division to pass around his left

flank, toward Timberville, and Devin's brigade across the North Fork,

to move along the base of Peaked Ridge and attack his right.  The

country was entirely open, and none of these manoeuvres could be

executed without being observed, so as soon as my advance began, the

enemy rapidly retreated in line of battle up the valley through New

Market, closely followed by Wright and Emory, their artillery on the

pike and their columns on its right and left.  Both sides moved with

celerity, the Confederates stimulated by the desire to escape, and

our men animated by the prospect of wholly destroying Early's army.

The stern-chase continued for about thirteen miles, our infantry

often coming within range, yet whenever we began to deploy, the

Confederates increased the distance between us by resorting to a

double quick, evading battle with admirable tact.  While all this was

going on, the open country permitted us a rare and brilliant sight,

the bright sun gleaming from the arms and trappings of the thousands

of pursuers and pursued.



Near New Market, as a last effort to hold the enemy, I pushed Devin's

cavalry--comprising about five hundred men--with two guns right up on

Early's lines, in the hope that the tempting opportunity given him to

capture the guns would stay his retreat long enough to let my

infantry deploy within range, but he refused the bait, and after

momentarily checking Devin he continued on with little loss and in

pretty good order.



All hope of Torbert's appearing in rear of the Confederates vanished

as they passed beyond New Market.  Some six miles south of this place

Early left the Valley Pike and took the road to Keezletown, a move

due in a measure to Powell's march by way of Timberville toward

Lacy's Springs, but mainly caused by the fact that the Keezletown

road ran immediately along the base of Peaked Mountain--a rugged

ridge affording protection to Early's right flank--and led in a

direction facilitating his junction with Kershaw, who had been

ordered back to him from Culpeper the day after the battle of the

Opequon.  The chase was kept up on the Keezeltown road till darkness

overtook us, when my weary troops were permitted to go into camp; and

as soon as the enemy discovered by our fires that the pursuit had

stopped, he also bivouacked some five miles farther south toward Port

Republic.



The next morning Early was joined by Lomax's cavalry from

Harrisonburg, Wickham's and Payne's brigades of cavalry also uniting

with him from the Luray Valley.  His whole army then fell back to the

mouth of Brown's Gap to await Kershaw's division and Cutshaw's

artillery, now on their return.



By the morning of the 25th the main body of the enemy had disappeared

entirely from my front, and the capture of some small, squads of

Confederates in the neighboring hills furnished us the only incidents

of the day.  Among the prisoners was a tall and fine looking officer,

much worn with hunger and fatigue.  The moment I saw him I recognized

him as a former comrade, George W. Carr, with whom I had served in

Washington Territory.  He was in those days a lieutenant in the Ninth

Infantry, and was one of the officers who superintended the execution

of the nine Indians at the Cascades of the Columbia in 1856.  Carr

was very much emaciated, and greatly discouraged by the turn events

had recently taken.  For old acquaintance sake I gave him plenty to

eat, and kept him in comfort at my headquarters until the next batch

of prisoners was sent to the rear, when he went with them.  He had

resigned from the regular army at the commencement of hostilities,

and, full of high anticipation, cast his lot with the Confederacy,

but when he fell into our hands, his bright dreams having been

dispelled by the harsh realities of war, he appeared to think that

for him there was no future.



Picking up prisoners here and there, my troops resumed their march

directly south on the Valley pike, and when the Sixth and Nineteenth

corps reached Harrisonburg, they went into camp, Powell in the

meanwhile pushing on to Mt. Crawford, and Crook taking up a position

in our rear at the junction of the Keezletown road and the Valley

pike.  Late in the afternoon Torbert's cavalry came in from New

Market arriving at that place many hours later than it had been

expected.



The succeeding day I sent Merritt to Port Republic to occupy the

enemy's attention, while Torbert, with Wilson's division and the

regular brigade, was ordered to Staunton, whence he was to proceed to

Waynesboro' and blow up the railroad bridge.  Having done this,

Torbert, as he returned, was to drive off whatever cattle he could

find, destroy all forage and breadstuffs, and burn the mills.  He

took possession of Waynesboro' in due time, but had succeeded in only

partially demolishing the railroad bridge when, attacked by Pegram's

division of infantry and Wickham's cavalry, he was compelled to fall

back to Staunton.  From the latter place he retired to Bridgewater,

and Spring Hill, on the way, however, fully executing his

instructions regarding the destructLon of supplies.



While Torbert was on this expedition, Merritt had occupied Port

Republic, but he happened to get there the very day that Kershaw's

division was marching from Swift Run Gap to join Early.  By accident

Kershaw ran into Merritt shortly after the latter had gained the

village.  Kershaw's four infantry brigades attacked at once, and

Merrit, forced out of Port Republic, fell back toward Cross Keys; and

in anticipation that the Confederates could be coaxed to that point,

I ordered the infantry there, but Torbert's attack at Wavnesboro' had

alarmed Early, and in consequence he drew all his forces in toward

Rock-fish Gap.  This enabled me to re-establish Merritt at Port

Republic, send the Sixth and Nineteenth corps to the neighborhood of

Mt. Crawford to await the return of Torbert, and to post Crook at

Harrisonburg; these dispositions practically obtained till the 6th of

October, I holding a line across the valley from Port Republic along

North River by Mt. Crawford to the Back road near the mouth of Briery

Branch Gap.



It was during this period, about dusk on the evening of October 3,

that between Harrisonburg and Dayton my engineer officer, Lieutenant

John R. Meigs, was murdered within my lines.  He had gone out with

two topographical assistants to plot the country, and late in the

evening, while riding along the public road on his return to camp, he

overtook three men dressed in our uniform.  From their dress, and

also because the party was immediately behind our lines and within a

mile and a half of my headquarters, Meigs and his assistants

naturally thought that they were joining friends, and wholly

unsuspicious of anything to the contrary, rode on with the three men

some little distance; but their perfidy was abruptly discovered by

their suddenly turning upon Meigs with a call for his surrender.  It

has been claimed that, refusing to submit, he fired on the

treacherous party, but the statement is not true, for one of the

topographers escaped--the other was captured--and reported a few

minutes later at my headquarters that Meigs was killed without

resistance of any kind whatever, and without even the chance to give

himself up.  This man was so cool, and related all the circumstances

of the occurrence with such exactness, as to prove the truthfulness

of his statement.  The fact that the murder had been committed inside

our lines was evidence that the perpetrators of the crime, having

their homes in the vicinity, had been clandestinely visiting them,

and been secretly harbored by some of the neighboring residents.

Determining to teach a lesson to these abettors of the foul deed--a

lesson they would never forget--I ordered all the houses within an

area of five miles to be burned.  General Custer, who had succeeded

to the command of the Third Cavalry division (General Wilson having

been detailed as chief of cavalry to Sherman's army), was charged

with this duty, and the next morning proceeded to put the order into

execution.  The prescribed area included the little village of

Dayton, but when a few houses in the immediate neighborhood of the

scene of the murder had been burned, Custer was directed to cease his

desolating work, but to fetch away all the able-bodied males as

prisoners.









CHAPTER III.



REASONS FOR NOT PURSUING EARLY THROUGH THE BLUE RIDGE--GENERAL

TORBERT DETAILED TO GIVE GENERAL ROSSER A "DRUBBING"--GENERAL ROSSER

ROUTED--TELEGRAPHED TO MEET STANTON--LONGSTREET'S MESSAGE--RETURN TO

WINCHESTER--THE RIDE TO CEDAR CREEK--THE RETREATING ARMY--RALLYING

THE TROOPS--REFORMING THE LINE--COMMENCING THE ATTACK--DEFEAT OF THE

CONFEDERATES--APPOINTED A MAJOR-GENERAL IN THE REGULAR ARMY--RESULTS

OF THE BATTLE.



While we lay in camp at Harrisonburg it became necessary to decide

whether or not I would advance to Brown's Gap, and, after driving the

enemy from there, follow him through the Blue Ridge into eastern

Virginia.  Indeed, this question began to cause me solicitude as soon

as I knew Early had escaped me at New Market, for I felt certain that

I should be urged to pursue the Confederates toward Charlottesville

and Gordonsville, and be expected to operate on that line against

Richmond.  For many reasons I was much opposed to such a plan, but

mainly because its execution would involve the opening of the Orange

and Alexandria railroad.  To protect this road against the raids of

the numerous guerrilla bands that infested the region through which

it passed, and to keep it in operation, would require a large force

of infantry, and would also greatly reduce my cavalry; besides, I

should be obliged to leave a force in the valley strong enough to

give security to the line of the upper Potomac and the Baltimore and

Ohio railroad, and this alone would probably take the whole of

Crook's command, leaving me a wholly inadequate number of fighting

men to prosecute a campaign against the city of Richmond.  Then, too,

I was in doubt whether the besiegers could hold the entire army at

Petersburg; and in case they could not, a number of troops sufficient

to crush me might be detached by Lee, moved rapidly by rail, and,

after overwhelming me, be quickly returned to confront General Meade.

I was satisfied, moreover, that my transportation could not supply me

further than Harrisonburg, and if in penetrating the Blue Ridge I met

with protracted resistance, a lack of supplies might compel me to

abandon the attempt at a most inopportune time.



I therefore advised that the Valley campaign be terminated north of

Staunton, and I be permitted to return, carrying out on the way my

original instructions for desolating the Shenandoah country so as to

make it untenable for permanent occupation by the Confederates.  I

proposed to detach the bulk of my army when this work of destruction

was completed, and send it by way of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad

through Washington to the Petersburg line, believing that I could

move it more rapidly by that route than by any other.  I was

confident that if a movement of this character could be made with

celerity it would culminate in the capture of Richmond and possibly

of General Lee's army, and I was in hopes that General Grant would

take the same view of the matter; but just at this time he was so

pressed by the Government and by public-opinion at the North, that he

advocated the wholly different conception of driving Early into

eastern Virginia, and adhered to this plan with some tenacity.

Considerable correspondence regarding the subject took place between

us, throughout which I stoutly maintained that we should not risk, by

what I held to be a false move, all that my army had gained.  I being

on the ground, General Grant left to me the final decision of the

question, and I solved the first step by determining to withdraw down

the valley at least as far as Strasburg, which movement was begun on

the 6th of October.



The cavalry as it retired was stretched across the country from the

Blue Ridge to the eastern slope of the Alleghanies, with orders to

drive off all stock and destroy all supplies as it moved northward.

The infantry preceded the cavalry, passing down the Valley pike, and

as we marched along the many columns of smoke from burning stacks,

and mills filled with grain, indicated that the adjacent country was

fast losing the features which hitherto had made it a great magazine

of stores for the Confederate armies.



During the 6th and 7th of October, the enemy's horse followed us up,

though at a respectful distance.  This cavalry was now under command

of General T. W. Rosser, who on October 5 had joined Early with an

additional brigade from Richmond.  As we proceeded the Confederates

gained confidence, probably on account of the reputation with which

its new commander had been heralded, and on the third day's march had

the temerity to annoy my rear guard considerably.  Tired of these

annoyances, I concluded to open the enemy's eyes in earnest, so that

night I told Torbert I expected him either to give Rosser a drubbing

next morning or get whipped himself, and that the infantry would be

halted until the affair was over; I also informed him that I proposed

to ride out to Round Top Mountain to see the fight.  When I decided

to have Rosser chastised, Merritt was encamped at the foot of Round

Top, an elevation just north of Tom's Brook, and Custer some six

miles farther north and west, near Tumbling Run.  In the night Custer

was ordered to retrace his steps before daylight by the Back road,

which is parallel to and about three miles from the Valley pike, and

attack the enemy at Tom's Brook crossing, while Merritt's

instructions were to assail him on the Valley pike in concert with

Custer.  About 7 in the morning, Custer's division encountered Rosser

himself with three brigades, and while the stirring sounds of the

resulting artillery duel were reverberating through the valley

Merritt moved briskly to the front and fell upon Generals Lomax and

Johnson on the Valley pike.  Merritt, by extending his right, quickly

established connection with Custer, and the two divisions moved

forward together under Torbert's direction, with a determination to

inflict on the enemy the sharp and summary punishment his rashness

had invited.



The engagement soon became general across the valley, both sides

fighting mainly mounted.  For about two hours the contending lines

struggled with each other along Tom's Brook, the charges and counter

charges at many points being plainly visible from the summit of Round

Top, where I had my headquarters for the time.



The open country permitting a sabre fight, both sides seemed bent on

using that arm.  In the centre the Confederates maintained their

position with much stubbornness, and for a time seemed to have

recovered their former spirit, but at last they began to give way on

both flanks, and as these receded, Merritt and Custer went at the

wavering ranks in a charge along the whole front.  The result was a

general smash-up of the entire Confederate line, the retreat quickly

degenerating into a rout the like of which was never before seen.

For twenty-six miles this wild stampede kept up, with our troopers

close at the enemy's heels; and the ludicrous incidents of the chase

never ceased to be amusing topics around the camp-fires of Merritt

and Custer.  In the fight and pursuit Torbert took eleven pieces of

artillery, with their caissons, all the wagons and ambulances the

enemy had on the ground, and three hundred prisoners.  Some of

Rosser's troopers fled to the mountains by way of Columbia Furnace,

and some up the Valley pike and into the Massamitten Range,

apparently not discovering that the chase had been discontinued till

south of Mount Jackson they rallied on Early's infantry.



After this catastrophe, Early reported to General Lee that his

cavalry was so badly demoralized that it should be dismounted; and

the citizens of the valley, intensely disgusted with the boasting and

swaggering that had characterized the arrival of the "Laurel Brigade"

in that section, baptized the action (known to us as Tom's Brook) the

"Woodstock Races," and never tired of poking fun at General Rosser

about his precipitate and inglorious flight.  (When Rosser arrived

from Richmond with his brigade he was proclaimed as the savior of the

Valley, and his men came all bedecked with laurel branches.)



On the l0th my army, resuming its retrograde movement, crossed to the

north side of Cedar Creek.  The work of repairing the Manassas Gap

branch of the Orange and Alexandria railroad had been begun some days

before, out from Washington, and, anticipating that it would be in

readiness to transport troops by the time they could reach Piedmont,

I directed the Sixth Corps to continue its march toward Front Royal,

expecting to return to the Army of the Potomac by that line.  By the

12th, however, my views regarding the reconstruction of this railroad

began to prevail, and the work on it was discontinued.  The Sixth

Corps, therefore, abandoned that route, and moved toward Ashby's Gap

with the purpose of marching direct to Washington, but on the l3th I

recalled it to Cedar Creek, in consequence of the arrival of the

enemy's infantry at Fisher's Hill, and the receipt, the night before,

of the following despatch, which again opened the question of an

advance on Gordonsville and Charlottesville:





(Cipher.)

"WASHINGTON, October 12, 1864, 12 M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN:



"Lieutenant-General Grant wishes a position taken far enough south to

serve as a base for further operations upon Gordonsville and

Charlottesville.  It must be strongly fortified and provisioned.

Some point in the vicinity of Manassas Gap would seem best suited for

all purposes.  Colonel Alexander, of the Engineers, will be sent to

consult with you as soon as you connect with General Augur.



"H.  W.  HALLECK, Major-General."





As it was well known in Washington that the views expressed in the

above despatch were counter to my convictions, I was the next day

required by the following telegram from Secretary Stanton to repair

to that city :





" WASHINGTON, October 13, 1864.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN

(through General Augur)



"If you can come here, a consultation on several points is extremely

desirable.  I propose to visit General Grant, and would like to see

you first.



"EDWIN M.  STANTON,

"Secretary of War."





I got all ready to comply with the terms of Secretary Stanton's

despatch, but in the meantime the enemy appeared in my front in

force, with infantry and cavalry, and attacked Colonel Thoburn, who

had been pushed out toward Strasburg from Crook's command, and also

Custer's division of cavalry on the Back road.  As afterward

appeared, this attack was made in the belief that all of my troops

but Crook's had gone to Petersburg.  From this demonstration there

ensued near Hupp's Hill a bitter skirmish between Kershaw and

Thoburn, and the latter was finally compelled to withdraw to the

north bank of Cedar Creek.  Custer gained better results, however, on

the Back road, with his usual dash driving the enemy's cavalry away

from his front, Merritt's division then joining him and remaining on

the right.



The day's events pointing to a probability that the enemy intended to

resume the offensive, to anticipate such a contingency I ordered the

Sixth Corps to return from its march toward Ashby's Gap.  It reached

me by noon of the 14th, and went into position to the right and rear

of the Nineteenth Corps, which held a line along the north bank of

Cedar Creek, west of the Valley pike.  Crook was posted on the left

of the Nineteenth Corps and east of the Valley pike, with Thoburn's

division advanced to a round hill, which commanded the junction of

Cedar Creek and the Shenandoah River, while Torbert retained both

Merritt and Custer on the right of the Sixth Corps, and at the same

time covered with Powell the roads toward Front Royal.  My head-

quarters were at the Belle Grove House, which was to the west of the

pike and in rear of the Nineteenth Corps.  It was my intention to

attack the enemy as soon as the Sixth Corps reached me, but General

Early having learned from his demonstration that I had not detached

as largely as his previous information had led him to believe, on the

night of the 13th withdrew to Fisher's Hill; so, concluding that he

could not do us serious hurt from there, I changed my mind as to

attacking, deciding to defer such action till I could get to

Washington, and come to some definite understanding about my future

operations.



To carry out this idea, on the evening of the 15th I ordered all of

the cavalry under General Torbert to accompany me to Front Royal,

again intending to push it thence through Chester Gap to the Virginia

Central railroad at Charlottesville, to destroy the bridge over the

Rivanna River, while I passed through Manassas Gap to Rectortown, and

thence by rail to Washington.  On my arrival with the cavalry near

Front Royal on the 16th, I halted at the house of Mrs. Richards, on

the north bank of the river, and there received the following

despatch and inclosure from General Wright, who had been left in

command at Cedar Creek :



"HEADQUARTERS MIDDLE MILITARY Division,

"October 16, 1864.



"GENERAL:



"I enclose you despatch which explains itself.  If the enemy should

be strongly reenforced in cavalry, he might, by turning our right,

give us a great deal of trouble.  I shall hold on here until the

enemy's movements are developed, and shall only fear an attack on my

right, which I shall make every preparation for guarding against and

resisting.



"Very respectfully, your obedient servant,



"H.  G.  WRIGHT, Major-General Commanding.

"MAJOR-GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Commanding Middle Military Division."





[INCLOSURE.] "To LIEUTENANT-GENERAL EARLY:



"Be ready to move as soon as my forces join you, and we will crush

Sheridan.



"LONGSTREET, Lieutenant-General."





The message from Longstreet had been taken down as it was being

flagged from the Confederate signal-station on Three Top Mountain,

and afterward translated by our signal officers, who knew the

Confederate signal code.  I first thought it a ruse, and hardly worth

attention, but on reflection deemed it best to be on the safe side,

so I abandoned the cavalry raid toward Charlottesville, in order to

give General Wright the, entire strength of the army, for it did not

seem wise to reduce his numbers while reinforcement for the enemy

might be near, and especially when such pregnant messages were

reaching Early from one of the ablest of the Confederate generals.

Therefore I sent the following note to General Wright:      I



"HEADQUARTERS MIDDLE MILITARY DIVISION,

"Front Royal, October 16, x864.



"GENERAL: The cavalry is all ordered back to you; make your position

strong.  If Longstreet's despatch is true, he is under the impression

that we have largely detached.  I will go over to Augur, and may get

additional news.  Close in Colonel Powell, who will be at this point.

If the enemy should make an advance, I know you will defeat him.

Look well to your ground and be well prepared.  Get up everything

that can be spared.  I will bring up all I can, and will be up on

Tuesday, if not sooner.



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General.



"MAJOR-GENERAL H.  G.  WRIGHT,

"Commanding Sixth Army Corps."





At 5 o'clock on the evening of the 16th I telegraphed General Halleck

from Rectortown, giving him the information which had come to me from

Wright, asking if anything corroborative of it had been received from

General Grant, and also saying that I would like to see Halleck; the

telegram ending with the question: "Is it best for me to go to see

you?"  Next morning I sent back to Wright all the cavalry except one

regiment, which escorted me through Manassas Gap to the terminus of

the railroad from Washington.  I had with me Lieutenant-Colonel James

W.  Forsyth, chief-of-staff, and three of my aides, Major George A.

Forsyth, Captain Joseph O'Keefe, and Captain Michael V. Sheridan.  I

rode my black horse, Rienzi, and the others their own respective

mounts.



Before leaving Cedar Creek I had fixed the route of my return to be

by rail from Washington to Martinsburg, and thence by horseback to

Winchester and Cedar Creek, and had ordered three hundred cavalry to

Martinsburg to escort me from that point to the front.  At Rectortown

I met General Augur, who had brought a force out from Washington to

reconstruct and protect the line of railroad, and through him

received the following reply from General Halleck:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"WASHINGTON, D.C., October 16 1864



"To MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN,

"Rectortown, Va.



General Grant says that Longstreet brought with him no troops from

Richmond, but I have very little confidence in the information

collected at his headquarters.  If you can leave your command with

safety, come to Washington, as I wish to give you the views of the

authorities here.



"H. W. HALLECK, Major-General, Chief-of-Staff.





In consequence of the Longstreet despatch, I felt a concern about my

absence which I could hardly repress, but after duly considering what

Halleck said, and believing that Longstreet could not unite with

Early before I got back, and that even if he did Wright would be able

to cope with them both, I and my staff, with our horses, took the

cars for Washington, where we arrived on the morning of the 17th at

about 8 o'clock.  I proceeded at an early hour to the War Department,

and as soon as I met Secretary Stanton, asked him for a special train

to be ready at 12 o'clock to take me to Martinsburg, saying that in

view of existing conditions I must get back to my army as quickly as

possible.  He at once gave the order for the train, and then the

Secretary, Halleck, and I proceeded to hold a consultation in regard

to my operating east of the Blue Ridge.  The upshot was that my views

against such a plan were practically agreed to, and two engineer

officers were designated to return with me for the purpose of

reporting on a defensive line in the valley that could be held while

the bulk of my troops were being detached to Petersburg.  Colonel

Alexander and Colonel Thom both of the Engineer Corps, reported to

accompany me, and at 12 o'clock we took the train.



We arrived about dark at Martinsburg, and there found the escort of

three hundred men which I had ordered before leaving Cedar Creek.  We

spent that night at Martinsburg, and early next morning mounted and

started up the Valley pike for Winchester, leaving Captain Sheridan

behind to conduct to the army the Commissioners whom the State of New

York had sent down to receive the vote of her troops in the coming

Presidential election.  Colonel Alexander was a man of enormous

weight, and Colonel Thom correspondingly light, and as both were

unaccustomed to riding we had to go slowly, losing so much time, in

fact, that we did not reach Winchester till between 3 and 4 o'clock

in the afternoon, though the distance is but twenty-eight miles.  As

soon as we arrived at Colonel Edwards's headquarters in the town,

where I intended stopping for the night, I sent a courier to the

front to bring me a report of the condition of affairs, and then took

Colonel Alexander out on the heights about Winchester, in order that

he might overlook the country, and make up his mind as to the utility

of fortifying there.  By the time we had completed our survey it was

dark, and just as we reached Colonel Edwards's house on our return a

courier came in from Cedar Creek bringing word that everything was

all right, that the enemy was quiet at Fisher's Hill, and that a

brigade of Grover's division was to make a reconnoissance in the

morning, the 19th, so about 10 o'clock I went to bed greatly

relieved, and expecting to rejoin my headquarters at my leisure next

day.



Toward 6 o'clock the morning of the 19th, the officer on picket duty

at Winchester came to my room, I being yet in bed, and reported

artillery firing from the direction of Cedar Creek.  I asked him if

the firing was continuous or only desultory, to which he replied that

it was not a sustained fire, but rather irregular and fitful.  I

remarked: "It's all right; Grover has gone out this morning to make a

reconnoissance, and he is merely feeling the enemy." I tried to go to

sleep again, but grew so restless that I could not, and soon got up

and dressed myself.  A little later the picket officer came back and

reported that the firing, which could be distinctly heard from his

line on the heights outside of Winchester, was still going on.  I

asked him if it sounded like a battle, and as he again said that it

did not, I still inferred that the cannonading was caused by Grover's

division banging away at the enemy simply to find out what he was up

to.  However, I went down-stairs and requested that breakfast be

hurried up, and at the same time ordered the horses to be saddled and

in readiness, for I concluded to go to the front before any further

examinations were made in regard to the defensive line.



We mounted our horses between half-past 8 and 9, and as we were

proceeding up the street which leads directly through Winchester,

from the Logan residence, where Edwards was quartered, to the Valley

pike, I noticed that there were many women at the windows and doors

of the houses, who kept shaking their skirts at us and who were

otherwise markedly insolent in their demeanor, but supposing this

conduct to be instigated by their well-known and perhaps natural

prejudices, I ascribed to it no unusual significance.  On reaching

the edge of the town I halted a moment, and there heard quite

distinctly the sound of artillery firing in an unceasing roar.

Concluding from this that a battle was in progress, I now felt

confident that the women along the street had received intelligence

from the battle, field by the "grape-vine telegraph," and were in

raptures over some good news, while I as yet was utterly ignorant of

the actual situation.  Moving on, I put my head down toward the

pommel of my saddle and listened intently, trying to locate and

interpret the sound, continuing in this position till we had crossed

Mill Creek, about half a mile from Winchester.  The result of my

efforts in the interval was the conviction that the travel of the

sound was increasing too rapidly to be accounted for by my own rate

of motion, and that therefore my army must be falling back.



At Mill Creek my escort fell in behind, and we were going ahead at a

regular pace, when, just as we made the crest of the rise beyond the

stream, there burst upon our view the appalling spectacle of a panic-

stricken army-hundreds of slightly wounded men, throngs of others

unhurt but utterly demoralized, and baggage-wagons by the score, all

pressing to the rear in hopeless confusion, telling only too plainly

that a disaster had occurred at the front.  On accosting some of the

fugitives, they assured me that the army was broken up, in full

retreat, and that all was lost; all this with a manner true to that

peculiar indifference that takes possession of panic-stricken men.  I

was greatly disturbed by the, sight, but at once sent word to Colonel

Edwards commanding the brigade in Winchester, to stretch his troops

across the valley, near Mill Creek, and stop all fugitives, directing

also that the transportation be, passed through and parked on the

north side of the town.



As I continued at a walk a few hundred yards farther, thinking all

the time of Longstreet's telegram to Early, "Be ready when I join

you, and we will crush Sheridan," I was fixing in my mind what I

should do.  My first thought was too stop the army in the suburbs of

Winchester as it came back, form a new line, and fight there; but as

the situation was more maturely considered a better conception

prevailed.  I was sure the troops had confidence in me, for

heretofore we had been successful; and as at other times they had

seen me present at the slightest sign of trouble or distress, I felt

that I ought to try now to restore their broken ranks, or, failing in

that, to share their fate because of what they had done hitherto.



About this time Colonel Wood, my chief commissary, arrived from the

front and gave me fuller intelligence, reporting that everything was

gone, my headquarters captured, and the troops dispersed.  When I

heard this I took two of my aides-de-camp, Major. George A. Forsyth

and Captain Joseph O'Keefe, and with twenty men from the escort

started for the front, at the same time directing Colonel James W.

Forsyth and Colonels Alexander and Thom to remain behind and do what

they could to stop the runaways.



For a short distance I traveled on the road, but soon found it so

blocked with wagons and wounded men that my progress was impeded, and

I was forced to take to the adjoining fields to make haste.  When

most of the wagons and wounded were past I returned to the road,

which was thickly lined with unhurt  men, who, having got far enough

to the rear to be out of danger, had halted, without any

organization, and begun cooking coffee, but when they saw me they

abandoned their coffee, threw up their hats, shouldered their

muskets, and as I passed along turned to follow with enthusiasm and

cheers.  To acknowledge this exhibition of feeling I took off my hat,

and with Forsyth and O'Keefe rode some distance in advance of my

escort, while every mounted officer who saw me galloped out on either

side of the pike to tell the men at a distance that I had come back.

In this way the news was spread to the stragglers off the road, when

they, too, turned their faces to the front and marched toward the

enemy, changing in a moment from the depths of depression , to the

extreme of enthusiasm.  I already knew that even in the ordinary

condition of mind enthusiasm is a potent element with soldiers, but

what I saw that day convinced me that if it can be excited from a

state of despondency its power is almost irresistible.  I said

nothing except to remark as I rode among those on the road: "If I had

been, with you this morning this disaster would not have happened.

We must face the other way; we will go back and recover our camp."



My first halt was made just north of Newtown, where I met a chaplain

digging his heels into the sides of his jaded horse, and making for

the rear with all possible speed.  I drew up for an instant, and

inquired of him how matters were going at the front.  He replied,

"Everything is lost; but all will be right when you get there"; yet

notwithstanding this expression of confidence in me, the parson at

once resumed his breathless pace to the rear.  At Newtown I was

obliged to make a circuit to the left, to get round the village.  I

could not pass through it, the streets were so crowded, but meeting

on this detour Major McKinley, of Crook's staff, he spread the news

of my return through the motley throng there.



When nearing the Valley pike, just south of Newtown I saw about

three-fourths of a mile west of the pike a body of troops, which

proved to be Ricketts's and Wheaton's divisions of the Sixth Corps,

and then learned that the Nineteenth Corps had halted a little to the

right and rear of these; but I did not stop, desiring to get to the

extreme front.  Continuing on parallel with the pike, about midway

between Newtown and Middletown I crossed to the west of it, and a

little later came up in rear of Getty's division of the Sixth Corps.

When I arrived, this division and the cavalry were the only troops in

the presence of and resisting the enemy; they were apparently acting

as a rear-guard at a point about three miles north of the line we

held at Cedar Creek when the battle began.  General Torbert was the

first officer to meet me, saying as he rode up, "My God! I am glad

you've come." Getty's division, when I found it, was about a mile

north of Middletown, posted on the reverse slope of some slightly

rising ground, holding a barricade made with fence-rails, and

skirmishing slightly with the enemy's pickets.  Jumping my horse over

the line of rails, I rode to the crest of the elevation, and there

taking off my hat, the men rose up from behind their barricade with

cheers of recognition.  An officer of the Vermont brigade, Colonel A.

S. Tracy, rode out to the front, and joining me, informed me that

General Louis A. Grant was in command there, the regular division

commander, General Getty, having taken charge of the Sixth Corps in

place of  Ricketts, wounded early in the action, while temporarily

commanding the corps.  I then turned back to the rear of Getty's

division, and as I came behind it, a line of regimental flags rose up

out of the ground, as it seemed, to welcome me.  They were mostly the

colors of Crook's troops, who had been stampeded and scattered in the

surprise of the morning.  The color-bearers, having withstood the

panic, had formed behind the troops of Getty.  The line with the

colors was largely composed of officers, among whom I recognized

Colonel R. B. Hayes, since president of the United States, one of the

brigade commanders.  At the close of this incident I crossed the

little narrow valley, or depression, in rear of Getty's line, and

dismounting on the opposite crest, established that point as my

headquarters.  In a few minutes some of my staff joined me, and the

first directions I gave were to have the Nineteenth Corps and the two

divisions of Wright's corps brought to the front, so they could be

formed on Getty's division, prolonged to the right; for I had already

decided to attack the enemy from that line as soon as I could get

matters in shape to take the offensive.  Crook met me at this time,

and strongly favored my idea of attacking, but said, however, that

most of his troops were gone.  General Wright came up a little later,

when I saw that he was wounded, a ball having grazed the point of his

chin so as to draw the blood plentifully.



Wright gave me a hurried account of the day's events, and when told

that we would fight the enemy on the line which Getty and the cavalry

were holding, and that he must go himself and send all his staff to

bring up the troops, he zealously fell in with the scheme; and it was

then that the Nineteenth Corps and two divisions of the Sixth were

ordered to the front from where they had been halted to the right and

rear of Getty.



After this conversation I rode to the east of the Valley pike and to

the left of Getty's division, to a point from which I could obtain a

good view of the front, in the mean time sending Major Forsyth to

communicate with Colonel Lowell (who occupied a position close in

toward the suburbs of Middletown and directly in front of Getty's

left) to learn whether he could hold on there.  Lowell replied that

he could.  I then ordered Custer's division back to the right flank,

and returning to the place where my headquarters had been established

I met near them Ricketts's division under General Keifer and General

Frank Wheaton's division, both marching to the front.  When the men

of these divisions saw me they began cheering and took up the double

quick to the front, while I turned back toward Getty's line to point

out where these returning troops should be placed.  Having done this,

I ordered General Wright to resume command of the Sixth Corps, and

Getty, who was temporarily in charge of it, to take command of his

own division.  A little later the Nineteenth Corps came up and was

posted between the right of the Sixth Corps and Middle Marsh Brook.



All this had consumed a great deal of time, and I concluded to visit

again the point to the east of the Valley pike, from where I had

first observed the enemy, to see what he was doing.  Arrived there, I

could plainly see him getting ready for attack, and Major Forsyth now

suggested that it would be well to ride along the line of battle

before the enemy assailed us, for although the troops had learned of

my return, but few of them had seen me.  Following his suggestion I

started in behind the men, but when a few paces had been taken I

crossed to the front and, hat in hand, passed along the entire length

of the infantry line; and it is from this circumstance that many of

the officers and men who then received me with such heartiness have

since supposed that that was my first appearance on the field.  But

at least two hours had elapsed since I reached the ground, for it was

after mid-day, when this incident of riding down the front took

place, and I arrived not later, certainly, than half-past 10 o'clock.



After re-arranging the line and preparing to attack I returned again

to observe the Confederates, who shortly began to advance on us.  The

attacking columns did not cover my entire front, and it appeared that

their onset would be mainly directed against the Nineteenth Corps,

so, fearing that they might be too strong for Emory on account of his

depleted condition (many of his men not having had time to get up

from the rear), and Getty's division being free from assault I

transferred a part of it from the extreme left to the support of the

Nineteenth Corps.  The assault was quickly repulsed by Emory,

however, and as the enemy fell back Getty's troops were returned to

their original place.  This repulse of the Confederates made me feel

pretty safe from further offensive operations on their part, and I

now decided to suspend the fighting till my thin ranks were further

strengthened by the men who were continually coming up from the rear,

and particularly till Crook's troops could be assembled on the

extreme left.



In consequence of the despatch already mentioned, "Be ready when I

join you, and we will crush Sheridan," since learned to have been

fictitious, I had been supposing all day that Longstreet's troops

were present, but as no definite intelligence on this point had been

gathered, I concluded, in the lull that now occurred, to ascertain

something positive regarding Longstreet; and Merritt having been

transferred to our left in the morning, I directed him to attack an

exposed battery then at the edge of Middletown, and capture some

prisoners.  Merritt soon did this work effectually, concealing his

intention till his troops got close in to the enemy, and then by a

quick dash gobbling up a number of Confederates.  When the prisoners

were brought in, I learned from them that the only troops of

Longstreet's in the fight were of Kershaw's division, which had

rejoined Early at Brown's Gap in the latter part of September, and

that the rest of Longstreet's corps was not on the field.  The

receipt of this information entirely cleared the way for me to take

the offensive, but on the heels of it came information that

Longstreet was marching by the Front Royal pike to strike my rear at

Winchester, driving Powell's cavalry in as he advanced.  This renewed

my uneasiness, and caused me to delay the general attack till after

assurances came from Powell denying utterly the reports as to

Longstreet, and confirming the statements of the prisoners.



Between half-past and 4 o'clock, I was ready to assail, and decided

to do so by advancing my infantry line in a swinging movement, so as

to gain the Valley pike with my right between Middletown and the

Belle Grove House; and when the order was passed along, the men

pushed steadily forward with enthusiasm and confidence.  General

Early's troops extended some little distance beyond our right, and

when my flank neared the overlapping enemy, he turned on it, with the

effect of causing a momentary confusion, but General McMillan quickly

realizing the danger, broke the Confederates at the reentering angle

by a counter charge with his brigade, doing his work so well that the

enemy's flanking troops were cut off from their main body and left to

shift for themselves.  Custer, who was just then moving in from the

west side of Middle Marsh Brook, followed McMillan's timely blow with

a charge of cavalry, but before starting out on it, and while his men

were forming, riding at full speed himself, to throw his arms around

my neck.  By the time he had disengaged himself from this embrace,

the troops broken by McMillan had gained some little distance to

their rear, but Custer's troopers sweeping across the Middletown

meadows and down toward Cedar Creek, took many of them prisoners

before they could reach the stream--so I forgave his delay.



My whole line as far as the eye could see was now driving everything

before it, from behind trees, stone walls, and all such sheltering

obstacles, so I rode toward the left to ascertain how matters were

getting on there.  As I passed along behind the advancing troops,

first General Grover, and then Colonel Mackenzie, rode up to welcome

me.  Both were severely wounded, and I told them to leave the field,

but they implored permission to remain till success was certain.

When I reached the Valley pike Crook had reorganized his men, and as

I desired that they should take part in the fight, for they were the

very same troops that had turned Early's flank at Winchester and at

Fisher's Hill, I ordered them to be pushed forward; and the alacrity

and celerity with which they moved on Middletown demonstrated that

their ill-fortune of the morning had not sprung from lack of valor.



Meanwhile Lowell's brigade of cavalry, which, it will be remembered,

had been holding on, dismounted, just north of Middletown ever since

the time I arrived from Winchester, fell to the rear for the purpose

of getting their led horses.  A momentary panic was created in the

nearest brigade of infantry by this withdrawal of Lowell, but as soon

as his men were mounted they charged the enemy clear up to the stone

walls in the edge of Niiddletown; at sight of this the infantry

brigade renewed its attack, and the enemy's right gave way.  The

accomplished Lowell received his death-wound in this courageous

charge.



All our troops were now moving on the retreating Confederates, and as

I rode to the front Colonel Gibbs, who succeeded Lowell, made ready

for another mounted charge, but I checked him from pressing the

enemy's right, in the hope that the swinging attack from my right

would throw most of the Confederates to the east of the Valley pike,

and hence off their line of retreat through Strasburg to Fisher's

Hill.  The eagerness of the men soon frustrated this anticipation,

however, the left insisting on keeping pace with the centre and

right, and all pushing ahead till we regained our old camps at Cedar

Creek.  Beyond Cedar Creek, at Strasburg, the pike makes a sharp turn

to the west toward Fisher's Hill, and here Merritt uniting with

Custer, they together fell on the flank of the retreating columns,

taking many prisoners, wagons, and guns, among the prisoners being

Major-General Ramseur, who, mortally wounded, died the next day.



When the news of the victory was received, General Grant directed a

salute of one hundred shotted guns to be fired into Petersburg, and

the President at once thanked the army in an autograph letter.  A few

weeks after, he promoted me, and I received notice of this in a

special letter from the Secretary of War, saying:



"that for the personal gallantry, military skill, and just confidence

in the courage and patriotism of your troops, displayed by you on the

19th day of October at Cedar Run, whereby, under the blessing of

Providence, your routed army was reorganized, a great National

disaster averted, and a brilliant victory achieved over the rebels

for the third time in pitched battle within thirty days, Philip H.

Sheridan is appointed a major-general in the United States Army."



The direct result of the battle was the recapture of all the

artillery, transportation, and camp equipage we had lost, and in

addition twenty-four pieces of the enemy's artillery, twelve hundred

prisoners, and a number of battle-flags.  But more still flowed from

this victory, succeeding as it did the disaster of the morning, for

the reoccupation of our old camps at once re-established a morale

which for some hours had been greatly endangered by ill-fortune.



It was not till after the battle that I learned fully what had taken

place before my arrival, and then found that the enemy, having

gathered all the strength he could through the return of

convalescents and other absentees, had moved quietly from Fisher's

Hill, in the night of the 18th and early on the morning of the 19th,

to surprise my army, which, it should be remembered, was posted on

the north bank of Cedar Creek, Crook holding on the left of the

Valley pike, with Thoburn's division advanced toward the creek on

Duval's (under Colonel Rutherford B. Hayes) and Kitching's

provisional divisions to the north and rear of Thoburn.  The

Nineteenth Corps was on the right of Crook, extending in a semi-

circular line from the pike nearly to Meadow Brook, while the Sixth

Corps lay to the west of the brook in readiness to be used as a

movable column.  Merritt's division was to the right and rear of the

Sixth Corps, and about a mile and a half west of Merrit was Custer

covering the fords of Cedar Creek as far west as the Middle road.



General Early's plan was for one column under General Gordon,

consisting of three divisions of infantry (Gordon's, Ramseur's, and

Pegram's), and Payne's brigade of cavalry to cross the Shenandoah

River directly east of the Confederate works at Fisher's Hill, march

around the northerly face of the Massanutten Mountain, and again

cross the Shenandoah at Bowman's and McInturff's fords.  Payne's task

was to capture me at the Belle Grove House.  General Early himself,

with Kershaw's and Wharton's divisions, was to move through

Strasburg, Kershaw, accompanied by Early, to cross Cedar Creek at

Roberts's ford and connect with Gordon, while Wharton was to continue

on the Valley pike to Hupp's Hill and join the left of Kershaw, when

the crossing of the Valley pike over Cedar Creek became free.



Lomax's cavalry, then in the Luray Valley, was ordered to join the

right of Gordon on the field of battle, while Rosser was to carry the

crossing of Cedar Creek on the Back road and attack Custer.  Early's

conceptions were carried through in the darkness with little accident

or delay, Kershaw opening the fight by a furious attack on Thoburn's

division, while at dawn and in a dense fog Gordon struck Crook's

extreme left, surprising his pickets, and bursting into his camp with

such suddenness as to stampede Crook's men.  Gordon directing his

march on my headquarters (the Belle Grove House), successfully turned

our position as he gained the Valley pike, and General Wright was

thus forced to order the withdrawal of the Nineteenth Corps from its

post at the Cedar Creek crossing, and this enabled Wharton to get

over the stream there unmolested and join Kershaw early in the

action.



After Crook's troops had been driven from their camps, General Wright

endeavored to form a line with the Sixth Corps to hold the Valley

pike to the left of the Nineteenth, but failing in this he ordered

the withdrawal of the latter corps, Ricketts, temporarily commanding

the Sixth Corps, checking Gordon till Emory had retired.  As already

stated, Wharton was thus permitted to cross Cedar Creek on the pike,

and now that Early had a continuous line, he pressed his advantage so

vigorously that the whole Union army was soon driven from its camps

in more or less disorder; and though much disjointed resistance was

displayed, it may be said that no systematic stand was made until

Getty's division, aided by Torbert's cavalry, which Wright had

ordered to the left early in the action, took up the ground where, on

arriving from Winchester, I found them.



When I left my command on the 16th, little did I anticipate that

anything like this would happen.  Indeed, I felt satisfied that Early

was, of himself, too weak to take the offensive, and although I

doubted the Longstreet despatch, yet I was confident that, even

should it prove true, I could get back before the junction could be

made, and at the worst I felt certain that my army was equal to

confronting the forces of Longstreet and Early combined.  Still, the

surprise of the morning might have befallen me as well as the general

on whom it did descend, and though it is possible that this could

have been precluded had Powell's cavalry been closed in, as suggested

in my despatch from Front Royal, yet the enemy's desperation might

have prompted some other clever and ingenious scheme for relieving

his fallen fortunes in the Shenandoah Valley.









CHAPTER IV.



GENERAL EARLY REORGANIZES HIS FORCES--MOSBY THE GUERRILLA--GENERAL

MERRITT SENT TO OPERATE AGAINST MOSBY--ROSSER AGAIN ACTIVE--GENERAL

CUSTER SURPRISED--COLONEL YOUNG SENT TO CAPTURE GILMORE THE

GUERRILLA--COLONEL YOUNG'S SUCCESS--CAPTURE OF GENERAL KELLY AND

GENERAL CROOK--SPIES--WAS WILKES BOOTH A SPY?--DRIVING THE

CONFEDERATES OUT OF THE VALLEY--THE BATTLE OF WAYNESBORO'--MARCHING

TO JOIN THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.



Early's broken army practically made no halt in its retreat after the

battle of Cedar-Creek until it reached New Market, though at Fisher's

Hill was left a small rear-guard of cavalry, which hastily decamped,

however, when charged by Gibbs's brigade on the morning of the 20th.

Between the date of his signal defeat and the 11th of November, the

enemy's scattered forces had sufficiently reorganized to permit his

again making a reconnoissance in the valley as far north as Cedar

Creek, my army having meanwhile withdrawn to Kernstown, where it had

been finally decided that a defensive line should be held to enable

me to detach troops to General Grant, and where, by reconstructing

the Winchester and Potomac railroad from Stephenson's depot to

Harper's Ferry, my command might be more readily, supplied.  Early's

reconnoissance north of Cedar Creek ended in a rapid withdrawal of

his infantry after feeling my front, and with the usual ill-fortune

to his cavalry; Merritt and Custer driving Rosser and Lomax with ease

across Cedar Creek on the Middle and Back roads, while Powell's

cavalry struck McCausland near Stony Point, and after capturing two

pieces of artillery and about three hundred officers and men chased

him into the Luray Valley.



Early got back to New Market on the 14th of November, and, from lack

of subsistence, being unable to continue demonstrations to prevent my

reinforcement of General Grant, began himself to detach to General

Lee by returning Kershaw's division to Petersburg, as was definitely

ascertained by Torbert in a reconnoissance to Mount Jackson.  At this

time General Grant wished me to send him the Sixth Corps, and it was

got ready for the purpose, but when I informed him that Torbert's

reconnoissance had developed the fact that Early still retained four

divisions of infantry and one of cavalry, it was decided, on my

suggestion, to let the Sixth Corps remain till the season should be a

little further advanced, when the inclemency of the weather would

preclude infantry campaigning.  These conditions came about early in

December, and by the middle of the month the whole of the Sixth Corps

was at Petersburg; simultaneously with its transfer to that line

Early sending his Second Corps to Lee.



During the entire campaign I had been annoyed by guerrilla bands

under such partisan chiefs as Mosby, White, Gilmore, McNeil, and

others, and this had considerably depleted my line-of-battle

strength, necessitating as it did large, escorts for my supply-

trains.  The most redoubtable of these leaders was Mosby, whose force

was made up from the country around Upperville, east of the Blue

Ridge, to which section he always fled for a hiding-place when he

scented danger.  I had not directed any special operations against

these partisans while the campaign was active, but as Mosby's men had

lately killed, within my lines, my chief quartermaster, Colonel

Tolles, and Medical Inspector Ohlenchlager, I concluded to devote

particular attention to these "irregulars" during the lull that now

occurred; so on the 28th of November, I directed General Merritt to

march to the Loudoun Valley and operate against Mosby, taking care to

clear the country of forage and subsistence, so as to prevent the

guerrillas from being harbored there in the future their destruction

or capture being well-nigh impossible, on account of their intimate

knowledge of the mountain region.  Merritt carried out his

instructions with his usual sagacity and thoroughness, sweeping

widely over each side of his general line of march with flankers, who

burned the grain and brought in large herds of cattle, hogs and

sheep, which were issued to the troops.



While Merritt was engaged in this service the Baltimore and Ohio

railroad once more received the attention of the enemy; Rosser, with

two brigades of cavalry, crossing the Great North Mountain, capturing

the post of New Creek, with about five hundred prisoners and seven

guns, destroying all the supplies of the garrison, and breaking up

the railroad track.  This slight success of the Confederates in West

Virginia, and the intelligence that they were contemplating further

raids in that section, led me to send, Crook there with one division,

his other troops going to City Point; and, I hoped that all the

threatened places would thus be sufficiently protected, but

negligence at Beverly resulted in the capture of that station by

Rosser on the 11th of January.



In the meanwhile, Early established himself with Wharton's division

at Staunton in winter quarters, posting his cavalry in that

neighborhood also, except a detachment at New Market, and another

small one at the signalstation on Three Top Mountain.  The winter was

a most severe one, snow falling frequently to the depth of several

inches, and the mercury often sinking below zero.  The rigor of the

season was very much against the success of any mounted operations,

but General Grant being very desirous to have the railroads broken up

about Gordonsville and Charlottesville, on the 19th of December I

started the cavalry out for that purpose, Torbert, with Merritt and

Powell, marching through Chester Gap, while Custer moved toward

Staunton to make a demonstration in Torbert's favor, hoping to hold

the enemy's troops in the valley.  Unfortunately, Custer did not

accomplish all that was expected of him, and being surprised by

Rosser and Payne near Lacy's Springs before reveille, had to abandon

his bivouac and retreat down the valley, with the loss of a number of

prisoners, a few horses, and a good many horse equipments, for,

because of the suddenness of Rosser's attack, many of the men had no

time to saddle up.  As soon as Custer's retreat was assured,

Wharton's division of infantry was sent to Charlottesville to check

Torbert, but this had already been done by Lomax, with the assistance

of infantry sent up from Richmond.  Indeed, from the very beginning

of the movement the Confederates had been closely observing the

columns of Torbert and Custer, and in consequence of the knowledge

thus derived, Early had marched Lomax to Gordonsville in anticipation

of an attack there, at the same time sending Rosser down the valley

to meet Custer.  Torbert in the performance of his task captured two

pieces of artillery from Johnson's and McCausland's brigades, at

Liberty Mills on the Rapidan River, but in the main the purpose of

the raid utterly failed, so by the 27th of December he returned,

many, of his men badly frost-bitten from the extreme cold which had

prevailed.



This expedition practically closed all operations for the season, and

the cavalry was put into winter cantonment near Winchester.  The

distribution of my infantry to Petersburg and West Virginia left with

me in the beginning of the new year, as already stated, but the one

small division of the Nineteenth Corps.  On account of this

diminution of force, it became necessary for me to keep thoroughly

posted in regard to the enemy, and I now realized more than I had

done hitherto how efficient my scouts had become since under the

control of Colonel Young; for not only did they bring me almost every

day intelligence from within Early's lines, but they also operated

efficiently against the guerrillas infesting West Virginia.



Harry Gilmore, of Maryland, was the most noted of these since the

death of McNeil, and as the scouts had reported him in Harrisonburg

the latter part of January, I directed two of the most trustworthy to

be sent to watch his movements and ascertain his purposes.  In a few

days these spies returned with the intelligence that Gilmore was on

his way to Moorefield, the centre of a very disloyal section in West

Virginia, about ninety miles southwest of Winchester, where, under

the guise of a camp-meeting, a gathering was to take place, at which

he expected to enlist a number of men, be joined by a party of about

twenty recruits coming from Maryland, and then begin depredations

along the Baltimore and Ohio railroad.  Believing that Gilmore might

be captured, I directed Young to undertake the task, and as a

preliminary step he sent to Moorefield two of his men who early in

the war had "refugeed" from that section and enlisted in one of the

Union regiments from West Virginia.  In about a week these men came

back and reported that Gilmore was living at a house between three

and four miles from Moorefield, and gave full particulars as to his

coming and going, the number of men he had about there and where they

rendezvoused.



With this knowledge at hand I directed Young to take twenty of his

best men and leave that night for Moorefield, dressed in Confederate

uniforms, telling him that I would have about three hundred cavalry

follow in his wake when he had got about fifteen miles start, and

instructing him to pass his party off as a body of recruits for

Gilmore coming from Maryland and pursued by the Yankee cavalry.  I

knew this would allay suspicion and provide him help on the road;

and, indeed, as Colonel Whittaker, who alone knew the secret,

followed after the fleeing "Marylanders," he found that their advent

had caused so little remark that the trail would have been lost had

he not already known their destination.  Young met with a hearty,

welcome wherever he halted on the way, and as he passed through the

town of Moorefield learned with satisfaction that Gilmore still made

his headquarters at the house where the report of the two scouts had

located him a few days before.  Reaching the designated place about

12 o'clock on the night of the 5th of February, Young, under the

representation that he had come directly from Maryland and was being

pursued by the Union cavalry, gained immediate access to Gilmore's

room.  He found the bold guerrilla snugly tucked in bed, with two

pistols lying on a chair near by.  He was sleeping so soundly that to

arouse him Young had to give him a violent shake.  As he awoke and

asked who was disturbing his slumbers, Young, pointing at him a

cocked six-shooter, ordered him to dress without delay, and in answer

to his inquiry, informed him that he was a prisoner to one of

Sheridan's staff.  Meanwhile Gilmore's men had learned of his

trouble, but the early appearance of Colonel Whittaker caused them to

disperse; thus the last link between Maryland and the Confederacy was

carried a prisoner to Winchester, whence he was sent to Fort Warren.



The capture of Gilmore caused the disbandment of the party he had

organized at the "camp-meeting," most of the men he had recruited

returning to their homes discouraged, though some few joined the

bands of Woodson and young Jesse McNeil, which, led by the latter,

dashed into Cumberland, Maryland, at 3 O'clock on the morning of the

21st of February and made a reprisal by carrying off General Crook

and General Kelly, and doing their work so silently and quickly that

they escaped without being noticed, and were some distance on their

way before the colored watchman at the hotel where Crook was

quartered could compose himself enough to give the alarm.  A troop of

cavalry gave hot chase from Cumberland, striving to intercept the

party at Moorefield and other points, but all efforts were fruitless,

the prisoners soon being beyond reach.



Although I had adopted the general rule of employing only soldiers as

scouts, there was an occasional exception to it.  I cannot say that

these exceptions proved wholly that an ironclad observance of the

rule would have been best, but I am sure of it in one instance.  A

man named Lomas, who claimed to be a Marylander, offered me his

services as a spy, and coming highly recommended from Mr. Stanton,

who had made use of him in that capacity, I employed him.  He made

many pretensions, often appearing over anxious to impart information

seemingly intended to impress me with his importance, and yet was

more than ordinarily intelligent, but in spite of that my confidence

in him was by no means unlimited.  I often found what he reported to

me as taking place within the Confederate lines corroborated by

Young's men, but generally there were discrepancies in his tales,

which led me to suspect that he was employed by the enemy as well as

by me.  I felt, however, that with good watching he could do me

little harm, and if my suspicions were incorrect he might be very

useful, so I held on to him.



Early in February Lomas was very solicitous for me to employ a man

who, he said, had been with Mosby, but on account of some quarrel in

the irregular camp had abandoned that leader.  Thinking that with two

of them I might destroy the railroad bridges east of Lynchburg, I

concluded, after the Mosby man had been brought to my headquarters by

Lomas about 12 o'clock one night, to give him employment, at the same

time informing Colonel Young that I suspected their fidelity,

however, and that he must test it by shadowing their every movement.

When Lomas's companion entered my room he was completely disguised,

but on discarding the various contrivances by which his identity was

concealed he proved to be a rather slender, dark-complexioned,

handsome young man, of easy address and captivating manners.  He gave

his name as Renfrew, answered all my questions satisfactorily, and

went into details about Mosby and his men which showed an intimacy

with them at some time.  I explained to the two men the work I had

laid out for them, and stated the sum of money I would give to have

it done, but stipulated that in case of failure there would be no

compensation whatever beyond the few dollars necessary for their

expenses.  They readily assented, and it was arranged that they

should start the following night.  Meanwhile Young had selected his

men to shadow them, and in two days reported my spies as being

concealed at Strasburg, where they remained, without making the

slightest effort to continue on their mission, and were busy, no

doubt, communicating with the enemy, though I was not able to fasten

this on them.  On the 16th of February they returned to Winchester,

and reported their failure, telling so many lies about their

hazardous adventure as to remove all remaining doubt as to their

double-dealing.  Unquestionably they were spies from the enemy, and

hence liable to the usual penalties of such service; but it struck me

that through them, I might deceive Early as to the time of opening

the spring campaign, I having already received from General Grant an

intimation of what was expected of me.  I therefore retained the men

without even a suggestion of my knowledge of their true character,

Young meanwhile keeping close watch over all their doings.



Toward the last of February General Early had at Staunton two

brigades of infantry under Wharton.  All the rest of the infantry

except Echol's brigade, which was in southwestern Virginia, had been

sent to Petersburg during the winter, and Fitz. Lee's two brigades of

cavalry also.  Rosser's men were mostly at their homes, where, on

account of a lack of subsistence and forage in the valley, they had

been permitted to go, subject to call.  Lomax's cavalry was at

Millboro', west of Staunton, where supplies were obtainable.  It was

my aim to get well on the road before Early could collect these

scattered forces, and as many of the officers had been in the habit

of amusing themselves fox-hunting during the latter part of the

winter, I decided to use the hunt as an expedient for stealing a

march on the enemy, and had it given out officially that a grand fox-

chase would take place on the 29th of February.  Knowing that Lomas,

and Renfrew would spread the announcement South, they were permitted

to see several red foxes that had been secured, as well as a large

pack of hounds which Colonel Young had collected for the sport, and

were then started on a second expedition to burn the bridges.  Of

course, they were shadowed as usual, and two days later, after they

had communicated with friends from their hiding-place, in Newtown,

they were arrested.  On the way north to Fort Warren they escaped

from their guards when passing through Baltimore, and I never heard

of them again, though I learned that, after the assassination of, Mr.

Lincoln, Secretary Stanton strongly suspected his friend Lomas of

being associated with the conspirators, and it then occurred to me

that the good-looking Renfrew may have been Wilkes Booth, for he

certainly bore a strong resemblance to Booth's pictures.



On the 27th of February my cavalry entered upon the campaign which

cleared the Shenandoah Valley of every remnant of organized

Confederates.  General Torbert being absent on leave at this time, I

did not recall him, but appointed General Merritt Chief of Cavalry.

for Torbert had disappointed me on two important occasions--in the

Luray Valley during the battle of Fisher's Hill, and on the recent

Gordonsville expedition--and I mistrusted his ability to conduct any

operations requiring much self-reliance.  The column was composed of

Custer's and Devin's divisions of cavalry, and two sections of

artillery, comprising in all about 10,000 officers and men.  On

wheels we had, to accompany this column, eight ambulances, sixteen

ammunition wagons, a pontoon train for eight canvas boats, and a

small supply-train, with fifteen days' rations of coffee, sugar, and

salt, it being intended to depend on the country for the meat and

bread ration, the men carrying in their haversacks nearly enough to

subsist them till out of the exhausted valley.



Grant's orders were for me to destroy the Virginia Central railroad

and the James River canal, capture Lynchburg if practicable, and then

join General Sherman in North Carolina wherever he might be found, or

return to Winchester, but as to joining Sherman I was to be governed

by the state of affairs after the projected capture of Lynchburg.

The weather was cold, the valley and surrounding mountains being

still covered with snow; but this was fast disappearing, however,

under the heavy rain that was coming down as the column moved along

up the Valley pike at a steady gait that took us to Woodstock the

first day.  The second day we crossed the North Fork of the

Shenandoah on our pontoon-bridge, and by night-fall reached Lacy's

Springs, having seen nothing of the enemy as yet but a few partisans

who hung on our flanks in the afternoon.



March 1 we encountered General Rosser at Mt Crawford, he having been

able to call together only some five or six hundred of his troops,

our unsuspected march becoming known to Early only the day before.

Rosser attempted to delay us here, trying to burn the bridges over

the Middle Fork of the Shenandoah, but two regiments from Colonel

Capehart's brigade swam the stream and drove Rosser to Kline's Mills,

taking thirty prisoners and twenty ambulances and wagons.



Meanwhile General Early was busy at Staunton, but not knowing my

objective point, he had ordered the return of Echol's brigade from

southwestern Virginia for the protection of Lynchburg, directed

Lomax's cavalry to concentrate at Pond Gap for the purpose of

harassing me if I moved toward Lynchburg, and at the same time

marched Wharton's two brigades of infantry, Nelson's artillery, and

Rosser's cavalry to Waynesboro', whither he went also to remain till

the object of my movement was ascertained.



I entered Staunton the morning of March 2, and finding that Early had

gone to Waynesboro' with his infantry and Rosser, the question at

once arose whether I should continue my march to Lynchburg direct,

leaving my adversary in my rear, or turn east and open the way

through Rockfish Gap to the Virginia Central railroad and James River

canal.  I felt confident of the success of the latter plan, for I

knew that Early numbered there not more than two thousand men; so,

influenced by this, and somewhat also by the fact that Early had left

word in Staunton that he would fight at Waynesboro', I directed

Merritt to move toward that place with Custer, to be closely followed

by Devin, who was to detach one brigade to destroy supplies at

Swoope's'depot.  The by-roads were miry beyond description, rain

having fallen almost incessantly since we left Winchester, but

notwithstanding the down-pour the column pushed on, men and horses

growing almost unrecognizable from the mud covering them from head to

foot.



General Early was true to the promise made his friends in Staunton,

for when Custer neared Waynesboro' he found, occupying a line of

breastworks on a ridge west of the town, two brigades of infantry,

with eleven pieces of artillery and Rosser's cavalry.  Custer, when

developing the position of the Confederates, discovered that their

left was somewhat exposed instead of resting on South River; he

therefore made his dispositions for attack, sending around that flank

the dismounted regiments from Pennington's brigade, while he himself,

with two brigades, partly mounted and partly dismounted, assaulted

along the whole line of breastworks.  Pennington's flanking movement

stampeded the enemy in short order, thus enabling Custer to carry the

front with little resistance, and as he did so the Eighth New York

and First Connecticut, in a charge in column, broke through the

opening made by Custer, and continued on through the town of

Waynesboro', never stopping till they crossed South River.  There,

finding themselves immediately in the enemy's rear, they promptly

formed as foragers and held the east bank of the stream till all the

Confederates surrendered except Rosser, who succeeded in making his

way back to the valley, and Generals Early, Wharton, Long, and

Lilley, who, with fifteen or twenty men, escaped across the Blue

Ridge.  I followed up the victory immediately by despatching Capehart

through Rock-fish Gap, with orders to encamp on the east side of the

Blue Ridge.  By reason of this move all the enemy's stores and

transportation fell into our hands, while we captured on the field

seventeen battle flags, sixteen hundred officers and men, and eleven

pieces of artillery.  This decisive victory closed hostilities in the

Shenandoah Valley.  The prisoners and artillery were sent back to

Winchester next morning, under a guard of 1,500 men, commanded by

Colonel J.  H.  Thompson, of the First New Hampshire.



The night of March 2 Custer camped at Brookfield, Devin remaining at

Waynesboro'.  The former started for Charlottesville the next morning

early, followed by Devin with but two brigades, Gibbs having been

left behind to blow up the iron railroad bridge across South River.

Because of the incessant rains and spring thaws the roads were very

soft, and the columns cut them up terribly, the mud being thrown by

the sets of fours across the road in ridges as much as two feet high,

making it most difficult to get our wagons along, and distressingly

wearing on the animals toward the middle and rear of the columns.

Consequently I concluded to rest at Charlottesville for a couple of

days and recuperate a little, intending at the same time to destroy,

with small parties, the railroad from that point toward Lynchburg.

Custer reached Charlottesville the 3d, in the afternoon, and was met

at the outskirts by a deputation of its citizens, headed by the

mayor, who surrendered the town with medieval ceremony, formally

handing over the keys of the public buildings and of the University

of Virginia.  But this little scene did not delay Custer long enough

to prevent his capturing, just beyond the village, a small body of

cavalry and three pieces of artillery.  Gibbs's brigade, which was

bringing up my mud-impeded train, did not arrive until the 5th of

March.  In the mean time Young's scouts had brought word that the

garrison of Lynchburg was being increased and the fortifications

strengthened, so that its capture would be improbable.  I decided,

however, to move toward the place as far as Amherst Court House,

which is sixteen miles short of the town, so Devin, under Merritt's

supervision, marched along the James River, destroying the canal,

while Custer pushed ahead on the railroad and broke it up.  The two

columns were to join at New Market, whence I intended to cross the

James River at some point east of Lynchburg, if practicable, so as to

make my way to Appomattox Court House, and destroy the Southside

railroad as far east as Farmville.  Owing to its swollen condition

the river was unfordable but knowing that there was a covered bridge

at Duguidsville, I hoped to secure it by a dash, and cross there, but

the enemy, anticipating this, had filled the bridge with inflammable

material, and just as our troops got within striking distance it

burst into flames.  The bridge at Hardwicksville also having been

burned by the enemy, there was now no means of crossing except by

pontoons.  but, unfortunately, I had only eight of these, and they

could not be made to span the swollen river.



Being thus unable to cross until the river should fall, and knowing

that it was impracticable to join General Sherman, and useless to

adhere to my alternative instructions to return to Winchester, I now

decided to destroy still more thoroughly the James River canal and

the Virginia Central railroad and then join General Grant in front of

Petersburg.  I was master of the whole country north of the James as

far down as Goochland; hence the destruction of these arteries of

supply could be easily compassed, and feeling that the war was

nearing its end, I desired my cavalry to be in at the death.



On March 9 the main column started eastward down the James River,

destroying locks, dams, and boats, having been preceded by Colonel

Fitzhugh's brigade of Devin's division in a forced march to Goochland

and Beaver Dam Creek, with orders to destroy everything below

Columbia.  I made Columbia on the 10th, and from there sent a

communication to General Grant reporting what had occurred, informing

him of my condition and intention, asking him to send forage and

rations to meet me at the White House, and also a pontoon-bridge to

carry me over the Pamunkey, for in view of the fact that hitherto it

had been impracticable to hold Lee in the trenches around Petersburg,

I regarded as too hazardous a march down the south bank of the

Pamunkey, where the enemy, by sending troops out from Richmond, might

fall upon my flank and rear.  It was of the utmost importance that

General Grant should receive these despatches without chance of

failure, in order that I might, depend absolutely on securing

supplies at the White House; therefore I sent the message in

duplicate, one copy overland direct to City Point by two scouts,

Campbell and Rowan, and the other by Fannin and Moore, who were to go

down the James River in a small boat to Richmond, join the troops in

the trenches in front of Petersburg, and, deserting to the Union

lines, deliver their tidings into General Grant's hands.  Each set of

messengers got through, but the copy confided to Campbell and Rowan

was first at Grant's headquarters.



I halted for one day at Columbia to let my trains catch up, for it

was still raining and the mud greatly delayed the teams, fatiguing

and wearying the mules so much that I believe we should have been

forced to abandon most of the wagons except for the invaluable help

given by some two thousand negroes who had attached themselves to the

column: they literally lifted the wagons out of the mud.  From

Columbia Merritt, with Devin's division, marched to Louisa Court

House and destroyed the Virginia Central to Frederick's Hall.

Meanwhile Custer was performing similar work from Frederick's Hall to

Beaver Dam Station, and also pursued for a time General Early, who,

it was learned from despatches captured in the telegraph office at

Frederick's Hall, was in the neighborhood with a couple of hundred

men.  Custer captured some of these men and two of Early's staff-

officers, but the commander of the Valley District, accompanied by a

single orderly, escaped across the South Anna and next day made his

way to Richmond, the last man of the Confederate army that had so

long contended with us in the Shenandoah Valley.



At Frederick's Hall, Young's scouts brought me word from Richmond

that General Longstreet was assembling a force there to prevent my

junction with Grant, and that Pickett's division, which had been sent

toward Lynchburg to oppose my march, and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry, were

moving east on the Southside railroad, with the object of

circumventing me.  Reasoning that Longstreet could interpose

effectually only by getting to the White House ahead of me, I pushed

one column under Custer across the South Anna, by way of Ground

Squirrel bridge, to Ashland, where it united with Merritt, who had

meanwhile marched through Hanover Junction.  Our appearance at

Ashland drew the Confederates out in that direction, as was hoped,

so, leaving Colonel Pennington's brigade there to amuse them, the

united command retraced its route to Mount Carmel church to cross the

North Anna.  After dark Pennington came away, and all the troops

reached the church by midnight of the 15th.



Resuming the march at an early hour next morning, we took the road by

way of King William Court House to the White House, where, arriving

on the 18th, we found, greatly to our relief, the supplies which I

had requested to be sent there.  In the meanwhile the enemy had

marched to Hanover Court House, but being unable either to cross the

Pamunkey there or forestall me at the White House on the south side

of the river, he withdrew to Richmond without further effort to

impede my column.



The hardships of this march far exceeded those of any previous

campaigns by the cavalry.  Almost incessant rains had drenched us for

sixteen days and nights, and the swollen streams and well-nigh

bottomless roads east of Staunton presented grave difficulties on

every hand, but surmounting them all, we destroyed the enemy's means

of subsistence, in quantities beyond computation, and permanently

crippled the Virginia Central railroad, as well as the James River

canal, and as each day brought us nearer the Army of the Potomac, all

were filled with the comforting reflection that our work in the

Shenandoah Valley had been thoroughly done, and every one was buoyed

up by the cheering thought that we should soon take part in the final

struggle of the war.









CHAPTER V.



TRANSFERRED TO PETERSBURG--GENERAL RAWLINS CORDIAL WELCOME--GENERAL

GRANT's ORDERS AND PLANS--A TRIP WITH MR. LINCOLN AND GENERAL GRANT--

MEETING GENERAL SHERMAN--OPPOSED TO JOINING THE ARMY OF THE TENNESSEE

--OPENING OF THE APPOMATTOX CAMPAIGN--GENERAL GRANT AND GENERAL

RAWLINS.



The transfer of my command from the Shenandoah Valley to the field of

operations in front of Petersburg was not anticipated by General

Grant; indeed, the despatch brought from Columbia by my scouts,

asking that supplies be sent me at the White House, was the first

word that reached him concerning the move.  In view of my message the

general-in-chief decided to wait my arrival before beginning spring

operations with the investing troops south of the James River, for he

felt the importance of having my cavalry at hand in a campaign which

he was convinced would wind up the war.  We remained a few days at

the White House resting and refitting the cavalry, a large amount of

shoeing being necessary; but nothing like enough horses were at hand

to replace those that had died or been disabled on the mud march from

Staunton to the Pamunkey River, so a good many of the men were still

without mounts, and all such were sent by boat to the dismounted camp

near City Point.  When all was ready the column set out for Hancock

Station, a point on the military railroad in front of Petersburg, and

arriving there on the 27th of March, was in orders reunited with its

comrades of the Second Division, who had been serving with the Army

of the Potomac since we parted from them the previous August.

General Crook, who had been exchanged within a few days, was now in

command of this Second Division.  The reunited corps was to enter

upon the campaign as a separate army, I reporting directly to General

Grant; the intention being thus to reward me for foregoing, of my own

choice, my position as a department commander by joining the armies

at Petersburg.



Taking the road across the Peninsula, I started from the White House

with Merritt's column on the 25th of March and encamped that night at

Harrison's Landing.  Very early next morning, in conformity with a

request from General Grant, I left by boat for City Point, Merritt

meanwhile conducting the column across the James River to the point

of rendezvous, The trip to City Point did not take long, and on

arrival at army headquarters the first person I met was General John

A. Rawlins, General Grant's chief-of-staff.  Rawlins was a man of

strong likes and dislikes, and positive always both in speech and

action, exhibiting marked feelings when greeting any one, and on this

occasion met me with much warmth.  His demonstrations of welcome

over, we held a few minutes' conversation about the coming campaign,

he taking strong ground against a part of the plan of operations

adopted, namely, that which contemplated my joining General Sherman's

army.  His language was unequivocal and vehement, and when he was

through talking, he conducted me to General Grant's quarters, but he

himself did not enter.



General Grant was never impulsive, and always met his officers in an

unceremonious way, with a quiet "How are you" soon putting one at his

ease, since the pleasant tone in which he spoke gave assurance of

welcome, although his manner was otherwise impassive.  When the

ordinary greeting was over, he usually waited for his visitor to open

the conversation, so on this occasion I began by giving him the

details of my march from Winchester, my reasons for not joining

Sherman, as contemplated in my instructions, and the motives which

had influenced me to march to the White House.  The other provision

of my orders on setting out from Winchester--the alternative return

to that place--was not touched upon, for the wisdom of having ignored

that was fully apparent.  Commenting on this recital of my doings,

the General referred only to the tortuous course of my march from

Waynesboro' down, our sore trials, and the valuable services of the

scouts who had brought him tidings of me, closing with the remark

that it was, rare a department commander voluntarily deprived himself

of independence, and added that I should not suffer for it.  Then

turning to the business for which he had called rne to City Point, he

outlined what he expected me to do; saying that I was to cut loose

from the Army of the Potomac by passing its left flank to the

southward along the line of the Danville railroad, and after crossing

the Roanoke River, join General Sherman.  While speaking, he handed

me a copy of a general letter of instructions that had been drawn up

for the army on the 24th.  The letter contained these words

concerning the movements of my command:



"The cavalry under General Sheridan, joined by the division now under

General Davies, will move at the same time (29th inst.) by the Weldon

road and the Jerusalem plank-road, turning west from the latter

before crossing the Nottoway, and west with the whole column before

reaching Stony Creek.  General Sheridan will then move independently

under other instructions which will be given him.  All dismounted

cavalry belonging to the Army of the Potomac, and the dismounted

cavalry from the Middle Military Division not required for guarding

property belonging to their arm of the service, will report to

Brigadier-General Benham to be added to the defenses of City Point."



When I had gone over the entire letter I showed plainly that I was

dissatisfied with it, for, coupled with what the General had outlined

orally, which I supposed was the "other instructions," I believed it

foreshadowed my junction with General Sherman.  Rawlins thought so

too, as his vigorous language had left no room to doubt, so I

immediately began to offer my objections to the programme.  These

were, that it would be bad policy to send me down to the Carolinas

with a part of the Army of the Potomac, to come back to crush Lee

after the destruction of General Johnston's army; such a course would

give rise to the charge that his own forces around Petersburg were

not equal to the task, and would seriously affect public opinion in

the North; that in fact my cavalry belonged to the Army of the

Potomac, which army was able unaided to destroy Lee, and I could not

but oppose any dispersion of its strength.



All this was said in a somewhat emphatic manner, and when I had

finished he quietly told me that the portion of my instructions from

which I so strongly dissented was intended as a "blind" to cover any

check the army in its general move, to the left might meet with, and

prevent that element in the North which held that the war could be

ended only through negotiation, from charging defeat.  The fact that

my cavalry was not to ultimately join Sherman was a great relief to

me, and after expressing the utmost confidence in the plans unfolded

for closing the war by directing every effort to the annihilation of

Lee's army, I left him to go to General Ingalls's quarters.  On the

way I again met Rawlins, who, when I told him that General Grant had

intimated his intention to modify the written plan of operations so

far as regarded the cavalry, manifested the greatest satisfaction,

and I judged from this that the new view of the matter had not

previously been communicated to the chief-of-staff, though he must

have been acquainted of course with the programme made out on the

24th of March.



Toward noon General Grant sent for me to accompany him up the river.

When I joined the General he informed me that the President was on

board the boat--the steamer Mary Martin.  For some days Mr. Lincoln

had been at City Point, established on the steamer River Queen,

having come down from Washington to be nearer his generals, no doubt,

and also to be conveniently situated for the reception of tidings

from the front when operations began, for he could not endure the

delays in getting news to Washington.  This trip up the James had

been projected by General Meade, but on account of demands at the

front he could not go, so the President, General Grant, and I

composed the party.  We steamed up to where my cavalry was crossing

on the pontoon-bridge below the mouth of the Dutch Gap canal, and for

a little while watched the column as it was passing over the river,

the bright sunshine presaging good weather, but only to delude, as

was proved by the torrents of rain brought by the succeeding days of

March.  On the trip the President was not very cheerful.  In fact, he

was dejected, giving no indication of his usual means of diversion,

by which (his quaint stories) I had often heard he could find relief

from his cares.  He spoke to me of the impending operations and asked

many questions, laying stress upon the one, "What would be the result

when the army moved out to the left, if the enemy should come down

and capture City Point?" the question being prompted, doubtless, by

the bold assault on our lines and capture of Fort Steadman two days

before by General Gordon.  I answered that I did not think it at all

probable that General Lee would undertake such a desperate measure to

relieve the strait he was in; that General Hartranft's successful

check to Gordon had ended, I thought, attacks of such a character;

and in any event General Grant would give Lee all he could attend to

on the left.  Mr. Lincoln said nothing about my proposed route of

march, and I doubt if he knew of my instructions, or was in

possession at most of more than a very general outline of the plan of

campaign.  It was late when the Mary Martin returned to City Point,

and I spent the night there with General Ingalls.



The morning of the 27th I went out to Hancock Station to look after

my troops and prepare for moving two days later.  In the afternoon I

received a telegram from General Grant, saying: "General Sherman will

be here this evening to spend a few hours.  I should like to have you

come down."  Sherman's coming was a surprise--at least to me it was--

this despatch being my first intimation of his expected arrival.

Well knowing the zeal and emphasis with which General Sherman would

present his views, there again came into my mind many misgivings with

reference to the movement of the cavalry, and I made haste to start

for Grant's headquarters.  I got off a little after 7 o'clock, taking

the rickety military railroad, the rails of which were laid on the

natural surface of the ground, with grading only here and there at

points of absolute necessity, and had not gone far when the

locomotive jumped the track.  This delayed my arrival at City Point

till near midnight, but on repairing to the little cabin that

sheltered the general-in-chief, I found him and Sherman still up

talking over the problem whose solution was near at hand.  As already

stated, thoughts as to the tenor of my instructions became uppermost

the moment I received the telegram in the afternoon, and they

continued to engross and disturb me all the way down the railroad,

for I feared that the telegram foreshadowed, under the propositions

Sherman would present, a more specific compliance with the written

instructions than General Grant had orally assured me would be

exacted.



My entrance into the shanty suspended the conversation for a moment

only, and then General Sherman, without prelude, rehearsed his plans

for moving his army, pointing out with every detail how he would come

up through the Carolinas to join the troops besieging Petersburg and

Richmond, and intimating that my cavalry, after striking the

Southside and Danville railroads, could join him with ease.  I made

no comments on the projects for moving, his own troops, but as soon

as opportunity offered, dissented emphatically from the proposition

to have me join the Army of the Tennessee, repeating in substance

what I had previously expressed to General Grant.



My uneasiness made me somewhat too earnest, I fear, but General Grant

soon mollified me, and smoothed matters over by practically repeating

what he had told me in regard to this point at the close of our

interview the day before, so I pursued the subject no further.  In a

little while the conference ended, and I again sought lodging at the

hospitable quarters of Ingalls.



Very early the next morning, while I was still in bed, General

Sherman came to me and renewed the subject of my joining him, but

when he saw that I was unalterably opposed to it the conversation

turned into other channels, and after we had chatted awhile he

withdrew, and later in the day went up the river with the President,

General Grant, and Admiral Porter, I returning to my command at

Hancock Station, where my presence was needed to put my troops in

march next day.



During the entire winter General Grant's lines fronting Petersburg

had extended south of the Appomattox River, practically from that

stream around to where the Vaughn road crosses Hatcher's Run, and

this was nearly the situation Wilien the cavalry concentrated at

Hancock Station, General Weitzel holding the line north of the

Appomattox, fronting Richmond and Bermuda Hundred.



The instructions of the 24th of March contemplated that the campaign

should begin with the movement of Warren's corps (the Fifth) at

3 o'clock on the morning of the 29th, and Humphreys's (the Second) at

6; the rest of the infantry holding on in the trenches.  The cavalry

was to move in conjunction with Warren and Humphreys, and make its

way out beyond our left as these corps opened the road.



The night of the 28th I received the following additional

instructions, the general tenor of which again disturbed me, for

although I had been assured that I was not to join General Sherman,

it will be seen that the supplemental directions distinctly present

that alternative, and I therefore feared that during the trip up the

James River on the morning of the 28th General Grant had returned to

his original views:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"City Point, Va., March 28, 1865.



"MAJOR-GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN:



"The Fifth Army Corps will move by the Vaughn road at 3 A.M.

tomorrow morning.  The Second moves at about 9 A.M., having but about

three miles to march to reach the point designated for it to take on

the right of the Fifth Corps, after the latter reaches Dinwiddie

Court House.



"Move your cavalry at as early an hour as you can, and without being

confined to any particular road or roads.  You may go out by the

nearest roads in rear of the Fifth Corps, pass by its left, and

passing near to or through Dinwiddie, reach the right and rear of the

enemy as soon as you can.  It is not the intention to attack the

enemy in his intrenched position, but to force him out if possible.

Should he come out and attack us, or get himself where he can be

attacked, move in with your entire force in your own way, and with

the full reliance that the army will engage or follow the enemy, as

circumstances will dictate.  I shall be on the field, and will

probably be able to communicate with you; should I not do so, and you

find that the enemy keeps within his main intrenched line, you may

cut loose and push for the Danville road.  If you find it practicable

I would like you to cross the Southside road, between Petersburg and

Burkeville, and destroy it to some extent.  I would not advise much

detention, however, until you reach the Danville road, which I would

like you to strike as near to the Appomattox as possible; make your

destruction of that road as complete as possible; you can then pass

on to the Southside road, west of Burkeville, and destroy that in

like manner.



"After having accomplished the destruction of the two railroads,

which are now the only avenues of supply to Lee's army, you may

return to this army, selecting your road farther south, or you may go

on into North Carolina and join General Sherman.  Should you select

the latter course, get the information to me as early as possible, so

that I may send orders to meet you at Goldsboro'.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieut.-General."





These instructions did not alter my line of march for the morrow, and

I trusted matters would so come about as not to require compliance

with those portions relative to the railroads and to joining Sherman;

so early on the 29th I moved my cavalry out toward Ream's Station on

the Weldon road, Devin commanding the First Division, with Colonels

Gibbs, Stagg, and Fitzhugh in charge of the brigades; the Third

Division under Custer, Colonels Wells, Capehart and Pennington being

the brigade commanders.  These two divisions united were commanded by

Merritt, as they had been since leaving Winchester.  Crook headed the

Second Division, his brigades being under General Davies and Colonels

John I. Gregg and Smith.



Our general direction was westward, over such routes as could be

found, provided they did not embarrass the march of the infantry.

The roads, from the winter's frosts and rains, were in a frightful

state, and when it was sought to avoid a spot which the head of the

column had proved almost bottomless, the bogs and quicksands of the

adjoining fields demonstrated that to make a detour was to go from

bad to worse.  In the face of these discouragements we floundered on,

however, crossing on the way a series of small streams swollen to

their banks.  Crook and Devin reached the county-seat of Dinwiddie

about 5 o'clock in the evening, having encountered only a small

picket, that at once gave way to our advance.  Merritt left Custer at

Malon's crossing of Rowanty Creek to care for the trains containing

our subsistence and the reserve ammunition, these being stuck in the

mire at, intervals all the way back to the Jerusalem plank-road; and

to make any headway at all with the trains, Custer's men often had to

unload the wagons and lift them out of the boggy places.



Crook and Devin camped near Dinwiddie Court House in such manner as

to cover the Vaughn, Flatfoot, Boydton, and Five Forks roads; for, as

these all intersected at Dinwiddie, they offered a chance for the

enemy's approach toward the rear of the Fifth Corps, as Warren

extended to the left across the Boydton road.  Any of these routes

leading to the south or west might also be the one on which, in

conformity with one part of my instructions, I was expected to get

out toward the Danville and Southside railroads, and the Five Forks

road would lead directly to General Lee's right flank, in case

opportunity was found to comply with the other part.  The place was,

therefore, of great strategic value, and getting it without cost

repaid us for floundering through the mud.



Dinwiddie Court House, though a most important point in the campaign,

was far from attractive in feature, being made up of a half-dozen

unsightly houses, a ramshackle tavern propped up on two sides with

pine poles, and the weatherbeaten building that gave official name to

the cross-roads.  We had no tents--there were none in the command--so

I took possession of the tavern for shelter for myself and staff, and

just as we had finished looking over its primitive interior a rain

storm set in.



The wagon containing my mess equipment was back somewhere on the

road, hopelessly stuck in the mud, and hence we had nothing to eat

except some coffee which two young women living at the tavern kindly

made for us; a small quantity of the berry being furnished from the

haversacks of my escort.  By the time we got the coffee, rain was

falling in sheets, and the evening bade fair to be a most dismal one;

but songs and choruses set up by some of my staff--the two young

women playing accompaniments on a battered piano--relieved the

situation and enlivened us a little.  However, the dreary night

brought me one great comfort; for General Grant, who that day had

moved out to Gravelly Run, sent me instructions to abandon all idea

of the contemplated raid, and directed me to act in concert with the

infantry under his immediate command, to turn, if possible, the right

flank of Lee's army.  The despatch made my mind easy with respect to

the objectionable feature of my original instructions, and of course

relieved me also from the anxiety growing out of the letter received

at Hancock Station the night of the 28th; so, notwithstanding the

suspicions excited by some of my staff concerning the Virginia

feather-bed that had been assigned me, I turned in at a late hour and

slept most soundly.



The night of the 29th the left of General Grant's infantry--Warren's

corps--rested on the Boydton road, not far from its intersection with

the Quaker road.  Humphreys's corps was next to Warren; then came

Ord, next Wright, and then Parke, with his right resting on the

Appomattox.  The moving of Warren and Humphreys to the left during

the day was early discovered by General Lee.  He met it by extending

the right of his infantry on the White Oak road, while drawing in the

cavalry of W. H. F. Lee and Rosser along the south bank of Stony

Creek to cover a crossroads called Five Forks, to anticipate me

there; for assuming that my command was moving in conjunction with

the infantry, with the ultimate purpose of striking the Southside

railroad, Lee made no effort to hold Dinwiddie, which he might have

done with his cavalry, and in this he made a fatal mistake.  The

cavalry of Fitz. Lee was ordered at this same time from Sunderland

depot to Five Forks, and its chief placed in command of all the

mounted troops of General Lee's army.



At daylight on ttie 3oth I proceeded to make dispositions under the

new conditions imposed by my modified instructions, and directed

Merritt to push Devin out as far as the White Oak road to make a

reconnoissance to Five Forks, Crook being instructed to send Davies's

brigade to support Devin.  Crook was to hold, with Gregg's brigade,

the Stony Creek crossing of the Boydton plank road, retaining Smith's

near Dinwiddie, for use in any direction required.  On the 29th W. H.

F. Lee conformed the march of his cavalry with that of ours, but my

holding Stony Creek in this way forced him to make a detour west of

Chamberlin's Run, in order to get in communication with his friends

at Five Forks.



The rain that had been falling all night gave no sign of stopping,

but kept pouring down all day long, and the swamps and quicksands

mired the horses, whether they marched in the roads or across the

adjacent fields.  Undismayed, nevertheless, each column set out for

its appointed duty, but shortly after the troops began to move I

received from General Grant this despatch, which put a new phase on

matters:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"GRAVELLY RUN, March 30, 1865.



"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN :



"The heavy rain of to-day will make it impossible for us to do much

until it dries up a little, or we get roads around our rear repaired.

You may, therefore, leave what cavalry you deem necessary to protect

the left, and hold such positions as you deem necessary for that

purpose, and send the remainder back to Humphrey's Station where they

can get hay and grain.  Fifty wagons loaded with forage will be sent

to you in the morning.  Send an officer back to direct the wagons

back to where you want them.  Report to me the cavalry you will leave

back, and the position you will occupy.  Could not your cavalry go

back by the way of Stony Creek depot and destroy or capture the store

of supplies there?



"U. S. GRANT, Lieut.-General."





When I had read and pondered this, I determined to ride over to

General Grant's headquarters on Gravelly Run, and get a clear idea of

what it was proposed to do, for it seemed to me that a suspension of

operations would be a serious mistake.  Mounting a powerful gray

pacing horse called Breckenridge (from its capture from one of

Breckenridge's staff-officers at Missionary Ridge), and that I knew

would carry me through the mud, I set out accompanied by my Assistant

Adjutant-General, Colonel Frederick C.  Newhall, and an escort of

about ten or fifteen men.  At first we rode north up the Boydton

plank-road, and coming upon our infantry pickets from a direction

where the enemy was expected to appear, they began to fire upon us,

but seeing from our actions that we were friends, they ceased, and

permitted us to pass the outposts.  We then struggled on in a

northeasterly direction across-country, till we struck the Vaughn

road.  This carried us to army headquarters, which were established

south of Gravelly Run in an old cornfield.  I rode to within a few

yards of the front of General Grant's tent, my horse plunging at

every step almost to his knees in the mud, and dismounted near a

camp-fire, apparently a general one, for all the staff-officers were

standing around it on boards and rails placed here and there to keep

them from sinking into the mire.



Going directly to General Grant's tent, I found him and Rawlins

talking over the question of suspending operations till the weather

should improve.  No orders about the matter had been issued yet,

except the despatch to me, and Rawlins, being strongly opposed to the

proposition, was frankly expostulating with General Grant, who, after

greeting me, remarked, in his quiet way: " Well, Rawlins, I think you

had better take command."  Seeing that there was a difference up

between Rawlins and his chief, I made the excuse of being wet and

cold, and went outside to the fire.  Here General Ingalls met me and

took me to his tent, where I was much more comfortable than when

standing outside, and where a few minutes later we were joined by

General Grant.  Ingalls then retired, and General Grant began talking

of our fearful plight, resulting from the rains and mud, and saying

that because of this it seemed necessary to suspend operations.  I at

once begged him not to do so, telling him that my cavalry was already

on the move in spite of the difficulties, and that although a

suspension of operations would not be fatal, yet it would give rise

to the very charge of disaster to which he had referred at City

Point, and, moreover, that we would surely be ridiculed, just as

General Burnside's army was after the mud march of 1863.  His better

judgment was against suspending operations, but the proposition had

been suggested by all sorts of complaints as to the impossibility of

moving the trains and the like, so it needed little argument to

convince him, and without further discussion he said, in that manner

which with him meant a firmness of purpose that could not be changed

by further complainings, "We will go on."  I then told him that I

believed I could break in the enemy's right if he would let me have

the Sixth Corps; but saying that the condition of the roads would

prevent the movement of infantry, he replied that I would have to

seize Five Forks with the cavalry alone.



On my way back to Dinwiddie I stopped at the headquarters of General

Warren, but the General being asleep, I went to the tent of one of

his staff-officers.  Colonel William T. Gentry, an old personal

friend with whom I had served in Oregon.  In a few minutes Warren

came in and we had a short conversation, he speaking rather

despondently of the outlook, being influenced no doubt by the

depressing weather.



>From Warren's headquarters I returned, by the Boydton road to

Dinwiddie Court House, fording Gravelly Run with ease.  When I got as

far as the Dabney road I sent Colonel Newhall out on it toward Five

Forks, with orders for Merritt to develop the enemy's position and

strength, and then rode on to Dinwiddie to endeavor to get all my

other troops up.  Merritt was halted at the intersection of the Five

Forks and Gravelly Church roads when Newhall delivered the orders,

and in compliance moving out Gibbs's brigade promptly, sharp

skirmishing was brought on, Gibbs driving the Confederates to Five

Forks, where he found them behind a line of breastworks running along

the White Oak road.  The reconnoissance demonstrating the intention

of the enemy to hold this point, Gibbs was withdrawn.



That evening, at 7 o'clock, I reported the position of the

Confederate cavalry, and stated that it had been reinforced by

Pickett's division of infantry.  On receipt of this despatch, General

Grant offered me the Fifth Corps, but I declined to take it, and

again asked for the Sixth, saying that with it I believed I could

turn the enemy (Pickett's) left, or break through his lines.  The

morning of the 31st General Grant replied the the Sixth Corps could

not be taken from its position in the line, and offered me the

Second; but in the mean time circumstances had changed, and no corps

was ordered.









CHAPTER VI.



BATTLE OF DINWIDDIE COURT HOUSE--PICKETT REPULSED--REINFORCED BY THE

FIFTH CORPS--BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS--TURNING THE CONFEDERATE LEFT--AN

UNQUALIFIED SUCCESS--RELIEVING GENERAL WARREN--THE WARREN COURT OF

INQUIRY--GENERAL SHERMAN'S OPINION.



The night of March 30 Merritt, with Devin's division and Davies's

brigade, was camped on the Five Forks road about two miles in front

of Dinwiddie, near J. Boisseau's.  Crook, with Smith and Gregg's

brigades, continued to cover Stony Creek, and Custer was still back

at Rowanty Creek, trying to get the trains up.  This force had been

counted while crossing the creek on the 29th, the three divisions

numbering 9,000 enlisted men, Crook having 3,300, and Custer and

Devin 5,700.



During the 30th, the enemy had been concentrating his cavalry, and by

evening General W. H. F. Lee and General Rosser had joined Fitzhugh

Lee near Five Forks.  To this force was added, about dark, five

brigades of infantry--three from Pickett's division, and two from

Johnson's--all under command of Pickett.  The infantry came by the

White Oak road from the right of General Lee's intrenchments, and

their arrival became positively known to me about dark, the

confirmatory intelligence being brought in then by some of Young's

scouts who had been inside the Confederate lines.



On the 31st, the rain having ceased, directions were given at an

early hour to both Merritt and Crook to make reconnoissances

preparatory to securing Five Forks, and about 9 o'clock Merritt

started for the crossroads, Davies's brigade supporting him.  His

march was necessarily slow because of the mud, and the enemy's

pickets resisted with obstinacy also, but the coveted crossroads fell

to Merritt without much trouble, as the bulk of the enemy was just

then bent on other things.  At the same hour that Merritt started,

Crook moved Smith's brigade out northwest from Dinwiddie to

Fitzgerald's crossing of Chamberlain's Creek, to cover Merritt's

left, supporting Smith by placing Gregg to his right and rear.  The

occupation of this ford was timely, for Pickett, now in command of

both the cavalry and infantry, was already marching to get in

Merritt's rear by crossing Chamberlain's Creek.



To hold on to Fitzgerald's ford Smith had to make a sharp fight, but

Mumford's cavalry attacking Devin, the enemy's infantry succeeded in

getting over Chamberlain's Creek at a point higher up than

Fitzgerald's ford, and assailing Davies, forced him back in a

northeasterly direction toward the Dinwiddie and Five Forks road in

company with Devin.  The retreat of Davies permitted Pickett to pass

between Crook and Merritt, which he promptly did, effectually

separating them and cutting off both Davies and Devin from the road

to Dinwiddie, so that to get to that point they had to retreat across

the country to B. Boisseau's and then down the Boydton road.



Gibbs's brigade had been in reserve near the intersection of the Five

Forks and Dabney roads, and directing Merritt to hold on there, I

ordered Gregg's brigade to be mounted and brought to Merritt's aid,

for if Pickett continued in pursuit north of the Five Forks road he

would expose his right and rear, and I determined to attack him, in

such case, from Gibbs's position.  Gregg arrived in good season, and

as soon as his men were dismounted on Gibbs's left, Merritt assailed

fiercely, compelling Pickett to halt and face a new foe, thus

interrupting an advance that would finally have carried Pickett into

the rear of Warren's corps.



It was now about 4 o'clock in the afternoon and we were in a critical

situation, but having ordered Merritt to bring Devin and Davies to

Dinwiddie by the Boydton road, staff-officers were sent to hurry

Custer to the same point, for with its several diverging roads the

Court House was of vital importance, and I determined to stay there

at all hazards.  At the same time orders were sent to Smith's

brigade, which, by the advance of Pickett past its right flank and

the pressure of W. H. F. Lee on its front, had been compelled to give

up Fitzgerald's crossing, to fall back toward Dinwiddie but to

contest every inch of ground so as to gain time.



When halted by the attack of Gregg and Gibbs, Pickett, desisting from

his pursuit of Devin, as already stated, turned his undivided

attention to this unexpected force, and with his preponderating

infantry pressed it back on the Five Forks road toward Dinwiddle,

though our men, fighting dismounted behind barricades at different

points, displayed such obstinacy as to make Pickett's progress slow,

and thus give me time to look out a line for defending the Court

House.  I selected a place about three-fourths of a mile northwest of

the crossroads, and Custer coming up quickly with Capehart's brigade,

took position on the left of the road to Five Forks in some open

ground along the crest of a gentle ridge.  Custer got Capehart into

place just in time to lend a hand to Smith, who, severely pressed,

came back on us here from his retreat along Chamberlain's "bed"--the

vernacular for a woody swamp such as that through which Smith

retired.  A little later the brigades of Gregg and Gibbs, falling to

the rear slowly and steadily, took up in the woods a line which

covered the Boydton Road some distance to the right of Capehart, the

intervening gap to be filled with Pennington's brigade.  By this time

our horse-artillery, which for two days had been stuck in the mud,

was all up, and every gun was posted in this line.



It was now near sunset, and the enemy's cavalry thinking the day was

theirs, made a dash at Smith, but just as the assailants appeared in

the open fields, Capehart's men opened so suddenly on their left

flank as to cause it to recoil in astonishment, which permitted Smith

to connect his brigade with Custer unmolested.  We were now in good

shape behind the familiar barricades, and having a continuous line,

excepting only the gap to be filled with Pennington, that covered

Dinwiddie and the Boydton Road.  My left rested in the woods about

half a mile west of the Court House, and the barricades extended from

this flank in a semicircle through the open fields in a northeasterly

direction, to a piece-of thick timber on the right, near the Boydton

Road.



A little before the sun went down the Confederate infantry was formed

for the attack, and, fortunately for us, Pennington's brigade came up

and filled the space to which it was assigned between Capehart and

Gibbs, just as Pickett moved out across the cleared fields in front

of Custer, in deep lines that plainly told how greatly we were

outnumbered.



Accompanied by Generals Merritt and Custer and my staff, I now rode

along the barricades to encourage the men.  Our enthusiastic

reception showed that they were determined to stay.  The cavalcade

drew the enemy's fire, which emptied several of the saddles--among

others Mr. Theodore Wilson, correspondent of the New York Herald,

being wounded.  In reply our horse-artillery opened on the advancing

Confederates, but the men behind the barricades lay still till

Pickett's troops were within short range.  Then they opened, Custer's

repeating rifles pouring out such a shower of lead that nothing could

stand up against it.  The repulse was very quick, and as the gray

lines retired to the woods from which but a few minutes before they

had so confidently advanced, all danger of their taking Dinwiddie or

marching to the left and rear of our infantry line was over, at least

for the night.  The enemy being thus checked, I sent a staff-officer-

-Captain Sheridan--to General Grant to report what had taken place

during the afternoon, and to say that I proposed to stay at

Dinwiddie, but if ultimately compelled to abandon the place, I would

do so by retiring on the Vaughn road toward Hatcher's Run, for I then

thought the attack might be renewed next morning.  Devin and Davies

joined me about dark, and my troops being now well in hand, I sent a

second staff-officer--Colonel John Kellogg--to explain my situation

more fully, and to assure General Grant that I would hold on at

Dinwiddie till forced to let go.



By following me to Dinwiddie the enemy's infantry had completely

isolated itself, and hence there was now offered the Union troops a

rare opportunity.  Lee was outside of his works, just as we desired,

and the general-in-chief realized this the moment he received the

first report of my situation; General Meade appreciated it too from

the information he got from Captain Sheridan, en route to army

headquarters with the first tidings, and sent this telegram to

General Grant :



"HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC,

"March 31, 1865.  9:45 p.m.



"LIEUTENANT-GENERAL GRANT:



"Would it not be well for Warren to go down with his whole corps and

smash up the force in front of Sheridan?  Humphreys can hold the line

to the Boydton plank-road, and the refusal along with it.  Bartlett's

brigade is now on the road from G. Boisseau's, running north, where

it crosses Gravelly Run, he having gone down the White Oak road.

Warren could go at once that way, and take the force threatening

Sheridan in rear at Dinwiddie, and move on the enemy's rear with the

other two.



"G. G. MEADE, Major-General."





An hour later General Grant replied in these words:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"DABNEY'S MILLS, March 311, 1865.  10:15 P. M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE,

"Commanding Army of the Potomac.



Let Warren move in the way you propose, and urge him not to stop for

anything.  Let Griffin (Griffin had been ordered by Warren to the

Boydton road to protect his rear) go on as he was first directed.



"U. S. GRANT, Lieutenant-General."





These two despatches were the initiatory steps in sending the Fifth

Corps, under Major-General G. K. Warren, to report to me, and when I

received word of its coming and also that Genera Mackenzie's cavalry

from the Army of the James was likewise to be added to my command,

and that discretionary authority was given me to use all my forces

against Pickett, I resolved to destroy him, if it was within the

bounds of possibility, before he could rejoin Lee.



In a despatch, dated 10:05 p.m., telling me of the coming of Warren

and Mackenzie, General Grant also said that the Fifth Corps should

reach me by 12 o'clock that night, but at that hour not only had none

of the corps arrived, but no report from it, so believing that if it

came all the way down to Dinwiddie the next morning, our opportunity

would be gone, I concluded that it would be best to order Warren to

move in on the enemy's rear while the cavalry attacked in front, and,

therefore, at 3 o'clock in the morning of April 1 sent this despatch

to General Warren:



"CAVALRY HEADQUARTERS, DINWIDDIE C. H.,

"April 1, 1865--3. A.M.



"MAJOR-GENERAL WARREN,

"Commanding Fifth Army Corps.



I am holding in front of Dinwiddie Court House, on the road leading

to Five Forks, for three-quarters of a mile with General Custer's

division.  The enemy are in his immediate front, lying so as to cover

the road just this side of A. Adams's house, which leads across

Chamberlain's bed, or run.  I understand you have a division at J.[G]

Boisseau's; if so, you are in rear of the enemy's line and almost on

his flank.  I will hold on here.  Possibly they may attack Custer at

daylight; if so, attack instantly and in full force.  Attack at

daylight anyhow, and I will make an effort to get the road this side

of Adams's house, and if I do, you can capture the whole of them.

Any force moving down the road I am holding, or on the White Oak

road, will be in the enemy's rear, and in all probability get any

force that may escape you by a flank movement.  Do not fear my

leaving here.  If the enemy remains, I shall fight at daylight.



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General.





With daylight came a slight fog, but it lifted almost immediately,

and Merritt moved Custer and Devin forward.  As these divisions

advanced the enemy's infantry fell back on the Five Forks road, Devin

pressing him along the road, while Custer extended on the left over

toward Chamberlain's Run, Crook being held in watch along Stony

Creek, meanwhile, to be utilized as circumstances might require when

Warren attacked.



The order of General Meade to Warren the night of March 31--a copy

being sent me also--was positive in its directions, but as midnight

came without a sign of or word from the Fifth Corps, notwithstanding

that was the hour fixed for its arrival, I nevertheless assumed that

there were good reasons for its non-appearance, but never once

doubted that measures would be taken to comply with my despatch Of

3 A. M. and therefore hoped that, as Pickett was falling back slowly

toward Five Forks, Griffin's and Crawford's divisions would come in

on the Confederate left and rear by the Crump road near J.[G]

Boisseau's house.



But they did not reach there till after the enemy had got by.  As a

matter of fact, when Pickett was passing the all-important point

Warren's men were just breaking from the bivouac in which their chief

had placed them the night before, and the head of Griffin's division

did not get to Boisseau's till after my cavalry, which meanwhile had

been joined by Ayres's division of the Fifth Corps by way of the

Boydton and Dabney roads.  By reason of the delay in moving Griffin

and Crawford, the enemy having escaped, I massed the Fifth Corps at

J.[G] Boisseau's so that the men could be rested, and directed it to

remain there; General Warren himself had not then come up.  General

Mackenzie, who had reported just after daybreak, was ordered at first

to stay at Dinwiddie Court House, but later was brought along the

Five Forks road to Dr. Smith's, and Crook's division was directed to

continue watching the crossings of Stony Creek and Chamberlain's Run.



That we had accomplished nothing but to oblige our foe to retreat was

to me bitterly disappointing, but still feeling sure that he would

not give up the Five Forks crossroads without a fight, I pressed him

back there with Merritt's cavalry, Custer advancing on the Scott

road, while Devin drove the rearguard along that leading from J.[G]

Boisseau's to Five Forks.



By 2 o'clock in the afternoon Merritt had forced the enemy inside his

intrenchments, which began with a short return about three-quarters

of a mile east of the Forks and ran along the south side of the White

Oak road to a point about a mile west of the Forks.  From the left of

the return over toward Hatcher's Run was posted Mumford's cavalry,

dismounted.  In the return itself was Wallace's brigade, and next on

its right came Ransom's, then Stewart's, then Terry's, then Corse's.

On the right of Corse was W. H. F. Lee's division of cavalry.  Ten

pieces of artillery also were in this line, three on the right of the

works, three near the centre at the crossroads, and four on the left,

in the return.  Rosser's cavalry was guarding the Confederate trains

north of Hatcher's Run beyond the crossing of the Ford road.



I felt certain the enemy would fight at Five Forks--he had to--so,

while we were getting up to his intrenchments, I decided on my plan

of battle.  This was to attack his whole front with Merritt's two

cavalry divisions, make a feint of turning his right flank, and with

the Fifth Corps assail his left.  As the Fifth Corps moved into

action, its right flank was to be covered by Mackenzie's cavalry,

thus entirely cutting off Pickett's troops from communication with

Lee's right flank, which rested near the Butler house at the junction

of the Claiborne and White Oaks roads.  In execution of this plan,

Merritt worked his men close in toward the intrenchments, and while

he was thus engaged, I ordered Warren to bring up the Fifth Corps,

sending the order by my engineer officer, Captain Gillespie, who had

reconnoitred the ground in the neighborhood of Gravelly Run Church,

where the infantry was to form for attack.



Gillespie delivered the order about 1 o'clock, and when the corps was

put in motion, General Warren joined me at the front.  Before he

came, I had received, through Colonel Babcock, authority from General

Grant to relieve him, but I did not wish to do it, particularly on

the eve of battle; so, saying nothing at all about the message

brought me, I entered at once on the plan for defeating Pickett,

telling Warren how the enemy was posted, explaining with considerable

detail, and concluding by stating that I wished his troops to be

formed on the Gravelly Church road, near its junction with the White

Oak road, with two divisions to the front, aligned obliquely to the

White Oak road, and one in reserve, opposite the centre of these two.



General Warren seemed to understand me clearly, and then left to join

his command, while I turned my attention to the cavalry, instructing

Merritt to begin by making demonstrations as though to turn the

enemy's right, and to assault the front of the works with his

dismounted cavalry as soon as Warren became engaged.  Afterward I

rode around to Gravelly Run Church, and found the head of Warren's

column just appearing, while he was sitting under a tree making a

rough sketch of the ground.  I was disappointed that more of the

corps was not already up, and as the precious minutes went by without

any apparent effort to hurry the troops on to the field, this

disappointment grew into disgust.  At last I expressed to Warren my

fears that the cavalry might expend all their ammunition before the

attack could be made, that the sun would go down before the battle

could be begun, or that troops from Lee's right, which, be it

remembered, was less than three miles away from my right, might, by

striking my rear, or even by threatening it, prevent the attack on

Pickett.



Warren did not seem to me to be at all solicitous; his manner

exhibited decided apathy, and he remarked with indifference that

"Bobby Lee was always getting people into trouble."  With unconcern

such as this, it is no wonder that fully three hours' time was

consumed in marching his corps from J.[G]  Boisseau's to Gravelly Run

Church, though the distance was but two miles.  However, when my

patience was almost worn out, Warren reported his troops ready,

Ayres's division being formed on the west side of the Gravelly Church

road, Crawford's on the east side, and Griffin in reserve behind the

right of Crawford, a little different from my instructions.  The

corps had no artillery present, its batteries, on account of the mud,

being still north of Gravelly Run.  Meanwhile Merritt had been busy

working his men close up to the intrenchments from the angle of the

return west, along the White Oak road.



About 4 o'clock Warren began the attack.  He was to assault the left

flank of the Confederate infantry at a point where I knew Pickett's

intrenchments were refused, almost at right angles with the White Oak

road.  I did not know exactly how far toward Hatcher's Run this part

of the works extended, for here the videttes of Mumford's cavalry

were covering, but I did know where the refusal began.  This return,

then, was the point I wished to assail, believing that if the assault

was made with spirit, the line could be turned.  I therefore intended

that Ayres and Crawford should attack the refused trenches squarely,

and when these two divisions and Merritt's cavalry became hotly

engaged, Griffin's division was to pass around the left of the

Confederate line; and I personally instructed Griffin how I wished

him to go in, telling him also that as he advanced, his right flank

would be taken care of by Mackenzie,who was to be pushed over toward

the Ford road and Hatcher's Run.



The front of the corps was oblique to the White Oak road; and on

getting there, it was to swing round to the left till perpendicular

to the road, keeping closed to the left.  Ayres did his part well,

and to the letter, bringing his division square up to the front of

the return near the angle; but Crawford did not wheel to the left, as

was intended.  On the contrary, on receiving fire from Mumford's

cavalry, Crawford swerved to the right and moved north from the

return, thus isolating his division from Ayres; and Griffin,

uncertain of the enemy's position, naturally followed Crawford.



The deflection of this division on a line of march which finally

brought it out on the Ford road near C. Young's house, frustrated the

purpose I had in mind when ordering the attack, and caused a gap

between Ayres and Crawford, of which the enemy quickly took

advantage, and succeeded in throwing a part of Ayres's division into

confusion.  At this juncture I sent word to General Warren to have

Crawford recalled; for the direction he was following was not only a

mistaken one, but, in case the assault at the return failed, he ran

great risk of capture.  Warren could not be found, so I then sent for

Griffin--first by Colonel Newhall, and then by Colonel Sherman--to

come to the aid of Ayres, who was now contending alone with that part

of the enemy's infantry at the return.  By this time Griffin had

observed and appreciated Crawford's mistake, however, and when the

staff-officers reached him, was already faced to the left; so,

marching across Crawford's rear, he quickly joined Ayres, who

meanwhile had rallied his troops and carried the return.



When Ayres's division went over the flank of the enemy's works,

Devin's division of cavalry, which had been assaulting the front,

went over in company with it; and hardly halting to reform, the

intermingling infantry and dismounted cavalry swept down inside the

intrenchments, pushing to and beyond Five Forks, capturing thousands

of prisoners.  The only stand the enemy tried to make was when he

attempted to form near the Ford road.  Griffin pressed him so hard

there, however, that he had to give way in short order, and many of

his men, with three pieces of artillery, fell into the hands of

Crawford while on his circuitous march.



The right of Custer's division gained a foothold on the enemy's works

simultaneously with Devin's, but on the extreme left Custer had a

very severe combat with W. H. F. Lee's cavalry, as well as with

Corse's and Terry's infantry.  Attacking Terry and Corse with

Pennington's brigade dismounted, he assailed Lee's cavalry with his

other two brigades mounted, but Lee held on so obstinately that

Custer gained but little ground till our troops, advancing behind the

works, drove Corse and Terry out.  Then Lee made no further stand

except at the west side of the Gillian field, where, assisted by

Corse's brigade, he endeavored to cover the retreat, but just before

dark Custer, in concert with some Fifth Corps regiments under Colonel

Richardson, drove ihe last of the enemy westward on the White Oak

road.



Our success was unqualified; we had overthrown Pickett, taken six

guns, thirteen battle-flags, and nearly six thousand prisoners.  When

the battle was practically over, I turned to consider my position

with reference to the main Confederate army.  My troops, though

victorious, were isolated from the Army of the Potomac, for on the

31st of March the extreme left of that army had been thrown back

nearly to the Boydton plank-road, and hence there was nothing to

prevent the enemy's issuing from his trenches at the intersection of

the White Oak and Claiborne roads and marching directly on my rear.

I surmised that he might do this that night or early next morning.

It was therefore necessary to protect myself in this critical

situation, and General Warren having sorely disappointed me, both in

the moving of his corps and in its management during the battle, I

felt that he was not the man to rely upon under such circumstances,

and deeming that it was to the best interest of the service as well

as but just to myself, I relieved him, ordering him to report to

General Grant.



I then put Griffin in command of the Fifth Corps, and directed him to

withdraw from the pursuit as quickly as he could after following the

enemy a short distance, and form in line of battle near Gravelly Run

Church, at right angles with the White Oak road, with Ayres and

Crawford facing toward the enemy at the junction of the White Oak and

Claiborne roads, leaving Bartlett, now commanding Griffin's division,

near the Ford road.  Mackenzie also was left on the Ford road at the

crossing of Hatcher's Run, Merritt going into camp on the Widow

Gillian's plantation.  As I had been obliged to keep Crook's division

along Stony Creek throughout the day, it had taken no active part in

the battle.



Years after the war, in 1879, a Court of Inquiry was given General

Warren in relation to his conduct on the day of the battle.  He

assumed that the delay in not granting his request for an inquiry,

which was first made at the close of the war, was due to opposition

on my part.  In this he was in error; I never opposed the ordering of

the Court, but when it was finally decided to convene it I naturally

asked to be represented by counsel, for the authorization of the

Inquiry was so peculiarly phrased that it made me practically a

respondent.





"NEW YORK CITY, May 3, 1880



"MAJOR-GENERAL W. S. HANCOCK, U. S. A.

"President Court of Inquiry, Governor's Island.



"Sir: Since my arrival in this city, under a subpoena to appear and

testify before the Court of which you are president, I have been

indirectly and unofficially informed that the Court some time ago

forwarded an invitation to me (which has not been received) to appear

personally or by counsel, in order to aid it in obtaining a knowledge

as to the facts concerning the movements terminating in the battle of

'Five Forks,' with reference to the direct subjects of its inquiry.

Any invitation of this character I should always and do consider it

incumbent on me to accede to, and do everything in my power in

furtherance of the specific purposes for which courts of inquiry are

by law instituted.



"The order convening the Court (a copy of which was not received by

me at my division headquarters until two days after the time

appointed for the Court to assemble) contemplates an inquiry based on

the application of Lieutenant Colonel G. K. Warren, Corps of

Engineers, as to his conduct while major-general commanding the Fifth

Army Corps, under my command, in reference to accusations or

imputations assumed in the order to have been made against him, and I

understand through the daily press that my official report of the

battle of Five Forks has been submitted by him as a basis of inquiry.



"If it is proposed to inquire, either directly or indirectly, as to

any action of mine so far as the commanding general Fifth Army Corps

was concerned, or my motives for such action, I desire to be

specifically informed wherein such action or transaction is alleged

to contain an accusation or imputation to become a subject of

inquiry, so that, knowing what issues are raised, I may intelligently

aid the Court in arriving at the facts.



"It is a long time since the battle of Five Forks was fought, and

during the time that has elapsed the official reports of that battle

have been received and acknowledged by the Government; but now, when

the memory of events has in many instances grown dim, and three of

the principal actors on that field are dead--Generals Griffin,

Custer, and Devin, whose testimony would have been valuable--an

investigation is ordered which might perhaps do injustice unless the

facts pertinent to the issues are fully developed.



"My duties are such that it will not be convenient for me to be

present continuously during the sessions of the Court.  In order,

however, that everything may be laid before it in my power pertinent

to such specific issues as aie legally raised, I beg leave to

introduce Major Asa Bird Gardner as my counsel.



"Very respectfully,



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Lieut.-General."





Briefly stated, in my report of the battle of Five Forks there were

four imputations concerning General Warren.  The first implied that

Warren failed to reach me on the 1st of April, when I had reason to

expect him; the second, that the tactical handling of his corps was

unskillful; the third, that he did not exert himself to get his corps

up to Gravelly Run Church; and the fourth, that when portions of his

line gave way he did not exert himself to restore confidence to his

troops.  The Court found against him on the first and second counts,

and for him on the third and fourth.  This finding was unsatisfactory

to General Warren, for he hoped to obtain such an unequivocal

recognition of his services as to cast discredit on my motives for

relieving him.  These were prompted by the conditions alone--by the

conduct of General Warren as described, and my consequent lack of

confidence in him.



It will be remembered that in my conversation with General Grant on

the 30th, relative to the suspension of operations because of the

mud, I asked him to let me have the Sixth Corps to help me in

breaking in on the enemy's right, but that it could not be sent me;

it will be recalled also that the Fifth Corps was afterward tendered

and declined.  From these facts it has been alleged that I was

prejudiced against General Warren, but this is not true.  As we had

never been thrown much together I knew but little of him.  I had no

personal objection to him, and certainly could have none to his

corps.  I was expected to do an extremely dangerous piece of work,

and knowing the Sixth Corps well--my cavalry having campaigned with

it so successfully in the Shenandoah Valley, I naturally preferred

it, and declined the Fifth for no other reason.  But the Sixth could

not be given, and the turn of events finally brought me the Fifth

after my cavalry, under the most trying difficulties, had drawn the

enemy from his works, and into such a position as to permit the

realization of General Grant's hope to break up with my force Lee's

right flank.  Pickett's isolation offered an opportunity which we

could not afford to neglect, and the destruction of his command would

fill the measure of General Grant's expectations as well as meet my

own desires.  The occasion was not an ordinary one, and as I thought

that Warren had not risen to its demand in the battle, I deemed it

injudicious and unsafe under the critical conditions existing to

retain him longer.  That I was justified in this is plain to all who

are disposed to be fair-minded, so with the following extract from

General Sherman's review of the proceedings of the Warren Court, and

with which I am convinced the judgment of history will accord, I

leave the subject:



"....It would be an unsafe and dangerous rule to hold the commander

of an army in battle to a technical adherence to any rule of conduct

for managing his command.  He is responsible for results, and holds

the lives and reputations of every officer and soldier under his

orders as subordinate to the great end--victory.  The most important

events are usually compressed into an hour, a minute, and he cannot

stop to analyze his reasons.  He must act on the impulse, the

conviction, of the instant, and should be sustained in his

conclusions, if not manifestly unjust.  The power to command men, and

give vehement impulse to their joint action, is something which

cannot be defined by words, but it is plain and manifest in battles,

and whoever commands an army in chief must choose his subordinates by

reason of qualities which can alone be tested in actual conflict.



"No one has questioned the patriotism, integrity, and great

intelligence of General Warren.  These are attested by a long record

of most excellent service, but in the clash of arms at and near Five

Forks, March 31 and April 1, 1865, his personal activity fell short

of the standard fixed by General Sheridan, on whom alone rested the

great responsibility for that and succeeding days.



"My conclusion is that General Sheridan was perfectly justified in

his action in this case, and he must be fully and entirely sustained

if the United States expects great victories by her arms in the

future."









CHAPTER VII.



RESULT OF THE BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS--RETREAT OF LEE--AN INTERCEPTED

DESPATCH--AT AMELIA COURT HOUSE--BATTLE OF SAILOR'S CREEK--THE

CONFEDERATES' STUBBORN RESISTANCE--A COMPLETE VICTORY--IMPORTANCE OF

THE BATTLE.



When the news of the battle at Five Forks reached General Grant, he

realized that the decisive character of our victory would necessitate

the immediate abandonment of Richmond and Petersburg by the enemy;

and fearing that Lee would escape without further injury, he issued

orders, the propriety of which must be settled by history, to assault

next morning the whole intrenched line.  But Lee could not retreat at

once.  He had not anticipated, dissster at Five Forks, and hence was

unprepared to withdraw on the moment; and the necessity of getting

off his trains and munitions of war, as well as being obliged to

cover the flight of the Confederate Government, compelled him to hold

on to Richmond and Petersburg till the afternoon of the 2d, though

before that Parke, Ord, and Wright had carried his outer

intrenchments at several points, thus materially shortening the line

of investment.



The night of the 1st of April, General Humphreys's corps-the Second-

had extended its left toward the White Oak road, and early next

morning, under instructions from General Grant, Miles's division of

that corps reported to me, and supporting him with Ayres's and

Crawford's divisions of the Fifth Corps, I then directed him to

advance toward Petersburg and attack the enemy's works at the

intersection of the Claiborne and White Oak roads.



Such of the enemy as were still in the works Miles easily forced

across Hatcher's Run, in the direction of Sutherland's depot, but the

Confederates promptly took up a position north of the little stream,

and Miles being anxious to attack, I gave him leave, but just at this

time General Humphreys came up with a request to me from General

Meade to return Miles.  On this request I relinquished command of the

division, when, supported by the Fifth Corps it could have broken in

the enemy's right at a vital point; and I have always since regretted

that I did so, for the message Humphreys conveyed was without

authority from General Grant, by whom Miles had been sent to me, but

thinking good feeling a desideratum just then, and wishing to avoid

wrangles, I faced the Fifth Corps about and marched it down to Five

Forks, and out the Ford road to the crossing of Hatcher's Run.  After

we had gone, General Grant, intending this quarter of the field to be

under my control, ordered Humphreys with his other two divisions to

move to the right, in toward Petersburg.  This left Miles entirely

unsupported, and his gallant attack made soon after was unsuccessful

at first, but about 3 o'clock in the afternoon he carried the point

which covered the retreat from Petersburg and Richmond.



Merritt had been sent westward, meanwhile, in the direction of Ford's

Station, to break the enemy's horse which had been collecting to the

north of Hatcher's Run.  Meeting, with but little opposition, Merritt

drove this cavalry force in a northerly direction toward Scott's

Corners, while the Fifth Corps was pushed toward Sutherland's depot,

in the hope of coming in on the rear of the force that was

confronting Miles when I left him.  Crawford and Merritt engaged the

enemy lightly just before night, but his main column, retreating

along the river road south of the Appomattox, had got across Namozine

Creek, and the darkness prevented our doing more than to pick up some

stragglers.  The next morning the pursuit was resumed, the cavalry

again in advance, the Fifth Corps keeping up with it all the while,

and as we pressed our adversaries hundreds and hundreds of prisoners,

armed and unarmed, fell into our hands, together with many wagons and

five pieces of artillery.  At Deep Creek the rearguard turned on us,

and a severe skirmish took place.  Merritt, finding the enemy very

strong, was directed to await the arrival of Crook and for the rear

division of the Fifth Corps; but by the time they reached the creek,

darkness had again come to protect the Confederates, and we had to be

content with meagre results at that point.



>From the beginning it was apparent that Lee, in his retreat, was

making for Amelia Court House, where his columns north and south of

the Appomattox River could join, and where, no doubt, he expected to

meet supplies, so Crook was ordered to march early on April 4 to

strike the Danville railroad, between Jettersville and Burkeville,

and then move south along the railroad toward JettersVille, Merritt

to move toward Amelia Court House, and the Fifth Corps to

Jettersville itself.



The Fifth Corps got to Jettersville about 5 in the afternoon, and I

immediately intrenched it across the Burkeville road with the

determination to stay there till the main army could come up, for I

hoped we could force Lee to surrender at Amelia Court House, since a

firm hold on Jettersville would cut him off from his line of retreat

toward Burkeville.



Accompanied only by my escort--the First United States Cavalry, about

two hundred strong--I reached Jettersville some little time before

the Fifth Corps, and having nothing else at hand I at once deployed

this handful of men to cover the crossroads till the arrival of the

corps.  Just as the troopers were deploying, a man on a mule, heading

for Burkeville, rode into my pickets.  He was arrested, of course,

and being searched there was found in his boots this telegram in

duplicate, signed by Lee's Commissary General.



"The army is at Amelia Court House, short of provisions.  Send

300,000 rations quickly to BurkeVille Junction." One copy was

addressed to the supply department at Danville, and the other to that

at Lynchburg.  I surmised that the telegraph lines north of

Burkeville had been broken by Crook after the despatches were

written, which would account for their being transmitted by

messenger.  There was thus revealed not only the important fact that

Lee was concentrating at Amelia Court House, but also a trustworthy

basis for estimating his troops, so I sent word to Crook to strike up

the railroad toward me, and to Merritt--who, as I have said, had

followed on the heels of the enemy--to leave Mackenzie there and

himself close in on Jettersville.  Staff-officers were also

despatched to hurry up Griffin with theFifth Corps, and his tired men

redoubled their strides.



My troops too were hard up for rations, for in the pursuit we could

not wait for our trains, so I concluded to secure if possible these

provisions intended for Lee.  To this end I directed Young to send

four of his best scouts to Burkeville Junction.  There they were to

separate, two taking the railroad toward Lynchburg and two toward

Danville, and as soon as a telegraph station was reached the telegram

was to be transmitted as it had been written and the provisions thus

hurried forward.



Although the Fifth Corps arrived at Jettersville the evening of April

4, as did also Crook's and Merritt's cavalry, yet none of the army of

the Potomac came up till about 3 o'clock the afternoon of the 5th,

the Second Corps, followed by the Sixth, joining us then.  General

Meade arrived at Jettersville an hour earlier, but being ill,

requested me to put his troops in position.  The Fifth Corps being

already intrenched across the Amelia Court House road facing north, I

placed the Sixth on its right and the Second on its left as they

reached the ground.



As the enemy had been feeling us ever since morning--to learn what he

was up to I directed Crook to send Davies's brigade on a

reconnoissance to Paine's crossroads.  Davies soon found out that Lee

was trying to escape by that flank, for at the crossroads he found

the Confederate trains and artillery moving rapidly westward.  Having

driven away the escort, Davies succeeded in burning nearly two

hundred wagons, and brought off five pieces of artillery.  Among

these wagons were some belonging to General, Lee's and to General

Fitzhugh Lee's headquarters.  This work through, Davies withdrew and

rejoined Crook, who, with Smith and Gregg, was established near Flat

Creek.



It being plain that Lee would attempt to escape as soon as his trains

were out of the way, I was most anxious to attack him when the Second

Corps began to arrive, for I felt certain that unless we did so he

would succeed in passing by our left flank, and would thus again make

our pursuit a stern-chase; but General Meade, whose plan of attack

was to advance his right flank on Amelia Court House, objected to

assailing before all his troops were up.



I then sent despatches to General Grant, explaining what Davies had

done, and telling him that the Second Corps was arriving, and that I

wished he himself was present.  I assured him of my confidence in our

capturing Lee if we properly exerted ourselves, and informed him,

finally, that I would put all my cavalry, except Mackenzie, on my

left, and that, with such a disposition of my forces, I could see no

escape for Lee.  I also inclosed him this letter, which had just been

captured:



"AMELIA C. H., April 5, 1865.



DEAR MAMMA:



"Our army is ruined, I fear.  We are all safe as yet.  Shyron left us

sick.  John Taylor is well--saw him yesterday.  We are in line of

battle this morning.  General Robert Lee is in the field near us.  My

trust is still in the justice of our cause, and that of God.  General

Hill is killed.  I saw Murray a few minutes since.  Bernard, Terry

said, was taken prisoner, but may yet get out.  I send this by a

negro I see passing up the railroad to Mechlenburg.  Love to all.



"Your devoted son,



"Wm. B. TAYLOR, Colonel."





General Grant, who on the 5th was accompanying General Ord's column

toward Burkeville Junction, did not receive this intelligence till

nearly nightfall, when within about ten miles of the Junction.  He

set out for Jettersville immediately, but did not reach us till near

midnight, too late of course to do anything that night.  Taking me

with him, we went over to see Meade, whom he then directed to advance

early in the morning on Amelia Court House.  In this interview Grant

also stated that the orders Meade had already issued would permit

Lee's escape, and therefore must be changed, for it was not the aim

only to follow the enemy, but to get ahead of him, remarking during

the conversation that, "he had no doubt Lee was moving right then."

On this same occasion Meade expressed a desire to have in the

proposed attack all the troops of the Army of the Potomac under his

own command, and asked for the return of the Fifth Corps.  I made no

objections, and it was ordered to report, to him.



When, on the morning of the 6th, Meade advanced toward Amelia Court

House, he found, as predicted, that Lee was gone.  It turned out that

the retreat began the evening of the 5th and continued all night.

Satisfied that this would be the case, I did not permit the cavalry

to participate in Meade's useless advance, but shifted it out toward

the left to the road running from Deatonsville to Rice's station,

Crook leading and Merritt close up.  Before long the enemy's trains

were discovered on this road, but Crook could make but little

impression on them, they were so strongly guarded; so, leaving

Stagg's brigade and Miller's battery about three miles southwest of

Deatonsville--where the road forks, with a branch leading north

toward the Appomattox--to harass the retreating column and find a

vulnerable point, I again shifted the rest of the cavalry toward the

left, across-country, but still keeping parallel to the enemy's line

of march.



Just after crossing Sailor's Greek, a favorable opportunity offering,

both Merritt and Crook attacked vigorously, gained the Rice's Station

road, destroyed several hundred wagons, made many prisoners, and

captured sixteen pieces of artillery.  This was important, but more

valuable still was the fact that we were astride the enemy's line of

retreat, and had cut off from joining Longstreet, waiting at Rice's

Station, a corps of Confederate infantry under General Ewell,

composed of Anderson's, Kershaw's, and Custis Lee's divisions.

Stagg's brigade and Miller's battery, which, as I have said, had been

left at the forks of the Deatonsville road, had meanwhile broken in

between the rear of Ewell's column and the head of Gordon's, forcing

Gordon to abandon his march for Rice's Station, and to take the

right-hand road at the forks, on which he was pursued by General

Humphreys.



The complete isolation of Ewell from Longstreet in his front and

Gordon in his rear led to the battle of Sailor's Creek, one of the

severest conflicts of the war, for the enemy fought with desperation

to escape capture, and we, bent on his destruction, were no less

eager and determined.  The capture of Ewell, with six of his generals

and most of his troops, crowned our success, but the fight was so

overshadowed by the stirring events of the surrender three days

later, that the battle has never been accorded the prominence it

deserves.



The small creek from which the field takes its name flows in a

northwesterly direction across the road leading from Deatonsville to

Rice's Station.  By shifting to the left, Merritt gained the Rice's

Station road west of the creek, making havoc of the wagon-trains,

while Crook struck them further on and planted himself square across

the road.  This blocked Ewell, who, advancing Anderson to some high

ground west of the creek, posted him behind barricades, with the

intention of making a hard fight there, while the main body should

escape through the woods in a westerly direction to roads that led to

Farmville.  This was prevented, however, by Crook forming his

division, two brigades dismounted and one mounted, and at once

assaulting all along Anderson's front and overlapping his right,

while Merritt fiercely attacked to the right of Crook.  The enemy

being thus held, enabled the Sixth Corps--which in the meantime I had

sent for--to come upon the ground, and Ewell, still contending with

the cavalry, found himself suddenly beset by this new danger from his

rear.  To, meet it, he placed Kershaw to the right and Custis Lee to

the left of the Rice's Station road, facing them north toward and

some little distance from Sailor's Creek, supporting Kershaw with

Commander Tucker's Marine brigade.  Ewell's skirmishers held the line

of Sailor's Creek, which runs through a gentle valley, the north

slope of which was cleared ground.



By General Grant's directions the Sixth Corps had been following my

route of march since the discovery, about 9 o'clock in the morning,

that Lee had decamped from Amelia Court House.  Grant had promptly

informed me of this in a note, saying, "The Sixth Corps will go in

with a vim any place you may dictate," so when I sent word to Wright

of the enemy's isolation, and asked him to hurry on with all speed,

his gallant corps came as fast as legs could carry them, he sending

to me successively Major McClellan and Colonel Franklin, of his

staff, to report his approach.



I was well advised as to the position of the enemy through

information brought me by an intelligent young soldier, William A.

Richardson, Company "A," Second Ohio, who, in one of the cavalry

charges on Anderson, had cleared the barricades and made his way back

to my front through Ewell's line.  Richardson had told me just how

the main body of the enemy was posted, so as Seymour's division

arrived I directed General Wright to put it on the right of the road,

while Wheaton's men, coming up all hot and out of breath, promptly

formed on Seymour's left.  Both divisions thus aligned faced

southwest toward Sailor's Creek, and the artillery of the corps being

massed to the left and front of the Hibbon house, without waiting for

Getty's division--for I feared that if we delayed longer the enemy

might effect his escape toward Farmville--the general attack was

begun.  Seymour and Wheaton, moving forward together, assailed the

enemy's front and left, and Stagg's brigade, too, which in the mean

time had been placed between Wheaton's left and Devin's right, went

at him along with them, Merritt and Crook resuming the fight from

their positions in front of Anderson.  The enemy, seeing little

chance of escape, fought like a tiger at bay, but both Seymour and

Wheaton pressed him vigorously, gaining ground at all points except

just to the right of the road, where Seymour's left was checked.

Here the Confederates burst back on us in a counter-charge, surging

down almost to the creek, but the artillery, supported by Getty, who

in the mean time had come on the ground, opened on them so terribly

that this audacious and furious onset was completely broken, though

the gallant fellows fell back to their original line doggedly, and

not until after they had almost gained the creek.  Ewell was now

hemmed in on every side, and all those under his immediate command

were captured.  Merritt and Crook had also broken up Anderson by this

time, but he himself, and about two thousand disorganized men escaped

by making their way through the woods toward the Appomattox River

before they could be entirely enveloped.  Night had fallen when the

fight was entirely over, but Devin was pushed on in pursuit for about

two miles, part of the Sixth Corps following to clinch a victory

which not only led to the annihilation of one corps of Lee's

retreating army, but obliged Longstreet to move up to Farmville, so

as to take a road north of the Appomattox River toward Lynchburg

instead of continuing toward Danville.



At the close of the battle I sent one of my staff--Colonel Redwood

Price--to General Grant to report what had been done; that we had

taken six generals and from nine to ten thousand prisoners.  On his

way Price stopped at the headquarters of General Meade, where he

learned that not the slightest intelligence of the occurrence on my

line had been received, for I not being under Meade's command, he had

paid no attention to my movements.  Price gave the story of the

battle, and General Meade, realizing its importance, sent directions

immediately to General Wright to make his report of the engagement to

the headquarters of the Army of the Potomac, assuming that Wright was

operating independently of me in the face of Grant's despatch Of

2 o'clock, which said that Wright was following the cavalry and would

"go in with a vim" wherever I dictated.  Wright could not do else

than comply with Meade's orders in the case, and I, being then in

ignorance of Meade's reasons for the assumption, could say nothing.

But General Grant plainly intending, and even directing, that the

corps should be under my command, remedied this phase of the matter,

when informed of what had taken place, by requiring Wright to send a

report of the battle through me.  What he then did, and what his

intentions and orders were, are further confirmed by a reference to

the episode in his "Memoirs," where he gives his reasons for ordering

the Sixth Corps to abandon the move on Amelia Court House and pass to

the left of the army.  On the same page he also says, referring to

the 6th of April: "The Sixth Corps now remained with the cavalry

under Sheridan's direct command until after the surrender."  He

unquestionably intended all of this, but his purpose was partly

frustrated by General Meade's action next morning in assuming

direction of the movements of the corps; and before General Grant

became aware of the actual conditions the surrender was at hand.









CHAPTER VIII.



LINCOLN'S LACONIC DESPATCH--CAPTURING LEE'S SUPPLIES--DELIGHTED

ENGINEERS--THE CONFEDERATES' LAST EFFORT--A FLAG OF TRUCE--GENERAL

GEARY'S "LAST DITCH" ABSURDITY--MEETING OF GRANT AND LEE--THE

SURRENDER--ESTIMATE OF GENERAL GRANT.



The first report of the battle of Sailor's Creek that General Grant

received was, as already stated, an oral message carried by Colonel

Price, of my staff.  Near midnight I sent a despatch giving the names

of the generals captured.  These were Ewell, Kershaw, Barton, Corse,

Dubose, and Custis Lee.  In the same despatch I wrote: "If the thing

is pressed, I think that Lee will surrender."  When Mr. Lincoln, at

City Point, received this word from General Grant, who was

transmitting every item of news to the President, he telegraphed

Grant the laconic message: "Let the thing be pressed." The morning of

the 7th we moved out at a very early hour, Crook's division marching

toward Farmville in direct pursuit, while Merritt and Mackenzie were

ordered to Prince Edward's Court House to anticipate any effort Lee

might make to escape through that place toward Danville since it had

been discovered that Longstreet had slipped away already from the

front of General Ord's troops at Rice's Station.  Crook overtook the

main body of the Confederates at Farmville, and promptly attacked

their trains on the north side of the Appomattox with Gregg's

brigade, which was fiercely turned upon and forced to re-cross the

river with the loss of a number of prisoner's, among them Gregg

himself.  When Crook sent word of this fight, it was clear that Lee

had abandoned all effort to escape to the southwest by way of

Danville.  Lynchburg was undoubtedly his objective point now; so,

resolving to throw my cavalry again across his path, and hold him

till the infantry could overtake him, I directed everything on

Appomattox depot, recalling Crook the night of the 7th to Prospect

Station, while Merritt camped at Buffalo Creek, and Mackenzie made a

reconnoissance along the Lynchburg railroad.



At break of day, April 8, Merritt and Mackenzie united with Crook at

Prospect Station, and the cavalry all moved then toward Appomattox

depot.  Hardly had it started when one of the scouts--Sergeant White-

-informed me that there were four trains of cars at the depot loaded

with supplies for Lee's army; these had been sent from Lynchburg, in

compliance with the telegram of Lee's commissary-general, which

message, it will be remembered, was captured and transmitted to

Lynchburg by two of Young's scouts on the 4th.  Sergeant White, who

had been on the lookout for the trains ever since sending the

despatch, found them several miles west of Appomattox depot feeling

their way along, in ignorance of Lee's exact position.  As he had the

original despatch with him, and took pains to dwell upon the pitiable

condition of Lee's army, he had little difficulty in persuading the

men in charge of the trains to bring them east of Appomattox Station,

but fearing that the true state of affairs would be learned before

long, and the trains be returned to Lynchburg, he was painfully

anxious to have them cut off by breaking the track west of the

station.



The intelligence as to the trains was immediately despatched to

Crook, and I pushed on to join him with Merritt's command.  Custer

having the advance, moved rapidly, and on nearing the station

detailed two regiments to make a detour southward to strike the

railroad some distance beyond and break the track.  These regiments

set off at a gallop, and in short order broke up the railroad enough

to prevent the escape of the trains, Custer meanwhile taking

possession of the station, but none too soon, for almost at the

moment he did so the advance-guard of Lee's army appeared, bent on

securing the trains.  Without halting to look after the cars further,

Custer attacked this advance-guard and had a spirited fight, in which

he drove the Confederates away from the station, captured twenty-five

pieces of artillery, a hospital train, and a large park of wagons,

which, in the hope that they would reach Lynchburg next day, were

being pushed ahead of Lee's main body.



Devin coming up a little before dusk, was put in on the right of

Custer, and one of Crook's brigades was sent to our left and the

other two held in reserve.  I then forced the enemy back on the

Appomattox road to the vicinity of the Court House, and that the

Confederates might have no rest, gave orders to continue the

skirmishing throughout the night.  Meanwhile the captured trains had

been taken charge of by locomotive engineers, soldiers of the

command, who were delighted evidently to get back at their old

calling.  They amused themselves by running the trains to and fro,

creating much confusion, and keeping up such an unearthly screeching

with the whistles that I was on the point of ordering the cars

burned.  They finally wearied of their fun, however, and ran the

trains off to the east toward General Ord's column.



The night of the 8th I made my headquarters at a little frame house

just south of the station.  I did not sleep at all, nor did anybody

else, the entire command being up all night long; indeed, there had

been little rest in the, cavalry for the past eight days.  The

necessity of getting Ord's column up was so obvious now that staff-

officer after staff-officer was sent to him and to General Grant

requesting that the infantry be pushed on, for if it could get to the

front, all knew that the rebellion would be ended on the morrow.

Merritt, Crook, Custer, and Devin were present at frequent intervals

during the night, and everybody was overjoyed at the prospect that

our weary work was about to end so happily.  Before sun-up General

Ord arrived, and informed me of the approach of his column, it having

been marching the whole night.  As he ranked me, of course I could

give him no orders, so after a hasty consultation as to where his

troops should be placed we separated, I riding to the front to

overlook my line near Appomattox Court House, while he went back to

urge along his weary troops.



The night before General Lee had held a council with his principal

generals, when it was arranged that in the morning General Gordon

should undertake to break through my cavalry, and when I neared my

troops this movement was beginning, a heavy line of infantry bearing

down on us from the direction of the village.  In front of Crook and

Mackenzie firing had already begun, so riding to a slight elevation

where a good view of the Confederates could be had, I there came to

the conclusion that it would be unwise to offer more resistance than

that necessary to give Ord time to form, so I directed Merritt to

fall back, and in retiring to shift Devin and Custer to the right so

as to make room for Ord, now in the woods to my rear.  Crook, who

with his own and Mackenzie's divisions was on my extreme left

covering some by-roads, was ordered to hold his ground as long as

practicable without sacrificing his men, and, if forced to retire, to

contest with obstinacy the enemy's advance.



As already stated, I could not direct General Ord's course, he being

my senior, but hastily galloping back to where he was, at the edge of

the timber, I explained to him what was taking place at the front.

Merritt's withdrawal inspired the Confederates, who forthwith began

to press Crook, their line of battle advancing with confidence till

it reached the crest whence I had reconnoitred them.  From this

ground they could see Ord's men emerging from the woods, and the

hopelessness of a further attack being plain, the gray lines

instinctively halted, and then began to retire toward a ridge

immediately fronting Appomattox Court House, while Ord, joined on his

right by the Fifth Corps, advanced on them over the ground that

Merritt had abandoned.



I now directed my steps toward Merritt, who, having mounted his

troopers, had moved them off to the right, and by the time I reached

his headquarters flag he was ready for work, so a move on the enemy's

left was ordered, and every guidon was bent to the front.  As the

cavalry marched along parallel with the Confederate line, and in

toward its left, a heavy fire of artillery opened on us, but this

could not check us at such a time, and we soon reached some high

ground about half a mile from the Court House, and from here I could

see in the low valley beyond the village the bivouac undoubtedly of

Lee's army.  The troops did not seem to be disposed in battle order,

but on the other side of the bivouac was a line of battle--a heavy

rear-guard--confronting, presumably, General Meade.



I decided to attack at once, and formations were ordered at a trot

for a charge by Custer's and Devin's divisions down the slope leading

to the camps.  Custer was soon ready, but Devin's division being in

rear its formation took longer, since he had to shift further to the

right; Devin's preparations were, therefore, but partially completed

when an aide-decamp galloped up to with the word from Custer, "Lee

has surrendered; do not charge; the white flag is up."  The enemy

perceiving that Custer was forming for attack, had sent the flag out

to his front and stopped the charge just in time.  I at once sent

word of the truce to General Ord, and hearing nothing more from

Custer himself, I supposed that he had gone down to the Court House

to join a mounted group of Confederates that I could see near there,

so I, too, went toward them, galloping down a narrow ridge, staff and

orderlies following; but we had not got half way to the Court House

when, from a skirt of timber to our right, not more than three

hundred yards distant, a musketry fire was opened on us.  This halted

us, when, waving my hat, I called out to the firing party that we

were under a truce, and they were violating it.  This did not stop

them, however, so we hastily took shelter in a ravine so situated as

to throw a ridge between us and the danger.



We traveled in safety down this depression to its mouth, and thence

by a gentle ascent approached the Court House.  I was in advance,

followed by a sergeant carrying my battleflag.  When I got within

about a hundred and fifty yards of the enemy's line, which was

immediately in front of the Court House, some of the Confederates

leveled their pieces at us, and I again halted.  Their officers kept

their men from firing, however, but meanwhile a single-handed contest

had begun behind me, for on looking back I heard a Confederate

soldier demanding my battle-flag from the color-bearer, thinking, no

doubt, that we were coming in as prisoners.  The sergeant had drawn

his sabre and was about to cut the man down, but at a word from me he

desisted and carried the flag back to my staff, his assailant quickly

realizing that the boot was on the other leg.



These incidents determined me to remain where I was till the return

of a staff-officer whom I had sent over to demand an explanation from

the group of Confederates for which I had been heading.  He came back

in a few minutes with apologies for what had occurred, and informed

me that General Gordon and General Wilcox were the superior officers

in the group.  As they wished me to join them I rode up with my

staff, but we had hardly met when in front of Merritt firing began.

At the sound I turned to General Gordon, who seemed embarrassed by

the occurrence, and remarked: "General, your men fired on me as I was

coming over here, and undoubtedly they are treating Merritt and

Custer the same way.  We might as well let them fight it out."  He

replied, "There must be some mistake."  I then asked, "Why not send a

staff-officer and have your people cease firing; they are violating

the flag." He answered, "I have no staff-officer to send."  Whereupon

I said that I would let him have one of mine, and calling for

Lieutenant Vanderbilt Allen, I directed him to carry General Gordon's

orders to General Geary, commanding a small brigade of South Carolina

cavalry, to discontinue firing.  Allen dashed off with the message

and soon delivered it, but was made a prisoner, Geary saying, "I do

not care for white flags: South Carolinians never surrender...."  By

this time Merritt's patience being exhausted, he ordered an attack,

and this in short order put an end to General Geary's "last ditch"

absurdity, and extricated Allen from his predicament.



When quiet was restored Gordon remarked: "General Lee asks for a

suspension of hostilities pending the negotiations which he is having

with General Grant."  I rejoined: "I have been constantly informed of

the progress of the negotiations, and think it singular that while

such discussions are going on, General Lee should have continued his

march and attempted to break through my lines this morning.  I will

entertain no terms except that General Lee shall surrender to General

Grant on his arrival here.  If these terms are not accepted we will

renew hostilities."  Gordon replied: "General Lee's army is

exhausted.  There is no doubt of his surrender to General Grant."



It was then that General Ord joined us, and after shaking hands all

around, I related the situation to him, and Gordon went away agreeing

to meet us again in half an hour.  When the time was up he came back

accompanied by General Longstreet, who brought with him a despatch,

the duplicate of one that had been sent General Grant through General

Meade's lines back on the road over which Lee had been retreating.



General Longstreet renewed the assurances that already had been given

by Gordon, and I sent Colonel Newhall with the despatch to find

General Grant and bring him to the front.  When Newhall started,

everything on our side of the Appomattox Court House was quiet, for

inevitable surrender was at hand, but Longstreet feared that Meade,

in ignorance of the new conditions on my front might attack the

Confederate rearguard.  To prevent this I offered to send Colonel J.

W. Forsyth through the enemy's lines to let Meade know of my

agreement, for he too was suspicious that by a renewed correspondence

Lee was endeavoring to gain time for escape.  My offer being

accepted, Forsyth set out accompanied by Colonel Fairfax, of

Longstreet's staff, and had no difficulty in accomplishing his

mission.



About five or six miles from Appomattox, on the road toward Prospect

Station near its intersection with the Walker's Church road, my

adjutant-general, Colonel Newhall, met General Grant, he having

started from north of the Appomattox River for my front the morning

of April 9, in consequence of the following despatches which had been

sent him the night before, after we had captured Appomattox Station

and established a line intercepting Lee:



"CAVALRY HEADQUARTERS, April 8, 1865--9:20 P. M.



"LIEUTENANT-GENERAL U. S. GRANT,

"Commanding Armies of the U.  S.



"General: I marched early this morning from Buffalo Creek and

Prospect Station on Appomattox Station, where my scouts had reported

trains of cars with supplies for Lee's army.  A short time before

dark General Custer, who had the advance, made a dash at the station,

capturing four trains of supplies with locomotives.  One of the

trains was burned and the others were run back toward Farmville for

security.  Custer then pushed on toward Appomattox Court House,

driving the enemy--who kept up a heavy fire of artillery--charging

them repeatedly and capturing, as far as reported, twenty-five pieces

of artillery and a number of prisoners and wagons.  The First Cavalry

Division supported him on the right.  A reconnoissance sent across

the Appomattox reports the enemy moving on the Cumberland road to

Appomattox Station, where they expect to get supplies.  Custer is

still pushing on.  If General Gibbon and the Fifth Corps can get up

to-night, we will perhaps finish the job in the morning.  I do not

think Lee means to surrender until compelled to do so.



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General."







"HEADQUARTERS CAVALRY, April 8, 1865--9:40 p.m.



"LIEUTENANT-GENERAL U. S. GRANT.

"Commanding Armies U. S.



"GENERAL: Since writing tne accompanying despatch, General Custer

reports that his command has captured in all thirty-five pieces of

artillery, one thousand prisoners--including one general officer--and

from one hundred and fifty to two hundred wagons.



"P. H. SHERIDAN, Major-General."





In attempting to conduct the lieutenant-general and staff back by a

short route, Newhall lost his bearings for a time, inclining in

toward the enemy's lines too far, but regained the proper direction

without serious loss of time.  General Grant arrived about 1 o'clock

in the afternoon, Ord and I, dismounted, meeting him at the edge of

the town, or crossroads, for it was little more.  He remaining

mounted, spoke first to me, saying simply,



"How are you, Sheridan?"  I assured him with thanks that I was

"first-rate," when, pointing toward the village, he asked, "Is

General Lee up there?" and I replied: There is his army down in that

valley, and he himself is over in that house (designating McLean's

house) waiting to surrender to you."  The General then said, "Come,

let us go over," this last remark being addressed to both Ord and me.

We two then mounted and joined him, while our staff-officers

followed, intermingling with those of the general-in-chief as the

cavalcade took its way to McLean's house near by, and where General

Lee had arrived some time before, in consequence of a message from

General Grant consenting to the interview asked for by Lee through

Meade's front that morning--the consent having been carried by

Colonel Babcock.



When I entered McLean's house General Lee was standing, as was also

his military secretary, Colonel Marshall, his only staff-officer

present.  General Lee was dressed in a new uniform and wore a

handsome sword.  His tall, commanding form thus set off contrasted

strongly with the short figure of General Grant, clothed as he was in

a soiled suit, without sword or other insignia of his position except

a pair of dingy shoulder-straps.  After being presented, Ord and I,

and nearly all of General Grant's staff, withdrew to await the

agreement as to terms, and in a little while Colonel Babcock came to

the door and said, "The surrender had been made; you can come in

again."



When we re-entered General Grant was writing; and General Lee, having

in his hand two despatches, which I that morning requested might be

returned, as I had no copies of them, addressed me with the remark:

"I am sorry.  It is probable that my cavalry at that point of the

line did not fully understand the agreement." These despatches had

been sent in the forenoon, after the fighting had been stopped,

notifying General Lee that some of his cavalry in front of Crook was

violating the suspension of hostilities by withdrawing.  About

3 o'clock in the afternoon the terms of surrender were written out

and accepted, and General Lee left the house, as he departed

cordially shaking hands with General Grant.  A moment later he

mounted his chunky gray horse, and lifting his hat as he passed out

of the yard, rode off toward his army, his arrival there being

announced to us by cheering, which, as it progressed, varying in

loudness, told he was riding through the bivouac of the Army of

Northern Virginia.



The surrender of General Lee practically ended the war of the

rebellion.  For four years his army had been the main-stay of the

Confederacy; and the marked ability with which he directed its

operations is evidenced both by his frequent successes and the length

of time he kept up the contest.  Indeed, it may be said that till

General Grant was matched against him, he never met an opponent he

did not vanquish, for while it is true that defeat was inflicted on

the Confederates at Antietam and Gettysburg, yet the fruits of these

victories were not gathered, for after each of these battles Lee was

left unmolested till he had a chance to recuperate.



The assignment of General Grant to the command of the Union armies in

the winter of 1863-64 gave presage of success from the start, for his

eminent abilities had already been proved, and besides, he was a

tower of strength to the Government, because he had the confidence of

the people.  They knew that henceforth systematic direction would be

given to our armies in every section of the vast territory over which

active operations were being prosecuted, and further, that this

coherence, this harmony of plan, was the one thing needed to end the

war, for in the three preceding years there had been illustrated most

lamentable effects of the absence of system.  From the moment he set

our armies in motion simultaneously, in the spring of 1864, it could

be seen that we should be victorious ultimately, for though on

different lines we were checked now and then, yet we were harassing

the Confederacy at so many vital points that plainly it must yield to

our blows.  Against Lee's army, the forefront of the Confederacy,

Grant pitted himself; and it may be said that the Confederate

commander was now, for the first time, overmatched, for against all

his devices--the products of a mind fertile in defense--General Grant

brought to bear not only the wealth of expedient which had hitherto

distinguished him, but also an imperturbable tenacity, particularly

in the Wilderness and on the march to the James, without which the

almost insurmountable obstacles of that campaign could not have been

overcome.  During it and in the siege of Petersburg he met with many

disappointments--on several occasions the shortcomings of generals,

when at the point of success, leading to wretched failures.  But so

far as he was concerned, the only apparent effect of these

discomfitures was to make him all the more determined to discharge

successfully the stupendous trust committed to his care, and to bring

into play the manifold resources of his well ordered military mind.

He guided every subordinate then, and in the last days of the

rebellion, with a fund of common sense and superiority of intellect,

which have left an impress so distinct as to exhibit his great

personality.  When his military history is analyzed after the lapse

of years, it will show, even more clearly than now, that during these

as well as in his previous campaigns he was the steadfast Centre

about and on which everything else turned.









CHAPTER IX.



ORDERED TO GREENSBORO', N. C.--MARCH TO THE DAN RIVER--ASSIGNED TO

THE COMMAND WEST OF THE MISSISSIPPI--LEAVING WASHINGTON--FLIGHT OF

GENERAL EARLY--MAXIMILIAN--MAKING DEMONSTRATIONS ON THE UPPER RIO

GRANDE--CONFEDERATES JOIN MAXIMILIAN--THE FRENCH INVASION OF MEXICO

AND ITS RELATIONS TO THE REBELLION--ASSISTING THE LIBERALS--

RESTORATION OF THE REPUBLIC.



The surrender at Appomattox put a stop to all military operations on

the part of General Grant's forces, and the morning of April 10 my

cavalry began its march to Petersburg, the men anticipating that they

would soon be mustered out and returned to their homes.  At Nottoway

Court House I heard of the assassination of the President.  The first

news came to us the night after the dastardly deed, the telegraph

operator having taken it from the wires while in transmission to

General Meade.  The despatch ran that Mr. Lincoln had been, shot at

10 o'clock that morning at Willard's Hotel, but as I could conceive

of nothing to take the President there I set the story down as a

canard, and went to bed without giving it further thought.  Next

morning, however, an official telegram confirmed the fact of the

assassination, though eliminating the distorted circumstances that

had been communicated the night before.



When we reached Petersburg my column was halted, and instructions

given me to march the cavalry and the Sixth Corps to Greensboro',

North Carolina, for the purpose of aiding General Sherman (the

surrender of General Johnston having not yet been effected), so I

made the necessary preparations and moved on the 24th of April,

arriving at South Boston, on the Dan River, the 28th, the Sixth Corps

having reached Danville meanwhile.  At South Boston I received a

despatch from General Halleck, who immediately after Lee's surrender

had been assigned to command at Richmond, informing me that General

Johnston had been brought to terms.  The necessity for going farther

south being thus obviated we retraced our steps to Petersburg, from

which place I proceeded by steamer to Washington, leaving, the

cavalry to be marched thither by easy stages.



The day after my arrival in Washington an important order was sent

me, accompanied by the following letter of instructions, transferring

me to a new field of operations:





"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

"Washington, D.  C., May 17, 1865.



"GENERAL : Under the orders relieving you from the command of the

Middle Military Division and assigning you to command west of the

Mississippi, you will proceed without delay to the West to arrange

all preliminaries for your new field of duties.



"Your duty is to restore Texas, and that part of Louisiana held by

the enemy, to the Union in the shortest practicable time, in a way

most effectual for securing permanent peace.



"To do this, you will be given all the troops that can be spared

by Major-General Canby, probably twenty-five thousand men of

all arms; the troops with Major-General J. J. Reynolds, in Arkansas,

say twelve thousand, Reynolds to command; the Fourth

Army Corps, now at Nashville, Tennessee, awaiting orders; and

the Twenty-Fifth Army Corps, now at City Point, Virginia, ready

to embark.



"I do not wish to trammel you with instructions; I will state,

however, that if Smith holds out, without even an ostensible

government to receive orders from or to report to, he and his men are

not entitled to the considerations due to an acknowledged

belligerent.  Theirs are the conditions of outlaws, making war

against the only Government having an existence over the territory

where war is now being waged.



"You may notify the rebel commander west of the Mississippi--holding

intercourse with him in person, or through such officers of the rank

of major-general as you may select--that he will be allowed to

surrender all his forces on the same terms as were accorded to Lee

and Johnston.  If he accedes, proceed to garrison the Red River as

high up as Shreveport, the seaboard at Galveston, Malagorda Bay,

Corpus Christi, and mouth of the Rio Grande.



"Place a strong force on the Rio Grande, holding it at least to a

point opposite Camargo, and above that if supplies can be procured.



"In case of an active campaign (a hostile one) I think a heavy force

should be put on the Rio Grande as a first preliminary.  Troops for

this might be started at once.  The Twenty-Fifth Corps is now

available, and to it should be added a force of white troops, say

those now under Major-General Steele.



"To be clear on this last point, I think the Rio Grande should be

strongly held, whether the forces in Texas surrender or not, and that

no time should be lost in getting troops there.  If war is to be

made, they will be in the right place; if Kirby Smith surrenders,

they will be on the line which is to be strongly garrisoned.



"Should any force be necessary other than those designated, they can

be had by calling for them on Army Headquarters.



"U. S. GRANT,

"Lieutenant-General.



"To MAJOR-GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN,

"United States Army."





On receipt of these instructions I called at once on General Grant,

to see if they were to be considered so pressing as to preclude my

remaining in Washington till after the Grand Review, which was fixed

for the 23d and 24th of May, for naturally I had a strong desire to

head my command on that great occasion.  But the General told me that

it was absolutely necessary to go at once to force the surrender of

the Confederates under Kirby Smith.  He also told me that the States

lately in rebellion would be embraced in two or three military

departments, the commanders of which would control civil affairs

until Congress took action about restoring them to the Union, since

that course would not only be economical and simple, but would give

the Southern people confidence, and encourage them to go to work,

instead of distracting them with politics.



At this same interview he informed me that there was an additional

motive in sending me to the new command, a motive not explained by

the instructions themselves, and went on to say that, as a matter of

fact, he looked upon the invasion of Mexico by Maximilian as a part

of the rebellion itself, because of the encouragement that invasion

had received from the Confederacy, and that our success in putting

down secession would never be complete till the French and Austrian

invaders were compelled to quit the territory of our sister republic.

With regard to this matter, though, he said it would be necessary for

me to act with great circumspection, since the Secretary of State,

Mr. Seward, was much opposed to the use of our troops along the

border in any active way that would be likely to involve us in a war

with European powers.



Under the circumstances, my disappointment at not being permitted to

participate in the review had to be submitted to, and I left

Washington without an opportunity of seeing again in a body the men

who, while under my command, had gone through so many trials and

unremittingly pursued and, assailed the enemy, from the beginning of

the campaign of 1864 till the white flag came into their hands at

Appomattox Court House.



I went first to St.  Louis, and there took the steamboat for New

Orleans, and when near the mouth of the Red River received word from

General Canby that Kirby Smith had surrendered under terms similar to

those accorded Lee and Johnston.  But the surrender was not carried

out in good faith, particularly by the Texas troops, though this I

did not learn till some little time afterward when I was informed

that they had marched off to the interior of the State in several

organized bodies, carrying with them their camp equipage, arms,

ammunition, and even some artillery, with the ultimate purpose of

going to Mexico.  In consequence of this, and also because of the

desire of the Government to make a strong showing of force in Texas,

I decided to traverse the State with two columns of cavalry,

directing one to San Antonio under Merritt, the other to Houston

under Custer.  Both commands were to start from the Red River--

Shreveport and Alexandria--being the respective initial points--and

in organizing the columns, to the mounted force already on the Red

River were added several regiments of cavalry from the east bank of

the, Mississippi, and in a singular way one of these fell upon the

trail of my old antagonist, General Early.  While crossing the river

somewhere below Vicksburg some of the men noticed a suspicious

looking party being ferried over in a rowboat, behind which two

horses were swimming in tow.  Chase was given, and the horses, being

abandoned by the party, fell into the hands of our troopers, who,

however, failed to capture or identify the people in the boat.  As

subsequently ascertained, the men were companions of Early, who was

already across the Mississippi, hidden in the woods, on his way with

two or three of these followers to join the Confederates in Texas,

not having heard of Kirby Smith's surrender.  A week or two later I

received a letter from Early describing the affair, and the capture

of the horses, for which he claimed pay, on the ground that they were

private property, because he had taken them in battle.  The letter

also said that any further pursuit of Early would be useless, as he

"expected to be on the deep blue sea" by the time his communication

reached me.  The unfortunate man was fleeing from imaginary dangers,

however, for striking his trail was purely accidental, and no effort

whatever was being made to arrest him personally.  Had this been

especially desired it might have been accomplished very readily just

after Lee's surrender, for it was an open secret that Early was then

not far away, pretty badly disabled with rheumatism.



By the time the two columns were ready to set out for San Antonio and

Houston, General Frank Herron,--with one division of the Thirteenth

Corps, occupied Galveston, and another division under General Fred

Steele had gone to Brazos Santiago, to hold Brownsville and the line

of the Rio Grande, the object being to prevent, as far as possible,

the escaping Confederates from joining Maximilian.  With this purpose

in view, and not forgetting Grant's conviction that the French

invasion of Mexico was linked with the rebellion, I asked for an

increase of force to send troops into Texas in fact, to concentrate

at available points in the State an army strong enough to move

against the invaders of Mexico if occasion demanded.  The Fourth and

Twenty-fifth army corps being ordered to report to me, accordingly, I

sent the Fourth Corps to Victoria and San Antonio, and the bulk of

the Twenty-fifth to Brownsville.  Then came the feeding and caring

for all these troops--a difficult matter--for those at Victoria and

San Antonio had to be provisioned overland from Indianola across the

"hog-wallow prairie," while the supplies for the forces at

Brownsville and along the Rio Grande must come by way of Brazos

Santiago, from which point I was obliged to construct, with the labor

of the men, a railroad to Clarksville, a distance of about eighteen

miles.



The latter part of June I repaired to Brownsville myself to impress

the Imperialists, as much as possible, with the idea that we intended

hostilities, and took along my chief of scouts--Major Young--and four

of his most trusty men, whom I had had sent from Washington.  From

Brownsville I despatched all these men to important points in

northern Mexico, to glean information regarding the movements of the

Imperial forces, and also to gather intelligence about the ex-

Confederates who had crossed the Rio Grande.  On information

furnished by these scouts, I caused General Steele to make

demonstrations all along the lower Rio Grande, and at the same time

demanded the return of certain munitions of war that had been turned

over by ex-Confederates to the Imperial General (Mejia) commanding at

Matamoras.  These demands, backed up as they were by such a

formidable show of force created much agitation and demoralization

among the Imperial troops, and measures looking to the abandonment of

northern Mexico were forthwith adopted by those in authority--a

policy that would have resulted in the speedy evacuation of the

entire country by Maximilian, had not our Government weakened;

contenting itself with a few pieces of the contraband artillery

varnished over with the Imperial apologies.  A golden opportunity was

lost, for we had ample excuse for crossing the boundary, but Mr.

Seward being, as I have already stated, unalterably opposed to any

act likely to involve us in war, insisted on his course of

negotiation with Napoleon.



As the summer wore away, Maximilian, under Mr. Seward's policy,

gained in strength till finally all the accessible sections of Mexico

were in his possession, and the Republic under President Juarez

almost succumbed.  Growing impatient at this, in the latter part of

September I decided to try again what virtue there might be in a

hostile demonstration, and selected the upper Rio Grande for the

scene of my attempt.  Merritt's cavalry and the Fourth Corps still

being at San Antonio, I went to that place and reviewed these troops,

and having prepared them with some ostentation for a campaign, of

course it was bruited about that we were going to invade Mexico.

Then, escorted by a regiment of horse I proceeded hastily to Fort

Duncan, on the Rio Grande just opposite the Mexican town of Piedras

Negras.  Here I opened communication with President Juarez, through

one of his staff, taking care not to do this in the dark, and the

news, spreading like wildfire, the greatest significance was ascribed

to my action, it being reported most positively and with many

specific details that I was only awaiting the arrival of the troops,

then under marching orders at San Antonio, to cross the Rio Grande in

behalf of the Liberal cause.



Ample corroboration of the reports then circulated was found in my

inquiries regarding the quantity of forage we could depend upon

getting in Mexico, our arrangements for its purchase, and my sending

a pontoon train to Brownsville, together with which was cited the

renewed activity of the troops along the lower Rio Grande.  These

reports and demonstrations resulted in alarming the Imperialists so

much that they withdrew the French and Austrian soldiers from

Matamoras, and practically abandoned the whole of northern Mexico as

far down as Monterey, with the exception of Matamoras, where General

Mejia continued to hang on with a garrison of renegade Mexicans.



The abandonment of so much territory in northern Mexico encouraged

General Escobedo and other Liberal leaders to such a degree that they

collected a considerable army of their followers at Comargo, Mier,

and other points.  At the same time that unknown quantity, Cortinas,

suspended his free-booting for the nonce, and stoutly harassing

Matamoras, succeeded in keeping its Imperial garrison within the

fortifications.  Thus countenanced and stimulated, and largely

supplied with arms and ammunition, which we left at convenient places

on our side of the river to fall into their hands, the Liberals,

under General Escobedo--a man of much force of character--were

enabied in northern Mexico to place the affairs of the Republic on a

substantial basis.



But in the midst of what bade fair to cause a final withdrawal of the

foreigners, we were again checked by our Government, as a result of

representations of the French Minister at Washington.  In October, he

wrote to Mr. Seward that the United States troops on the Rio Grande

were acting "in exact opposition to the repeated assurances Your

Excellency has given me concerning the desire of the Cabinet at

Washington to preserve the most strict neutrality in the events now

taking place in Mexico," and followed this statement with an emphatic

protest against our course.  Without any investigation whatever by

our State Department, this letter of the French Minister was

transmitted to me, accompanied by directions to preserve a strict

neutrality; so, of course, we were again debarred from anything like

active sympathy.



After this, it required the patience of Job to abide the slow and

poky methods of our State Department, and, in truth, it was often

very difficult to restrain officers and men from crossing the Rio

Grande with hostile purpose.  Within the knowledge of my troops,

there had gone on formerly the transfer of organized bodies of ex-

Confederates to Mexico, in aid of the Imperialists, and at this

period it was known that there was in preparation an immigration

scheme having in view the colonizing, at Cordova and one or two other

places, of all the discontented elements of the defunct Confederacy--

Generals Price, Magruder, Maury, and other high personages being

promoters of the enterprise, which Maximilian took to readily.  He

saw in it the possibilities of a staunch support to his throne, and

therefore not only sanctioned the project, but encouraged it with

large grants of land, inspirited the promoters with titles of

nobility, and, in addition, instituted a system of peonage, expecting

that the silver hook thus baited would be largely swallowed by the

Southern people.



The announcement of the scheme was followed by the appointment of

commissioners in each of the Southern States to send out emigrants;

but before any were deluded into starting, I made to General Grant a

report of what was going on, with the recommendation that measures be

taken, through our State Department, looking to the suppression of

the colony; but, as usual, nothing could be effected through that

channel; so, as an alternative, I published, in April, 1866, by

authority of General Grant, an order prohibiting the embarkation from

ports in Louisiana and Texas, for ports in Mexico, of any person

without a permit from my headquarters.  This dampened the ardor of

everybody in the Gulf States who had planned to go to Mexico; and

although the projectors of the Cordova Colonization Scheme--the name

by which it was known--secured a few innocents from other districts,

yet this set-back led ultimately to failure.



Among the Liberal leaders along the Rio Grande during this period

there sprang up many factional differences from various causes, some

personal, others political, and some, I regret to say, from downright

moral obliquity--as, for example, those between Cortinas and Canales-

-who, though generally hostile to the Imperialists, were freebooters

enough to take a shy at each other frequently, and now and then even

to join forces against Escobedo, unless we prevented them by coaxing

or threats.  A general who could unite these several factions was

therefore greatly needed, and on my return to New Orleans I so

telegraphed General Grant, and he, thinking General Caravajal (then

in Washington seeking aid for the Republic) would answer the purpose,

persuaded him to report to me in New Orleans.  Caravajal promptly

appeared, but he did not impress me very favorably.  He was old and

cranky, yet, as he seemed anxious to do his best, I sent him over to

Brownsville, with credentials, authorizing him to cross into Mexico,

and followed him myself by the next boat.  When I arrived in

Brownsville, matters in Matamoras had already reached a crisis.

General Mejia, feeling keenly the moral support we were giving the

Liberals, and hard pressed by the harassing attacks of Cortinas and

Canales, had abandoned the place, and Caravajal, because of his

credentials from our side, was in command, much to the

dissatisfaction of both those chiefs whose differences it was

intended he should reconcile.



The, day after I got to Brownsville I visited Matamoras, and had a

long interview with Caravajal.  The outcome of this meeting was, on

my part, a stronger conviction than ever that he was unsuitable, and

I feared that either Canales or Cortinas would get possession of the

city.  Caravajal made too many professions of what he would do--in

short, bragged too much--but as there was no help for the situation,

I made the best of it by trying to smooth down the ruffled feathers

of Canales and Cortinas.  In my interview with Caravajal I

recommended Major Young as a confidential man, whom he could rely

upon as a "go-between " for communicating with our people at

Brownsville, and whom he could trust to keep him informed of the

affairs of his own country as well.



A day or two afterward I recrossed the Gulf to New Orleans, and then,

being called from my headquarters to the interior of Texas, a

fortnight passed before I heard anything from Brownsville.  In the

meanwhile Major Young had come to New Orleans, and organized there a

band of men to act as a body-guard for Caravajal, the old wretch

having induced him to accept the proposition by representing that it

had my concurrence.  I at once condemned the whole business, but

Young, having been furnished with seven thousand dollars to recruit

the men and buy their arms, had already secured both, and was so

deeply involved in the transaction, he said, that he could not

withdraw without dishonor, and with tears in his eyes he besought me

to help him.  He told me he had entered upon the adventure in the

firm belief that I would countenance it; that the men and their

equipment were on his hands; that he must make good his word at all

hazards; and that while I need not approve, yet I must go far enough

to consent to the departure of the men, and to loan him the money

necessary to provision his party and hire a schooner to carry them to

Brazos.  It was hard in deed to resist the appeals of this man, who

had served me so long and so well, and the result of his pleading was

that I gave him permission to sail, and also loaned him the sum asked

for; but I have never ceased to regret my consent, for misfortune

fell upon the enterprise almost from its inception.



By the time the party got across the Gulf and over to Brownsville,

Caravajal had been deposed by Canales, and the latter would not

accept their services.  This left Young with about fifty men to whom

he was accountable, and as he had no money to procure them

subsistence, they were in a bad fix.  The only thing left to do was

to tender their services to General Escobedo, and with this in view

the party set out to reach the General's camp, marching up the Rio

Grande on the American side, intending to cross near Ringgold Bar

racks.  In advance of them, however, had spread far and wide the

tidings of who they were, what they proposed to do, and where they

were going, and before they could cross into Mexico they were

attacked by a party of ex-Confederates and  renegade Mexican

rancheros.  Being on American soil, Young forbade his men to return

the fire, and bent all his efforts to getting them over the river;

but in this attempt they were broken up, and became completely

demoralized.  A number of the men were drowned while swimming the

river, Young himself was shot and killed, a few were captured, and

those who escaped--about twenty in all--finally joined Escobedo, but

in such a  plight as to be of little use.  With this distressing

affair came to an end pretty much all open participation of American

sympathizers with the Liberal cause, but the moral support afforded

by the presence of our forces continued, and this was frequently

supplemented with material aid in the shape of munitions of war,

which we liberally supplied, though constrained to do so by the most

secret methods.



The term of office of Juarez as President of the Mexican Republic

expired in December, 1865, but to meet existing exigencies he had

continued himself in office by proclamation, a course rendered

necessary by the fact that no elections could be held on account of

the Imperial occupation of most of the country.  The official who, by

the Mexican Constitution, is designated for the succession in such an

emergency, is the President of the Supreme Court, and the person then

eligible under this provision was General Ortega, but in the interest

of the Imperialists he had absented himself from Mexico, hence the

patriotic course of Juarez in continuing himself at the head of

affairs was a necessity of the situation.  This action of the

President gave the Imperialists little concern at first, but with the

revival of the Liberal cause they availed themselves of every means

to divide its supporters, and Ortega, who had been lying low in the

United States, now came forward to claim the Presidency.  Though

ridiculously late for such a step, his first act was to issue a

manifesto protesting against the assumption of the executive

authority by Juarez.  The protest had little effect, however, and his

next proceeding was to come to New Orleans, get into correspondence

with other disaffected Mexicans, and thus perfect his plans.  When he

thought his intrigue ripe enough for action, he sailed for Brazos,

intending to cross the Rio Grande and assert his claims with arms.

While he was scheming in New Orleans, however, I had learned what he

was up to, and in advance of his departure had sent instructions to

have him arrested on American soil.  Colonel Sedgwick, commanding at

Brownsville, was now temporary master of Matamoras also, by reason of

having stationed some American troops there for the protection of

neutral merchants, so when Ortega appeared at Brazos, Sedgwick

quietly arrested him and held him till the city of Matamoras was

turned over to General Escobedo, the authorized representative of

Juarez; then Escobedo took charge, of Ortega, and with ease prevented

his further machinations.



During the winter and spring of 1866 we continued covertly supplying

arms and ammunition to the Liberals--sending as many as 30,000

muskets from Baton Rouge Arsenal alone--and by mid-summer Juarez,

having organized a pretty good sized army, was in possession of the

whole line of the Rio Grande, and, in fact, of nearly the whole of

Mexico down to San Louis Potosi.  Then thick and fast came rumors

pointing to the tottering condition of Maximilian's Empire-first,

that Orizaba and Vera Cruz were being fortified; then, that the

French were to be withdrawn; and later came the intelligence that the

Empress Carlotta had gone home to beg assistance from Napoleon, the

author of all of her husband's troubles.  But the situation forced

Napoleon to turn a deaf ear to Carlotta's prayers.  The brokenhearted

woman besought him on her knees, but his fear of losing an army made

all pleadings vain.  In fact, as I ascertained by the following

cablegram which came into my hands, Napoleon's instructions for the

French evacuation were in Mexico at the very time of this pathetic

scene between him and Carlotta.  The despatch was in cipher when I

received it, but was translated by the telegraph operator at my

headquarters, who long before had mastered the key of the French

cipher:



"PARIS, January 10, 1867.  FRENCH CONSUL, New Orleans, La.



"To GENERAL CASTELNAU, at Mexico.



"Received your despatch of the 9th December.  Do not compel the

Emperor to abdicate, but do not delay the departure of the troops;

bring back all those who will not remain there.  Most of the fleet

has left.



"NAPOLEON."





This meant the immediate withdrawal of the French.  The rest of the

story--which has necessarily been but in outline--is soon told.

Maximilian, though deserted, determined to hold out to the last, and

with the aid of disloyal Mexicans stuck to his cause till the spring.

When taken prisoner at Queretaro, he was tried and executed under

circumstances that are well known.  From promptings of humanity

Secretary Seward tried hard to save the Imperial prisoner, but

without success.  The Secretary's plea for mercy was sent through me

at New Orleans, and to make speed I hired a steamer to proceed with

it across the Gulf to Tampico.  The document was carried by Sergeant

White, one of my scouts, who crossed the country from Tampico, and

delivered it to Escobedo at Queretaro; but Mr. Seward's

representations were without avail--refused probably because little

mercy had been shown certain Liberal leaders unfortunate enough to

fall into Maximilian's hands during the prosperous days of his

Empire.



At the close of our war there was little hope for the Republic of

Mexico.  Indeed, till our troops were concentrated on the Rio Grande

there was none.  Our appearance in such force along the border

permitted the Liberal leaders, refugees from their homes, to

establish rendezvous whence they could promulgate their plans in

safety, while the countenance thus given the cause, when hope was

well-nigh gone, incited the Mexican people to renewed resistance.

Beginning again with very scant means, for they had lost about all,

the Liberals saw their cause, under the influence of such significant

and powerful backing, progress and steadily grow so strong that

within two years Imperialism had received its death-blow.  I doubt

very much whether such, results could have been achieved without the

presence of an American army on the Rio Grande, which, be it

remembered, was sent there because, in General Grant's words, the

French invasion of Mexico was so closely related to the rebellion as

to be essentially a part of it.









CHAPTER X.



A. J. HAMILTON APPOINTED PROVISIONAL GOVERNOR OF TEXAS--ASSEMBLES A

CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION--THE TEXANS DISSATISFIED--LAWLESSNESS--

OPPRESSIVE LEGISLATION--EX-CONFEDERATES CONTROLLING LOUISIANA--A

CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION--THE MEETING SUPPRESSED--A BLOODY RIOT--MY

REPORTS OF THE MASSACRE--PORTIONS SUPPRESSED BY PRESIDENT JOHNSON--

SUSTAINED BY A CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE--THE RECONSTRUCTION LAWS.



Although in 1865-66 much of my attention was directed to

international matters along the Rio Grande, the civil affairs of

Texas and Louisiana required a certain amount of military supervision

also in the absence of regularly established civil authority.  At the

time of Kirby Smith's surrender the National Government had

formulated no plan with regard to these or the other States lately in

rebellion, though a provisional Government had been set up in

Louisiana as early as 1864.  In consequence of this lack of system,

Governor Pendleton Murray, of Texas, who was elected under

Confederate rule, continued to discharge the duties of Governor till

President Johnson, on June 17, in harmony with his amnesty

proclamation of May 29, 1865, appointed A. J. Hamilton provisional

Governor.  Hamilton was empowered by the President to call a

Constitutional convention, the delegates to which were to be elected,

under certain prescribed qualifications, for the purpose of

organizing the political affairs of the State, the Governor to be

guided by instructions similar to those given the provisional

Governor of North Carolina (W. W. Holden), when appointed in May.



The convening of this body gave rise to much dissatisfaction among

the people of Texas.  They had assumed that affairs were to go on as

of old, and that the reintegration of the State was to take place

under the administration of Governor Murray, who, meanwhile, had

taken it upon himself, together with the Legislature, to authorize

the election of delegates to a State Convention, without restriction

as to who should be entitled to vote.  Thus encouraged, the element

but lately in armed rebellion was now fully bent on restoring the

State to the Union without any intervention whatever of the Federal

Government; but the advent of Hamilton put an end to such illusions,

since his proclamation promptly disfranchised the element in

question, whose consequent disappointment and chagrin were so great

as to render this factor of the community almost uncontrollable.  The

provisional Governor at once rescinded the edict of Governor Murray,

prohibited the assembling of his convention, and shortly after

called, one himself, the delegates to which were to b chosen by

voters who could take the amnesty-oath.  The proclamation convening

this assemblage also announced the policy that would be pursued in

governing the State until its affairs were satisfactorily

reorganized, defined in brief the course to be followed by the

Judiciary, and provided for the appointment, by the Governor, of

county officials to succeed those known to be disloyal.  As this

action of Hamilton's disfranchised all who could not take the amnesty

oath, and of course deprived them of the offices, it met at once with

pronounced and serious opposition, and he quickly realized that he

had on his hands an arduous task to protect the colored people,

particularly as in the transition state of society just after the

close of the war there prevailed much lawlessness, which vented

itself chiefly on the freedmen.  It was greatly feared that political

rights were to be given those so recently in servitude, and as it was

generally believed that such enfranchisement would precipitate a race

war unless the freedmen were overawed and kept in a state of

subjection, acts of intimidation were soon reported from all parts of

the State.



Hamilton, an able, determined, and fearless man, tried hard to curb

this terrorism, but public opinion being strong against him, he could

accomplish little without military aid.  As department commander, I

was required, whenever called upon, to assist his government, and as

these requisitions for help became necessarily very frequent, the

result was that shortly after he assumed his duties, detachments of

troops were stationed in nearly every county of the State.  By such

disposition of my forces fairly good order was maintained under the

administration of Hamilton, and all went well till the inauguration

of J. W. Throckmorton, who, elected Governor in pursuance of an

authorization granted by the convention which Hamilton had called

together, assumed the duties of the office August 9, 1866.



One of Governor Throckmorton's first acts was to ask the withdrawal

or non-interference of the military.  This was not all granted, but

under his ingenious persuasion President Johnson, on the 13th of

August, 1866, directed that the new State officials be entrusted with

the unhampered control of civil affairs, and this was more than

enough to revive the bulldozing methods that had characterized the

beginning of Hamilton's administration.  Oppressive legislation in

the shape of certain apprentice and vagrant laws quickly followed,

developing a policy of gross injustice toward the colored people on

the part of the courts, and a reign of lawlessness and disorder

ensued which, throughout the remote districts of the State at least,

continued till Congress, by what are known as the Reconstruction

Acts, took into its own hands the rehabilitation of the seceded

States.



In the State of Louisiana a provisional government, chosen by the

loyal element, had been put in operation, as already mentioned, as

early as 1864.  This was effected under encouragement given by

President Lincoln, through the medium of a Constitutional convention,

which met at New Orleans in April, 1864, and adjourned in July.  The

constitution then agreed upon was submitted to the people, and in

September, 1864, was ratified by a vote of the few loyal residents of

the State.



The government provided under this constitution being looked upon as

provisional merely, was never recognized by Congress, and in 1865 the

returned Confederates, restored to citizenship by the President's

amnesty proclamation, soon got control of almost all the State.  The

Legislature was in their hands, as well as most of the State and

municipal offices; so, when the President, on the 20th of August,

1866, by proclamation, extended his previous instructions regarding

civil affairs in Texas so as to have them apply to all the seceded

States, there at once began in Louisiana a system of discriminative

legislation directed against the freedmen, that led to flagrant

wrongs in the enforcement of labor contracts, and in the remote

parishes to numbers of outrages and murders.



To remedy this deplorable condition of things, it was proposed, by

those who had established the government of 1864, to remodel the

constitution of the State; and they sought to do this by reassembling

the convention, that body before its adjournment having provided for

reconvening under certain conditions, in obedience to the call of its

president.  Therefore, early in the summer of 1866, many members of

this convention met in conference at New Orleans, and decided that a

necessity existed for reconvening the delegates, and a proclamation

was issued accordingly by B. K. Howell, President-pro-tempore.



Mayor John T.  Monroe and the other officials of New Orleans looked

upon this proposed action as revolutionary, and by the time the

convention assembled (July 30), such bitterness of feeling prevailed

that efforts were made by the mayor and city police to suppress the

meeting.  A bloody riot followed, resulting, in the killing and

wounding of about a hundred and sixty persons.



I happened to be absent from the city at the time, returning from

Texas, where I had been called by affairs on the Rio Grande.  On my

way up from the mouth of the Mississippi I was met on the night of

July 30 by one of my staff, who reported what had occurred, giving

the details of the massacre--no milder term is fitting--and informing

me that, to prevent further slaughter, General Baird, the senior

military officer present, had assumed control of the municipal

government.  On reaching the city I made an investigation, and that

night sent the following report of the affair:



"HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE GULF,

"NEW ORLEANS, LA., Aug.  1, 1866.



"GENERAL U. S. GRANT:



"You are doubtless aware of the serious riot which occurred in this

city on the 30th.  A political body, styling themselves the

Convention of 1864, met on the 30th, for, as it is alleged, the

purpose of remodeling the present constitution of the State.  The

leaders were political agitators and revolutionary men, and the

action of the convention was liable to produce breaches of the public

peace.  I had made up my mind to arrest the head men, if the

proceedings of the convention were calculated to disturb the

tranquility of the Department; but I had no cause for action until

they committed the overt act.  In the meantime official duty called

me to Texas, and the mayor of the city, during my absence suppressed

the convention by the use of the police force, and in so doing

attacked the members of the convention, and a party of two hundred

negroes, with fire-arms, clubs, and knives, in a manner so

unnecessary and atrocious as to compel me to say that it was murder.

About forty whites and blacks were thus killed, and about one hundred

and sixty wounded.  Everything is now quiet, but I deem it best to

maintain a military supremacy in the city for a few days, until the

affair is fully investigated.  I believe the sentiment of the general

community is great regret at this unnecessary cruelty, and that the

police could have made any arrest they saw fit without sacrificing

lives.



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General Commanding."





On receiving the telegram, General.  Grant immediately submitted.  it

to the President.  Much clamor being made at the North for the

publication of the despatch, Mr. Johnson pretended to give it to the

newspapers.  It appeared in the issues of August 4, but with this

paragraph omitted, viz.:



"I had made up my mind to arrest the head men, if the proceedings of

the convention were calculated to disturb the tranquility of the

Department, but I had no cause for action until they committed the

overt act.  In the mean time official duty called me to Texas, and

the mayor of the city, during my absence, suppressed the convention

by the use of the police force, and in so doing attacked the members

of the convention, and a party of two hundred negroes, with fire-

arms, clubs, and knives, in a manner so unnecessary and atrocious as

to compel me to say it was murder."



Against this garbling of my report-done by the President's own order-

I strongly demurred; and this emphatic protest marks the beginning of

Mr. Johnson's well-known personal hostility toward me.  In the mean

time I received (on August 3) the following despatch from General

Grant approving my course:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"WAR DEPT., WASHINGTON, D.  C., "August 3, 1866--5 p.m.



"MAJOR-GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Commanding Mil. Div. of the Gulf,

"New Orleans, La.



"Continue to enforce martial law, so far as may be necessary to

preserve the peace; and do not allow any of the civil authorities to

act, if you deem such action dangerous to the public safety.  Lose no

time in investigating and reporting the causes that led to the riot,

and the facts which occurred.



"U. S. GRANT,

"Lieutenant-General."





In obedience to the President's directions, My report of August 1 was

followed by another, more in detail, which I give in full, since it

tells the whole story of the riot :



"HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE GULF,

"NEW ORLEANS, LA., August 6, 1866.



"His EXCELLENCY ANDREW JOHNSON,

"President United States



"I have the honor to make the following reply to your despatch of

August 4.  A very large number of colored people marched in

procession on Friday night, July twenty-seven (27), and were

addressed from the steps of the City Hall by Dr. Dostie, ex-Governor

Hahn, and others.  The speech of Dostie was intemperate in language

and sentiment.  The speeches of the others, so far as I can learn,

were characterized by moderation.  I have not given you the words of

Dostie's speech, as the version published was denied; but from what I

have learned of the man, I believe they were intemperate.



"The convention assembled at twelve (12) M.  on the thirtieth (30),

the timid members absenting themselves because the tone of the

general public was ominous of trouble.  I think there were about

twenty-six (26) members present.  In front of the Mechanics

Institute, where the meeting was held, there were assembled some

colored men, women, and children, perhaps eighteen (18) or twenty

(20), and in the Institute a number of colored men, probably one

hundred and fifty (150).  Among those outside and inside there might

have been a pistol in the possession of every tenth (10) man.



"About one (1) p. m.  a procession of say from sixty (60) to one

hundred and thirty (130) colored men marched up Burgundy Street and

across Canal Street toward the convention, carrying an American flag.

These men had about one pistol to every ten men, and canes and clubs

in addition.  While crossing Canal Street a row occurred.  There were

many spectators on the street, and their manner and tone toward the

procession unfriendly.  A shot was fired, by whom I am not able to

state, but believe it to have been by a policeman, or some colored

man in the procession.  This led to other shots and a rush after the

procession.  On arrival at the front of the Institute there was some

throwing of brickbats by both sides.  The police, who had been held

well in hand, were vigorously marched to the scene of disorder.  The

procession entered the Institute with the flag, about six (6) or

eight (8) remaining outside.  A row occurred between a policeman and

one of these colored men, and a shot was again fired by one of the

parties, which led to an indiscriminate fire on the building through

the windows by the policemen.  This had been going on for a short

time, when a white flag was displayed from the windows of the

Institute, whereupon the firing ceased, and the police rushed into

the building.



"From the testimony of wounded men, and others who were inside the

building, the policemen opened an indiscriminate fire upon the

audience until they had emptied their revolvers, when they retired,

and those inside barricaded the doors.  The door was broken in, and

the firing again commenced, when many of the colored and white people

either escaped throughout the door or were passed out by the

policemen inside; but as they came out the policemen who formed the

circle nearest the building fired upon them, and they were again

fired upon by the citizens that formed the outer circle.  Many of

those wounded and taken prisoners, and others who were prisoners and

not wounded, were fired upon by their captors and by citizens.  The

wounded were stabbed while lying on the grgund, and their heads

beaten with brickbats.  In the yard of the building, whither some of

the colored men had escaped and partially secreted themselves, they

were fired upon and killed or wounded by policemen.  Some were killed

and wounded several squares from the scene.  Members of the

convention were wounded by the police while in their hands as

prisoners, some of them mortally.



"The immediate cause of this terrible affair was the assemblage of

this Convention; the remote cause was the bitter and antagonistic

feeling which has been growing in this community since the advent of

the present Mayor, who, in the organization of his police force,

selected many desperate men, and some of them known murderers.

People of clear views were overawed by want of confidence in the

Mayor, and fear of the thugs, many of which he had selected for his

police force.  I have frequently been spoken to by prominent citizens

on this subject, and have heard them express fear, and want of

confidence in Mayor Monroe.  Ever since the intimation of this last

convention movement I must condemn the course of several of the city

papers for supporting, by their articles, the bitter feeling of bad

men.  As to the merciless manner in which the convention was broken

up, I feel obliged to confess strong repugnance.



"It is useless to disguise the hostility that exists on the part of a

great many here toward Northern men, and this unfortunate affair has

so precipitated matters that there is now a test of what shall be the

status of Northern men--whether they can live here without being in

constant dread or not, whether they can be protected in life and

property, and have justice in the courts.  If this matter is

permitted to pass over without a thorough and determined prosecution

of those engaged in it, we may look out for frequent scenes of the

same kind, not only here, but in other places.  No steps have as yet

been taken by the civil authorities to arrest citizens who were

engaged in this massacre, or policemen who perpetrated such

cruelties.  The members of the convention have been indicted by the

grand jury, and many of them arrested and held to bail.  As to

whether the civil authorities can mete out ample justice to the

guilty parties on both sides, I must say it is my opinion,

unequivocally, that they cannot.  Judge Abell, whose course I have

closely watched for nearly a year, I now consider one of the most

dangerous men that we have here to the peace and quiet of the city.

The leading men of the convention--King, Cutler, Hahn, and others--

have been political agitators, and are bad men.  I regret to say that

the course of Governor Wells has been vacillating, and that during

the late trouble he has shown very little of the man.



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General Commanding."





Subsequently a military commission investigated the subject of the

riot, taking a great deal of testimony.  The commission substantially

confirmed the conclusions given in my despatches, and still later

there was an investigation by a select committee of the House of

Representatives, of which the Honorables Samuel Shellabarger, of

Ohio, H. L. Elliot, of Massachusetts, and B. M. Boyer, of

Pennsylvania, were the members.  The majority report of the committee

also corroborated, in all essentials, my reports of the distressing

occurrence.  The committee likewise called attention to a violent

speech made by Mr. Johnson at St. Louis in September, 1866, charging

the origin of the riot to Congress, and went on to say of the speech

that "it was an unwarranted and unjust expression of hostile feeling,

without pretext or foundation in fact."  A list of the killed and

wounded was embraced in the committee's report, and among other

conclusions reached were the following: "That the meeting of July 30

was a meeting of quiet citizens, who came together without arms and

with intent peaceably to discuss questions of public concern....

There has been no occasion during our National history when a riot

has occurred so destitute of justifiable cause, resulting in a

massacre so inhuman and fiend-like, as that which took place at New

Orleans on the 30th of July last.  This riotous attack upon the

convention, with its terrible results of massacre and murder, was not

an accident.  It was the determined purpose of the mayor of the city

of New Orleans to break up this convention by armed force."



The statement is also made, that, "He [the President] knew that

'rebels' and 'thugs' and disloyal men had controlled the election of

Mayor Monroe, and that such men composed chiefly his police force."



The committee held that no legal government existed in Louisiana, and

recommended the temporary establishment of a provisional government

therein; the report concluding that "in the meantime the safety of

all Union men within the State demands that such government be formed

for their protection, for the well being of the nation and the

permanent peace of the Republic."



The New Orleans riot agitated the whole country, and the official and

other reports served to intensify and concentrate the opposition to

President Johnson's policy of reconstruction, a policy resting

exclusively on and inspired solely by the executive authority--for it

was made plain, by his language and his acts, that he was seeking to

rehabilitate the seceded States under conditions differing not a whit

from those existing before the rebellion; that is to say, without the

slightest constitutional provision regarding the status of the

emancipated slaves, and with no assurances of protection for men who

had remained loyal in the war.



In December, 1866, Congress took hold of the subject with such vigor

as to promise relief from all these perplexing disorders, and, after

much investigation and a great deal of debate, there resulted the so-

called "Reconstruction Laws," which, for a clear understanding of the

powers conferred on the military commanders, I deem best to append in

full:



AN ACT to provide for the more efficient government of the rebel

States.



WHEREAS, no legal State governments or adequate protection for life

or property now exist in the rebel States of Virginia, North

Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, Louisiana,

Florida, Texas, and Arkansas; and whereas, it is necessary that peace

and good order should be enforced in said States until loyal and

republican State governments can be legally established; therefore,



BE IT ENACTED by the Senate and House of Representatives of the

United States of America in Congress assembled, That said rebel

States shall be divided into military districts and made subject to

the military authority of the United States as hereinafter

prescribed; and for that purpose Virginia shall constitute the first

district; North Carolina and South Carolina, the second district;

Georgia, Alabama, and Florida, the third district; Mississippi and

Arkansas, the fourth district; and Louisiana and Texas, the fifth

district.



SEC. 2.  And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the

President to assign to the command of each of said districts an

officer of the army not below the rank of brigadier-general, and to

detail a sufficient military force to enable such officer to perform

his duties and enforce his authority within the district to which he

is assigned.



SEC. 3. And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of each

officer assigned as aforesaid to protect all persons in their rights

of person and property, to suppress insurrection, disorder, and

violence, and to punish, or cause to be punished, all disturbers of

the public peace and criminals, and to this end he may allow local

civil tribunals to take jurisdiction of and to try offenders, or,

when in his judgment it may be necessary for the trial of offenders,

he shall have power to organize military commissions or tribunals for

that purpose, and all interference, under cover of State authority,

with the exercise of military authority under this act, shall be null

and void.



SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That all persons put under

military arrest by virtue of this act shall be tried without

unnecessary delay, and no cruel or unjust punishment shall be

inflicted; and no sentence of any military commission or tribunal

hereby authorized affecting the life or liberty of any person, shall

be executed untill it is approved by the officer in command of the

district; and the laws and regulations for the government of the army

shall not be affected by this act except in so far as they conflict

with its provisions: Provided, That no sentence of death, under the

provisions of this act, shall be carried into effect without the

approval of the President.



SEC. 5. And be it further enacted, That when the people of any one of

said rebel States shall have formed a constitution of government in

conformity with the Constitution of the United States in all

respects, framed by a convention of delegates elected by the male

citizens of said State twenty-one years old and upward, of whatever

race, color, or previous condition, who have been resident in said

State for one year previous to the day of such election, except such

as may be disfranchised for participation in the rebellion, or for

felony at common law; and when such constitution shall provide that

the elective franchise shall be enjoyed by all such persons as have

the qualifications herein stated for electors of delegates; and when

such constitution shall be ratified by a majority of the persons

voting on the question of ratification who are qualified as electors

for delegates, and when such constitution shall have been submitted

to Congress for examination and approval, and Congress shall have

approved the same; and when said State, by a vote of its legislature

elected under said constitution, shall have adopted the amendment to

the Constitution of the United States proposed by the Thirty-ninth

Congress, and known as article fourteen; and when said article shall

have become a part of the Constitution of the United States, said

State shall be declared entitled to representation in Congress, and

senators and representatives shall be admitted therefrom on their

taking the oath prescribed by law; and then and thereafter the

preceding sections of this act shall be inoperative in said State:

Provided, That no person excluded from the privilege of holding

office by said proposed amendment to the Constitution of the United

States shall be eligible to election as a member of the convention to

frame a constitution for any of said rebel States, nor shall any such

person vote for members of such convention.



SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That until the people of said

rebel States shall be by law admitted to representation in the

Congress of the United States, any civil government which may exist

therein shall be deemed provisional only, and in all respects subject

to the paramount authority of the United States at any time to

abolish, modify, control, or supersede the same; and in all elections

to any office under such provisional governments all persons shall be

entitled to vote, and none others, who are entitled to vote under the

fifth section of this act; and no person shall be eligible to any

office under any such provisional governments who would be

disqualified from holding office under the provisions of the third

article of said constitutional amendment.



SCHUYLER COLFAX,

Speaker of the House of Representatives.



LAFAYETTE S. FOSTER,

President of the Senate pro tempore.





AN ACT supplementary to an act entitled "An act to provide for the

more efficient government of the rebel States," passed March second,

eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, and to facilitate restoration.



Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the

United States of America in Congress assembled, That before the first

day of September, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, the commanding

general in each district defined by an act entitled "An act to

provide for the more efficient government of the rebel States,"

passed March second, eighteen hundred and sixty-seven, shall cause a

registration to be made of the male citizens of the United States,

twenty-one years of age and upwards, resident in each county or

parish in the State or States included in his district, which

registration shall include only those persons who are qualified to

vote for delegates by the act aforesaid, and who shall have taken and

subscribed the following oath or affirmation : " I,------, do

solemnly swear (or affirm), in the presence of the Almighty God, that

I am a citizen of the State of ---------; that I have resided in said

State for----- months next preceding this day, and now reside in the

county of -------, or the parish of --------, in said State, (as the

case may be); that I am twenty-one years old; that I have not been

disfranchised for participation in any rebellion or civil war against

the United States, nor for felony committed against the laws of any

State or of the United States; that I have never been a member of any

State Legislature, nor held any executive or judicial office in any

State, and afterwards engaged in insurrection or rebellion against

the United States, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof;

that I have never taken an oath as a member of Congress of the United

States, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any

State Legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any

State, to support the constitution of the United States, and

afterwards engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the United

States or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof; that I will

faithfully support the Constitution and obey the laws of the United

States, and will, to the best of my ability, encourage others so to

do: so help me God."; which oath or affirmation may be administered

by any registering officer.



SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That after the completion of the

registration hereby provided for in any State, at such time and

places therein as the commanding general shall appoint and direct, of

which at least thirty days' public notice shall be given, an election

shall be held of delegates to a convention for the purpose of

establishing a constitution and civil government for such State loyal

to the Union, said convention in each State, except Virginia, to

consist of the same number of members as the most numerous branch of

the State Legislature of such State in the year eighteen hundred and

sixty, to be apportioned among the several districts, counties, or

parishes of such State by the commanding general, giving each

representation in the ratio of voters registered as aforesaid as

nearly as may be.  The convention in Virginia shall consist of the

same number of members as represented the territory now constituting

Virginia in the most numerous branch of the Legislature of said State

in the year eighteen hundred and sixty, to be apportioned as

aforesaid.



SEC.  3. And be it further enacted, That at said election the

registered voters of each State shall vote for or against a

convention to form a constitution therefor under this act.  Those

voting in favor of such a convention shall have written or printed on

the ballots by which they vote for delegates, as aforesaid, the words

"For a convention," and those voting against such a convention shall

have written or printed on such ballot the words "Against a

convention." The persons appointed to superintend said election, and

to make return of the votes given thereat, as herein provided, shall

count and make return of the votes given for and against a

convention; and the commanding general to whom the same shall have

been returned shall ascertain and declare the total vote in each

State for and against a convention.  If a majority of the votes given

on that question shall be for a convention, then such convention

shall be held as hereinafter provided; but if a majority of said

votes shall, be against a convention, then no such convention shall

be held under this act: Provided, That such convention shall not be

held unless a majority of all such registered voters shall have voted

on the question of holding such convention.



SEC.  4.  And be it further enacted, That the commanding general of

each district shall appoint as many boards of registration as may be

necessary, consisting of three loyal officers or persons, to make and

complete the registration, superintend the election, and make return

to him of the votes, list of voters, and of the persons elected as

delegates by a plurality of the votes cast at said election; and upon

receiving said returns he shall open the same, ascertain the persons

elected as delegates, according to the returns of the officers who

conducted said election, and make proclamation thereof; and if a

majority of the votes given on that question shall be for a

convention, the commanding general, within sixty days from the date

of election, shall notify the delegates to assemble in convention, at

a time and place to be mentioned in the notification, and said

convention, when organized, shall proceed to frame a constitution and

civil government according to the provisions of this act, and the act

to which it is supplementary; and when the same shall have been so

framed, said constitution shall be submitted by the convention for

ratification to the persons registered under the provisions of this

act at an election to be conducted by the officers or persons

appointed or to be appointed by the commanding general, as

hereinbefore provided, and to be held after the expiration of thirty

days from the date of notice thereof, to be given by said convention;

and the returns thereof shall be made to the commanding general of

the district.



SEC.  5.  And be it further enacted, That if, according to said

returns, the constitution shall be ratified by a majority of the

votes of the registered electors qualified as herein specified, cast

at said election, at least one-half of all the registered voters

voting upon the question of such ratification, the president of the

convention shall transmit a copy of the same, duly certified, to the

President of the United States, who shall forthwith transmit the same

to Congress, if then in session, and if not in session, then

immediately upon its next assembling; and if it shall moreover appear

to Congress that the election was one at which all the registered and

qualified electors in the State had an opportunity to vote freely,

and without restraint, fear, or the influence of fraud, and if the

Congress shall be satisfied that such constitution meets the approval

of a majority of all the qualified electors in the State, and if the

said constitution shall be declared by Congress to be in conformity

with the provisions of the act to which this is supplementary, and

the other provisions of said act shall have been complied with, and

the said constitution shall be approved by Congress, the State shall

be declared entitled to representation, and senators and

representatives shall be admitted therefrom as therein provided.



SEC.  6.  And be it further enacted, That all elections in the States

mentioned in the said "Act to provide for the more efficient

government of the rebel States" shall, during the operation of said

act, be by ballot; and all officers making the said registration of

voters and conducting said elections, shall, before entering upon the

discharge of their duties, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by

the act approved July second, eighteen hundred and sixty-two,

entitled "An act to prescribe an oath of office": Provided, That if

any person shall knowingly and falsely take and subscribe any oath in

this act prescribed, such person so offending and being thereof duly

convicted, shall be subject to the pains, penalties, and disabilities

which by law are provided for the punishment of the crime of wilful

and corrupt perjury.



SEC. 7. And be if further enacted, That all expenses incurred by the

several commanding generals, or by virtue of any orders issued, or

appointments made, by them, under or by virtue of this act, shall be

paid out of any moneys in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.



SEC. 8. And be it further enacted, That the convention for each State

shall prescribe the fees, salary, and compensation to be paid to all

delegates and other officers and agents herein authorized or

necessary to carry into effect the purposes of this act not herein

otherwise provided for, and shall provide for the levy and collection

of such taxes on the property in such State as may be necessary to

pay the same.



SEC. 9. And be it further enacted, That the word "article," in the

sixth section of the act to which this is supplementary, shall be

construed to mean, "section."



SCHUYLER COLFAX,

Speaker of the House of Representatives.



B. F. WADE,

President of the Senate pro tempore.









CHAPTER X1.



PASSAGE OF THE RECONSTRUCTION ACT OVER THE PRESIDENT'S VETO--PLACED

IN COMMAND OF THE FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT--REMOVING OFFICERS--MY

REASONS FOR SUCH ACTION--AFFAIRS IN LOUISIANA AND TEXAS--REMOVAL OF

GOVERNOR WELLS--REVISION OF THE JURY LISTS--RELIEVED FROM THE COMMAND

OF THE FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT.



The first of the Reconstruction laws was passed March 2, 1867, and

though vetoed by the President, such was the unanimity of loyal

sentiment and the urgency demanding the measure, that the bill became

a law over the veto the day the President returned it to Congress.

March the 11th this law was published in General Orders No . 10, from

the Headquarters of the Army, the same order assigning certain

officers to take charge of the five military districts into which the

States lately in rebellion were subdivided, I being announced as the

commander of the Fifth Military District, which embraced Louisiana

and Texas, a territory that had formed the main portion of my command

since the close of the war.



Between the date of the Act and that of my assignment, the Louisiana

Legislature, then in special session, had rejected a proposed repeal

of an Act it had previously passed providing for an election of

certain municipal officers in New Orleans.  This election was set for

March 11, but the mayor and the chief of police, together with

General Mower, commanding the troops in the city, having expressed to

me personally their fears that the public peace would be disturbed by

the election, I, in this emergency, though not yet assigned to the

district, assuming the authority which the Act conferred on district

commanders, declared that the election should not take place; that no

polls should be opened on the day fixed; and that the whole matter

would stand postponed till the district commander should be

appointed, or special instructions be had.  This, my first official

act under the Reconstruction laws, was rendered necessary by the

course of a body of obstructionists, who had already begun to give

unequivocal indications of their intention to ignore the laws of

Congress.



A copy of the order embodying the Reconstruction law, together with

my assignment, having reached me a few days after, I regularly

assumed control of the Fifth Military District on March 19, by an

order wherein I declared the State and municipal governments of the

district to be provisional only, and, under the provisions of the

sixth section of the Act, subject to be controlled, modified,

superseded, or abolished.  I also announced that no removals from

office would be made unless the incumbents failed to carry out the

provisions of the law or impeded reorganization, or unless willful

delays should necessitate a change, and added: "Pending the

reorganization, it is, desirable and intended to create as little

disturbance in the machinery of the various branches of the

provisional governments as possible, consistent with the law of

Congress and its successful execution, but this condition is

dependent upon the disposition shown by the people, and upon the

length of time required for reorganization."



Under these limitations Louisiana and Texas retained their former

designations as military districts, the officers in command

exercising their military powers as heretofore.  In addition, these

officers were to carry out in their respective commands all

provisions of the law except those specially requiring the action of

the district commander, and in cases of removals from and appointment

to office.



In the course of legislation the first Reconstruction act, as I have

heretofore noted, had been vetoed.  On the very day of the veto,

however, despite the President's adverse action, it passed each House

of Congress by such an overwhelming majority as not only to give it

the effect of law, but to prove clearly that the plan of

reconstruction presented was, beyond question, the policy endorsed by

the people of the country.  It was, therefore, my determination to

see to the law's zealous execution in my district, though I felt

certain that the President would endeavor to embarrass me by every

means in his power, not only on account of his pronounced personal

hostility, but also because of his determination not to execute but

to obstruct the measures enacted by Congress.



Having come to this conclusion, I laid down, as a rule for my

guidance, the principle of non-interference with the provisional

State governments, and though many appeals were made to have me

rescind rulings of the courts, or interpose to forestall some

presupposed action to be taken by them, my invariable reply was that

I would not take cognizance of such matters, except in cases of

absolute necessity.  The same policy was announced also in reference

to municipal affairs throughout the district, so long as the action

of the local officers did not conflict with the law.



In a very short time, however, I was obliged to interfere in

municipal matters in New Orleans, for it had become clearly apparent

that several of the officials were, both by acts of omission and

commission, ignoring the law, so on the 27th of March I removed from

office the Mayor, John T.  Monroe; the Judge of the First District

Court, E. Abell; and the Attorney-General of the State, Andrew S.

Herron; at the same time appointing to the respective offices thus

vacated Edward Heath, W. W. Howe, and B. L. Lynch.  The officials

thus removed had taken upon themselves from the start to pronounce

the Reconstruction acts unconstitutional, and to advise such a course

of obstruction that I found it necessary at an early dav to replace

them by men in sympathy with the law, in order to make plain my

determination to have its provisions enforced.  The President at once

made inquiry, through General Grant, for the cause of the removal,

and I replied :



"HEADQUARTERS FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT,

"New Orleans, La., April 19, 1867.



"GENERAL: On the 27th day of March last I removed from office Judge

E. Abell, of the Criminal Court of New Orleans; Andrew S. Herron,

Attorney-General of the State of Louisiana; and John T. Monroe, Mayor

of the City of New Orleans.  These removals were made under the

powers granted me in what is usually termed the 'military bill,'

passed March 2, 1867, by the Congress of the United States.



"I did not deem it necessary to give any reason for the removal of

these men, especially after the investigations made by the military

board on the massacre Of July 30, 1866, and the report of the

congressional committee on the same massacre; but as some inquiry has

been made for the cause of removal, I would respectfully state as

follows :



"The court over which judge Abell presided is the only criminal court

in the city of New Orleans, and for a period of at least nine months

previous to the riot Of July 30 he had been educating a large portion

of the community to the perpetration of this outrage, by almost

promising no prosecution in his court against the offenders, in case

such an event occurred.  The records of his court will show that he

fulfilled his promise, as not one of the guilty has been prosecuted.



"In reference to Andrew J. Herron, Attorney-General of the State of

Louisiana, I considered it his duty to indict these men before this

criminal court.  This he failed to do, but went so far as to attempt

to impose on the good sense of the whole nation by indicting the

victims of the riot instead of the rioters; in other words, making

the innocent guilty and the guilty innocent.  He was therefore, in my

belief, an able coadjutor with judge Abell in bringing on the

massacre of July 30.



"Mayor Monroe controlled the element engaged in this riot, and when

backed by an attorney-general who would not prosecute the guilty, and

a judge who advised the grand jury to find the innocent guilty and

let the murderers go free, felt secure in engaging his police force

in the riot and massacre.



"With these three men exercising a large influence over the worst

elements of the population of this city, giving to those elements an

immunity for riot and bloodshed, the general-in-chief will see how

insecurely I felt in letting them occupy their respective positions

in the troubles which might occur in registration and voting in the

reorganization of this State.



"I am, General, very respectfully, your obedient servant,



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General U. S. A.





"GENERAL U. S. GRANT,



"Commanding Armies of the United States,

"Washington, D.  C."





To General Grant my reasons were satisfactory, but not so to the

President, who took no steps, however, to rescind my action, for he

knew that the removals were commended by well-nigh the entire

community in the city, for it will be understood that Mr. Johnson

was, through his friends and adherents in Louisiana and Texas, kept

constantly advised of every step taken by me.  Many of these persons

were active and open opponents of mine, while others were spies,

doing their work so secretly and quickly that sometimes Mr. Johnson

knew of my official acts before I could report them to General Grant.



The supplemental Reconstruction act which defined the method of

reconstruction became a law despite the President's veto on March 23.

This was a curative act, authorizing elections and prescribing

methods of registration.  When it reached me officially I began

measures for carrying out its provisions, and on the 28th of March

issued an order to the effect that no elections for the State,

parish, or municipal officers would be held in Louisiana until the

provisions of the laws of Congress entitled "An act to provide for

the more efficient government of the rebel States," and of the act

supplemental thereto, should have been complied with.  I also

announced that until elections were held in accordance with these

acts, the law of the Legislature of the State providing for the

holding over of those persons whose terms of office otherwise would

have expired, would govern in all cases excepting only those special

ones in which I myself might take action.  There was one parish,

Livingston, which this order did no reach in time to prevent the

election previously ordered there, and which therefore took place,

but by a supplemental order this election was declare null and void.



In April.  I began the work of administering th Supplemental Law,

which, under  certain condition of eligibility, required a

registration of the voter of the State, for the purpose of electing

delegate to a Constitutional convention.  It therefore became

necessary to appoint Boards of Registration throughout the election

districts, and on April 10 the boards for the Parish of Orleans were

given out, those for the other parishes being appointed ten days

later.  Before announcing these boards, I had asked to be advised

definitely as to what persons were disfranchised by the law, and was

directed by General Grant to act upon my own interpretation of it,

pending an opinion expected shortly from the Attorney-General--Mr.

Henry Stanbery--so, for the guidance of the boards, I gave the

following instructions:



"HEADQUARTERS FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT.

"New Orleans, La., April io, 1867.



"Special Orders, No.  15.



"....In obedience to the directions contained in the first section of

the Law of Congress entitled "An Act supplemental to an Act entitled

'An Act to provide for the more efficient government of the rebel

States'" the registration of the legal voters, according to that law

in the Parish of Orleans, will be commenced on the 15th instant, and

must be completed by the 15th of May.



"The four municipal districts of the City of New Orleans and the

Parish of Orleans, right bank (Algiers), will each constitute a

Registration district.  Election precincts will remain as at present

constituted.



"....Each member of the Board of Registers, before commencing his

duties, will file in the office of the Assistant-Inspector-General at

these headquarters, the oath required in the sixth section of the Act

referred to, and be governed in the execution of his duty by the

provisions of the first section of that Act, faithfully administering

the oath therein prescribed to each person registered.



"Boards of Registers will immediately select suitable offices within

their respective districts, having reference to convenience and

facility of registration, and will enter upon their duties on the day

designated.  Each Board will be entitled to two clerks.  Office-hours

for registration will be from 8 o'clock till 12 A.  M., and from 4

till 7 P.  m.



"When elections are ordered, the Board of Registers for each district

will designate the number of polls and the places where they shall be

opened in the election precincts within its district, appoint the

commissioners and other officers necessary for properly conducting

the elections, and will superintend the same.



"They will also receive from the commissioners of elections of the

different precincts the result of the vote, consolidate the same, and

forward it to the commanding general.



"Registers and all officers connected with elections will be held to

a rigid accountability and will be subject to trial by military

commission for fraud, or unlawful or improper conduct in the

performance of their duties.  Their rate of compensation and manner

of payment will be in accordance with the provisions of sections six

and seven of the supplemental act.



"....Every male citizen of the United States, twenty-one years old

and upward, of whatever race, color, or previous condition, who has

been resident in the State of Louisiana for one year and Parish of

Orleans for three months previous to the date at which he presents

himself for registration, and who has not been disfranchised by act

of Congress or for felony at common law, shall, after having taken

and subscribed the oath prescribed in the first section of the act

herein referred to, be entitled to be, and shall be, registered as a

legal voter in the Parish of Orleans and State of Louisiana.



"Pending the decision of the Attorney-General of the United States on

the question as to who are disfranchised by law, registers will give

the most rigid interpretation to the law, and exclude from

registration every person about whose right to vote there may be a

doubt.  Any person so excluded who may, under the decision of the

Attorney-General, be entitled to vote, shall be permitted to register

after that decision is received, due notice of which will be given.



"By command of Major-General P. H. SHERIDAN,



"GEO. L. HARTSUFF,

"Assistant Adjutant-General."





The parish Boards of Registration were composed of three members

each.  Ability to take what was known as the "ironclad oath" was the

qualification exacted of the members, and they were prohibited from

becoming candidates for office.  In the execution of their duties

they were to be governed by the provisions of the supplemental act.

It was also made one of their functions to designate the number and

location of the polling-places in the several districts, to appoint

commissioners for receiving the votes and in general to attend to

such other matters as were necessary, in order properly to conduct

the voting, and afterward to receive from the commissioners the

result of the vote and forward it to my headquarters.  These

registers, and all other officers having to do with elections, were

to be held to a rigid accountability, and be subject to trial by

military commission for fraud or unlawful or improper conduct in the

performance of their duties; and in order to be certain that the

Registration Boards performed their work faithfully and

intelligently, officers of the army were appointed as supervisors.

To this end the parishes were grouped together conveniently in

temporary districts, each officer having from three to five parishes

to supervise.  The programme thus mapped out for carrying out the law

in Louisiana was likewise adhered to in Texas, and indeed was

followed as a model in some of the other military districts.



Although Military Commissions were fully authorized by the

Reconstruction acts, yet I did not favor their use in governing the

district, and probably would never have convened one had these acts

been observed in good faith.  I much preferred that the civil courts,

and the State and municipal authorities already in existence, should

perform their functions without military control or interference, but

occasionally, because the civil authorities neglected their duty, I

was obliged to resort to this means to ensure the punishment Of

offenders.  At this time the condition of the negroes in Texas and

Louisiana was lamentable, though, in fact, not worse than that of the

few white loyalists who had been true to the Union during the war.

These last were singled out as special objects of attack, and were,

therefore, obliged at all times to be on the alert for the protection

of their lives and property.  This was the natural outcome of Mr.

Johnson's defiance of Congress, coupled with the sudden conversion to

his cause of persons in the North--who but a short time before had

been his bitterest enemies; for all this had aroused among the

disaffected element new hopes of power and place, hopes of being at

once put in political control again, with a resumption of their

functions in State and National matters without any preliminary

authorization by Congress.  In fact, it was not only hoped, but

expected, that things were presently to go on just as if there had

been no war.



In the State of Texas there were in 1865 about 200,000 of the colored

race-roughly, a third of the entire population--while in Louisiana

there were not less than 350,000, or more than one-half of all the

people in the State.  Until the enactment of the Reconstruction laws

these negroes were without rights, and though they had been liberated

by the war, Mr. Johnson's policy now proposed that they should have

no political status at all, and consequently be at the mercy of a

people who, recently their masters, now seemed to look upon them as

the authors of all the misfortunes that had come upon the land.

Under these circumstances the blacks naturally turned for protection

to those who had been the means of their liberation, and it would

have been little less than inhuman to deny them sympathy.  Their

freedom had been given them, and it was the plain duty of those in

authority to make it secure, and screen them from the bitter

political resentment that beset them, and to see that they had a fair

chance in the battle of life.  Therefore, when outrages and murders

grew frequent, and the aid of the military power was an absolute

necessity for the protection of life, I employed it unhesitatingly--

the guilty parties being brought to trial before military

commissions--and for a time, at least, there occurred a halt in the

march of terrorism inaugurated by the people whom Mr. Johnson had

deluded.



The first, Military Commission was convened to try the case of John

W. Walker, charged with shooting a negro in the parish of St. John.

The proper civil authorities had made no effort to arrest Walker, and

even connived at his escape, so I had him taken into custody in New

Orleans, and ordered him tried, the commission finding him guilty,

and sentencing him to confinement in the penitentiary for six months.

This shooting was the third occurrence of the kind that had taken

place in St.  John's parish, a negro being wounded in each case, and

it was plain that the intention was to institute there a practice of

intimidation which should be effective to subject the freedmen to the

will of their late masters, whether in making labor contracts, or in

case these newly enfranchised negroes should evince a disposition to

avail themselves of the privilege to vote.



The trial and conviction of Walker, and of one or two others for

similiar outrages, soon put a stop to every kind of "bull-dozing " in

the country parishes; but about this time I discovered that many

members of the police force in New Orleans were covertly intimidating

the freedmen there, and preventing their appearance at the

registration offices, using milder methods than had obtained in the

country, it is true, but none the less effective.



Early in 1866 the Legislature had passed an act which created for the

police of New Orleans a residence qualification, the object of which

was to discharge and exclude from the force ex-Union soldiers.  This

of course would make room for the appointment of ex-Confederates, and

Mayor Monroe had not been slow in enforcing the provisions of the

law.  It was, in fact, a result of this enactment that the police was

so reorganized as to become the willing and efficient tool which it

proved to be in the riot of 1866; and having still the same

personnel, it was now in shape to prevent registration by threats,

unwarranted arrests, and by various other influences, all operating

to keep the timid blacks away from the registration places.



That the police were taking a hand in this practice of repression, I

first discovered by the conduct of the assistant to the chief of the

body, and at once removed the offender, but finding this ineffectual

I annulled that part of the State law fixing the five years'

residence restriction, and restored the two years' qualification,

thus enabling Mayor Heath, who by my appointment had succeeded

Monroe, to organize the force anew, and take about one-half of its

members from ex-Union soldiers who when discharged had settled in New

Orleans.  This action put an end to intimidation in the parish of

Orleans; and now were put in operation in all sections the processes

provided by the supplemental Reconstruction law for the summoning of

a convention to form a Constitution preparatory to the readmission of

the State, and I was full of hope that there would now be much less

difficulty in administering the trust imposed by Congress.



During the two years previous great damage had been done the

agricultural interests of Louisiana by the overflow of the

Mississippi, the levees being so badly broken as to require extensive

repairs, and the Legislature of 1866 had appropriated for the purpose

$4,000,000, to be raised by an issue of bonds.  This money was to be

disbursed by a Board of Levee Commissioners then in existence, but

the term of service of these commissioners, and the law creating the

board, would expire in the spring of 1867.  In order to overcome this

difficulty the Legislature passed a bill continuing the commissioners

in office but as the act was passed inside of ten days before the

adjournment of the Legislature, Governor Wells pocketed the bill, and

it failed to become a law.  The Governor then appointed a board of

his own, without any warrant of law whatever.  The old commissioners

refused to recognize this new board, and of course a conflict of

authority ensued, which, it was clear, would lead to vicious results

if allowed to continue; so, as the people of the State had no

confidence in either of the boards, I decided to end the contention

summarily by appointing an entirely new commission, which would

disburse the money honestly, and further the real purpose for which

it had been appropriated.  When I took this course the legislative

board acquiesced, but Governor Wells immediately requested the

President to revoke my order, which, however, was not done, but

meanwhile the Secretary of War directed me to suspend all proceedings

in the matter, and make a report of the facts.  I complied in the

following telegram:



"HEADQUARTERS FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT,

"NEW ORLEANS, La., June 3, 1867.



"SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of

this date in reference to the Levee Commissioners in this State.



"The following were my reasons for abolishing the two former boards,

although I intended that my order should be sufficiently explanatory:



"Previous to the adjournment of the Legislature last winter it passed

an act continuing the old Levee board in office, so that the four

millions of dollars ($4,000,000) in bonds appropriated by the

Legislature might be disbursed by a board of rebellious antecedents.



"After its adjournment the Governor of the State appointed a board of

his own, in violation of this act, and made the acknowledgment to me

in person that his object was to disburse the money in the interest

of his own party by securing for it the vote of the employees at the

time of election.



"The board continued in office by the Legislature refused to turn

over to the Governor's board, and each side appealed to me to sustain

it, which I would not do.  The question must then have gone to the

courts, which, according to the Governor's judgment when he was

appealing to me to be sustained, would require one year for decision.

Meantime the State was overflowed, the Levee boards tied up by

political chicanery, and nothing done to relieve the poor people, now

fed by the charity of the Government and charitable associations of

the North.



"To obviate this trouble, and to secure to the overflowed districts

of the State the immediate relief which the honest disbursement of

the four millions ($4,000,000) would give, my order dissolving both

boards was issued.



"I say now, unequivocally, that Governor Wells is a political

trickster and a dishonest man.  I have seen him myself, when I first

came to this command, turn out all the Union men who had supported

the Government, and put in their stead rebel soldiers who had not yet

doffed their gray uniform.  I have seen him again, during the July

riot of 1866, skulk away where I could not find him to give him a

guard, instead of coming out as a manly representative of the State

and joining those who were preserving the peace.  I have watched him

since, and his conduct has been as sinuous as the mark left in the

dust by the movement of a snake.



"I say again that he is dishonest, and that dishonesty is more than

must be expected of me.



"P. H. SHERIDAN,

"Major-General, U. S. A.



"Hon. E. M. STANTON,

"Secretary of War, Washington, D.  C."





The same day that I sent my report to the Secretary of War I removed

from office Governor Wells himself, being determined to bear no

longer with the many obstructions he had placed in the way of

reorganizing the civil affairs of the State.  I was also satisfied

that he was unfit to retain the place, since he was availing himself

of every opportunity to work political ends beneficial to himself.

In this instance Wells protested to me against his removal, and also

appealed to the President for an opinion of the Attorney-General as

to my power in the case; and doubtless he would have succeeded in

retaining his office, but for the fact that the President had been

informed by General James B. Steadman and others placed to watch me

that Wells was wholly unworthy.





"NEW ORLEANS, June 19, 1867.

"ANDREW JOHNSON, President United States,

"Washington City:



"Lewis D.  Campbell leaves New Orleans for home this evening.  Want

of respect for Governor Wells personally, alone represses the

expression of indignation felt by all honest and sensible men at the

unwarranted usurpation of General Sheridan in removing the civil

officers of Louisiana.  It is believed here that you will reinstate

Wells.  He is a bad man, and has no influence.



"I believe Sheridan made the removals to embarrass you, believing the

feeling at the North would sustain him.  My conviction is that on

account of the bad character of Wells and Monroe, you ought not to

reinstate any who have been removed, because you cannot reinstate any

without reinstating all, but you ought to prohibit the exercise of

this power in the future.



"Respectfully yours,



"JAMES B. STEADMAN."





I appointed Mr. Thomas J. Durant as Wells's successor, but he

declining, I then appointed Mr. Benjamin F. Flanders, who, after I

had sent a staff-officer to forcibly eject Wells in case of

necessity, took possession of the Governor's office.  Wells having

vacated, Governor Flanders began immediately the exercise of his

duties in sympathy with the views of Congress, and I then notified

General Grant that I thought he need have no further apprehension

about the condition of affairs in Louisiana, as my appointee was a

man of such integrity and ability that I already felt relieved of

half my labor.  I also stated in the same despatch that nothing would

answer in Louisiana but a bold and firm course, and that in taking

such a one I felt that I was strongly supported; a statement that was

then correct, for up to this period the better classes were disposed

to accept the Congressional plan of reconstruction.



During the controversy over the Levee Commissioners, and the

correspondence regarding the removal of Governor Wells, registration

had gone on under the rules laid down for the boards.  The date set

for closing the books was the 3oth of June, but in the parish of

Orleans the time was extended till the 15th of July.  This the

President considered too short a period, and therefore directed the

registry lists not to be closed before the 1st of August, unless

there was some good reason to the contrary.  This was plainly

designed to keep the books open in order that under the Attorney-

General's interpretation of the Reconstruction laws, published June

20, many persons who had been excluded by the registration boards

could yet be registered, so I decided to close the registration,

unless required by the President unconditionally, and in specific

orders, to extend the time.  My motives were manifold, but the main

reasons were that as two and a half months had been given already,

the number of persons who, under the law, were qualified for registry

was about exhausted; and because of the expense I did not feel

warranted in keeping up the boards longer, as I said, "to suit new

issues coming in at the eleventh hour," which would but open a "broad

macadamized road for perjury and fraud."



When I thus stated what I intended to do, the opinion of the

Attorney-General had not yet been received.  When it did reach me it

was merely in the form of a circular signed by Adjutant-General

Townsend, and had no force of law.  It was not even sent as an order,

nor was it accompanied by any instructions, or by anything except the

statement that it was transmitted to the 11 respective military

commanders for their information, in order that there might be

uniformity in the execution  of the Reconstruction acts.  To adopt

Mr. Stanbery's interpretation of the law and reopen registration

accordingly, would defeat the purpose of Congress, as well as add to

my perplexities.  Such a course would also require that the officers

appointed by me for the performance of specified duties, under laws

which I was empowered to interpret and enforce, should receive their

guidance and instructions from an unauthorized source, so on

communicating with General Grant as to how I should act, he directed

me to enforce my own construction of the military bill until ordered

to do otherwise.



Therefore the registration continued as I had originally directed,

and nothing having been definitely settled at Washington in relation

to my extending the time, on the 10th of July I ordered all the

registration boards to select, immediately, suitable persons to act

as commissioners of election, and at the same time specified the

number of each set of commissioners, designated the polling-places,

gave notice that two days would be allowed for voting, and followed

this with an order discontinuing registration the 31st of July, and

then another appointing the 27th and 28th of September as the time

for the election of delegates to the State convention.



In accomplishing the registration there had been little opposition

from the mass of the people, but the press of New Orleans, and the

office-holders and office-seekers in the State generally, antagonized

the work bitterly and violently, particularly after the promulgation

of the opinion of the Attorney-General.  These agitators condemned

everybody and everything connected with the Congressional plan of

reconstruction; and the pernicious influence thus exerted was

manifested in various ways, but most notably in the selection of

persons to compose the jury lists in the country parishes it also

tempted certain municipal officers in New Orleans to perform illegal

acts that would seriously have affected the credit of the city had

matters not been promptly corrected by the summary removal from

office of the comptroller and the treasurer, who had already issued a

quarter of a million dollars in illegal certificates.  On learning of

this unwarranted and unlawful proceeding, Mayor Heath demanded an

investigation by the Common Council, but this body, taking its cue

from the evident intention of the President to render abortive the

Reconstruction acts, refused the mayor's demand.  Then he tried to

have the treasurer and comptroller restrained by injunction, but the

city attorney, under the same inspiration as the council, declined to

sue out a writ, and the attorney being supported in this course by

nearly all the other officials, the mayor was left helpless in his

endeavors to preserve the city's credit.  Under such circumstances he

took the only step left him--recourse to the military commander; and

after looking into the matter carefully I decided, in the early part

of August, to give the mayor officials who would not refuse to make

an investigation of the illegal issue of certificates, and to this

end I removed the treasurer, surveyor, comptroller, city attorney,

and twenty-two of the aldermen; these officials, and all of their

assistants, having reduced the financial credit of New Orleans to a

disordered condition, and also having made efforts--and being then

engaged in such--to hamper the execution of the Reconstruction laws.



This action settled matters in the city, but subsequently I had to

remove some officials in the parishes--among them a justice of the

peace and a sheriff in the parish of Rapides; the justice for

refusing to permit negro witnesses to testify in a certain murder

case, and for allowing the murderer, who had foully killed a colored

man, to walk out of his court on bail in the insignificant sum of

five hundred dollars; and the sheriff, for conniving at the escape

from jail of another alleged murderer.  Finding, however, even after

these removals, that in the country districts murderers and other

criminals went unpunished, provided the offenses were against negroes

merely (since the jurors were selected exclusively from the whites,

and often embraced those excluded from the exercise of the election

franchise) I, having full authority under the Reconstruction laws,

directed such a revision of the jury lists as would reject from them

every man not eligible for registration as a voter.  This order was

issued August 24, and on its promulgation the President relieved me

from duty and assigned General Hancock as my successor.





"HEADQUARTERS FIFTH MILITARY DISTRICT,

"NEW ORLEANS, LA., August 24, 1867.



"SPECIAL ORDERS, No.  125.



"The registration of voters of the State of Louisiana, according to

the law of Congress, being complete, it is hereby ordered that no

person who is not registered in accordance with said law shall be

considered as, a duly qualified voter of the State of Louisiana.  All

persons duly registered as above, and no others, are consequently

eligible, under the laws of the State of Louisiana, to serve as

jurors in any of the courts of the State.



"The necessary revision of the jury lists will immediately be made by

the proper officers.



"All the laws of the State respecting exemptions, etc., from jury

duty will remain in force.



By command of Major-General P. H. SHERIDAN.



"GEO. L. HARTNUFF, Asst. Adj't-General."





Pending the arrival of General Hancock, I turned over the command of

the district September 1 to General Charles Griffin; but he dying of

yellow fever, General J. A. Mower succeeded him, and retained command

till November 29, on which date General Hancock assumed control.

Immediately after Hancock took charge, he revoked my order of August

24 providing for a revision of the jury lists; and, in short,

President Johnson's policy now became supreme, till Hancock himself

was relieved in March, 1868.



My official connection with the reconstruction of Louisiana and Texas

practically closed with this order concerning the jury lists.  In my

judgment this had become a necessity, for the disaffected element,

sustained as it was by the open sympathy of the President, had grown

so determined in its opposition to the execution of the

Reconstruction acts that I resolved to remove from place and power

all obstacles; for the summer's experience had convinced me that in

no other way could the law be faithfully administered.



The President had long been dissatisfied with my course; indeed, he

had harbored personal enmity against me ever since he perceived that

he could not bend me to an acceptance of the false position in which

he had tried to place me by garbling my report of the riot of 1866.

When Mr. Johnson decided to remove me, General Grant protested in

these terms, but to no purpose:



"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,

"WASHINGTON, D. C., August 17, 1867



"SIR: I am in receipt of your order of this date directing the

assignment of General G. H. Thomas to the command of the Fifth

Military District, General Sheridan to the Department of the

Missouri, and General Hancock to the Department of the Cumberland;

also your note of this date (enclosing these instructions), saying:

'Before you issue instructions to carry into effect the enclosed

order, I would be pleased to hear any suggestions you may deem

necessary respecting the assignments to which the order refers.'



"I am pleased to avail myself of this invitation to urge--earnestly

urge--urge in the name of a patriotic people, who have sacrificed

hundreds of thousands of loyal lives and thousands of millions of

treasure to preserve the integrity and union of this country--that

this order be not insisted on.  It is unmistakably the expressed wish

of the country that General Sheridan should not be removed from his

present command.



"This is a republic where the will of the people is the law of the

land.  I beg that their voice may be heard.



"General Sheridan has performed his civil duties faithfully and

intelligently.  His removal will only be regarded as an effort to

defeat the laws of Congress.  It will be interpreted by the

unreconstructed element in the South--those who did all they could to

break up this Government by arms, and now wish to be the only element

consulted as to the method of restoring order--as a triumph.  It will

embolden them to renewed opposition to the will of the loyal masses,

believing that they have the Executive with them.



"The services of General Thomas in battling for the Union entitle him

to some consideration.  He has repeatedly entered his protest against

being assigned to either of the five military districts, and

especially to being assigned to relieve General Sheridan.



"There are military reasons, pecuniary reasons, and above all,

patriotic reasons, why this should not be insisted upon.



"I beg to refer to a letter marked 'private,' which I wrote to the

President when first consulted on the subject of the change in the

War Department.  It bears upon the subject of this removal, and I had

hoped would have prevented it.



"I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant,



"U. S. GRANT,

"General U. S. A., Secretary of War ad interim.



"His Excellency A. JOHNSON,

"President of the United States."





I was ordered to command the Department of the Missouri (General

Hancock, as already noted, finally becoming my successor in the Fifth

Military District), and left New Orleans on the 5th of September.  I

was not loath to go.  The kind of duty I had been performing in

Louisiana and Texas was very trying under the most favorable

circumstances, but all the more so in my case, since I had to contend

against the obstructions which the President placed in the way from

persistent opposition to the acts of Congress as well as from

antipathy to me--which obstructions he interposed with all the

boldness and aggressiveness of his peculiar nature.



On more than one occasion while I was exercising this command,

impurity of motive was imputed to me, but it has never been

truthfully shown (nor can it ever be) that political or corrupt

influences of any kind controlled me in any instance.  I simply tried

to carry out, without fear or favor, the Reconstruction acts as they

came to me.  They were intended to disfranchise certain persons, and

to enfranchise certain others, and, till decided otherwise, were the

laws of the land; and it was my duty to execute them faithfully,

without regard, on the one hand, for those upon whom it was thought

they bore so heavily, nor, on the other, for this or that political

party, and certainly without deference to those persons sent to

Louisiana to influence my conduct of affairs.



Some of these missionaries were high officials, both military and

civil, and I recall among others a visit made me in 1866 by a

distinguished friend of the President, Mr. Thomas A. Hendricks.  The

purpose of his coming was to convey to me assurances of the very high

esteem in which I was held by the President, and to explain

personally Mr. Johnson's plan of reconstruction, its flawless

constitutionality, and so on.  But being on the ground, I had before

me the exhibition of its practical working, saw the oppression and

excesses growing out of it, and in the face of these experiences even

Mr. Hendricks's persuasive eloquence was powerless to convince me of

its beneficence.  Later General Lovell H. Rousseau came down on a

like mission, but was no more successful than Mr. Hendricks.



During the whole period that I commanded in Louisiana and Texas my

position was a most unenviable one.  The service was unusual, and the

nature of it scarcely to be understood by those not entirely familiar

with the conditions existing immediately after the war.  In

administering the affairs of those States, I never acted except by

authority, and always from conscientious motives.  I tried to guard

the rights of everybody in accordance with the law.  In this I was

supported by General Grant and opposed by President Johnson.  The

former had at heart, above every other consideration, the good of his

country, and always sustained me with approval and kind suggestions.

The course pursued by the President was exactly the opposite, and

seems to prove that ,in the whole matter of reconstruction he was

governed less by patriotic motives than by personal ambitions.  Add

to this his natural obstinacy of character and personal enmity toward

me, and no surprise should be occasioned when I say that I heartily

welcomed the order that lifted from me my unsought burden.









CHAPTER XII.



AT FORT LEAVENWORTH--THE TREATY OF MEDICINE LODGE--GOING TO FORT

DODGE--DISCONTENTED INDIANS--INDIAN OUTRAGES--A DELEGATION OF CHIEFS-

-TERRIBLE INDIAN RAID--DEATH OF COMSTOCK--VAST HERDS OF BUFFALO--PRE

PARING FOR A WINTER CAMPAIGN--MEETING "BUFFALO BILL"--HE UNDERTAKES A

DANGEROUS TASK--FORSYTH'S GALLANT FIGHT--RESCUED.



The headquarters of the military department to which I was assigned

when relieved from duty at New Orleans was at Fort Leavenworth,

Kansas, and on the 5th of September I started for that post.  In due

time I reached St. Louis, and stopped there a day to accept an

ovation tendered in approval of the course I had pursued in the Fifth

Military District--a public demonstration apparently of the most

sincere and hearty character.



>From St. Louis to Leavenworth took but one night, and the next day I

technically complied with my orders far enough to permit General

Hancock to leave the department, so that he might go immediately to

New Orleans if he so desired, but on account of the yellow fever

epidemic then prevailing, he did not reach the city till late in

November.



My new command was one of the four military departments that composed

the geographical division then commanded by Lieutenant-General

Sherman.  This division had been formed in 1866, with a view to

controlling the Indians west of the Missouri River, they having

become very restless and troublesome because of the building of the

Pacific railroads through their hunting-grounds, and the

encroachments of pioneers, who began settling in middle and western

Kansas and eastern Colorado immediately after the war.



My department embraced the States of Missouri and Kansas, the Indian

Territory, and New Mexico.  Part of this section of country--western

Kansas particularly--had been frequently disturbed and harassed

during two or three years past, the savages every now and then

massacring an isolated family, boldly attacking the surveying and

construction parties of the Kansas-Pacific railroad, sweeping down on

emigrant trains, plundering and burning stage-stations and the like

along the Smoky Hill route to Denver and the Arkansas route to New

Mexico.



However, when I relieved Hancock, the department was comparatively

quiet.  Though some military operations had been conducted against

the hostile tribes in the early part of the previous summer, all

active work was now suspended in the attempt to conclude a permanent

peace with the Cheyennes, Arapahoes, Kiowas, and Comanches, in

compliance with the act of Congress creating what was known as the

Indian Peace Commission of 1867.



Under these circumstances there was little necessity for my remaining

at Leavenworth, and as I was much run down in health from the

Louisiana climate, in which I had been obliged to live continuously

for three summers (one of which brought epidemic cholera, and another

a scourge of yellow fever), I took a leave of absence for a few

months, leaving Colonel A. J. Smith, of the Seventh Cavalry,

temporarily in charge of my command.



On this account I did not actually go on duty in the department of

the Missouri till March, 1868.  On getting back I learned that the

negotiations of the Peace Commissioners held at Medicine Lodge, about

seventy miles south of Fort Larned had resulted in a treaty with the

Cheyennes, Arapahoes, Kiowas, and Comanches, by which agreement it

was supposed all troubles had been settled.  The compact, as

concluded, contained numerous provisions, the most important to us

being one which practically relinquished the country between the

Arkansas and Platte rivers for white settlement; another permitted

the peaceable construction of the Pacific railroads through the same

region; and a third requiring the tribes signing the treaty to retire

to reservations allotted them in the Indian Territory.  Although the

chiefs and head-men were well-nigh unanimous in ratifying these

concessions, it was discovered in the spring of 1868 that many of the

young men were bitterly opposed to what had been done, and claimed

that most of the signatures had been obtained by misrepresentation

and through proffers of certain annuities, and promises of arms and

ammunition to be issued in the spring of 1868.  This grumbling was

very general in extent, and during the winter found outlet in

occasional marauding, so, fearing a renewal of the pillaging and

plundering at an early day, to prepare myself for the work evidently

ahead the first thing I did on assuming permanent command was to make

a trip to Fort Larned and Fort Dodge, near which places the bulk of

the Indians had congregated on Pawnee and Walnut creeks.  I wanted to

get near enough to the camps to find out for myself the actual state

of feeling among the savages, and also to familiarize myself with the

characteristics of the Plains Indians, for my previous experience had

been mainly with mountain tribes on Ehe Pacific coast.  Fort Larned I

found too near the camps for my purpose, its proximity too readily

inviting unnecessary "talks," so I remained here but a day or two,

and then went on to Dodge, which, though considerably farther away

from the camps, was yet close enough to enable us to obtain easily

information of all that was going on.



It took but a few days at Dodge to discover that great discontent

existed about the Medicine Lodge concessions, to see that the young

men were chafing and turbulent, and that it would require much tact

and good management on the part of the Indian Bureau to persuade the

four tribes to go quietly to their reservations, under an agreement

which, when entered into, many of them protested had not been fully

understood.



A few hours after my arrival a delegation of prominent chiefs called

on me and proposed a council, where they might discuss their

grievances, and thus bring to the notice of the Government the

alleged wrongs done them; but this I refused, because Congress had

delegated to the Peace Commission the whole matter of treating with

them, and a council might lead only to additional complications.  My

refusal left them without hope of securing better terms, or of even

delaying matters longer; so henceforth they were more than ever

reckless and defiant.  Denunciations of the treaty became outspoken,

and as the young braves grew more and more insolent every day, it

amounted to conviction that, unless by some means the irritation was

allayed, hostilities would surely be upon us when the buffalo

returned to their summer feeding-grounds between the Arkansas and the

Platte.



The principal sufferers in this event would be the settlers in middle

and western Kansas, who, entirely ignorant of the dangers hanging

over them, were laboring to build up homes in a new country.  Hence

the maintenance of peace was much to be desired, if it could be

secured without too great concessions, and although I would not meet

the different tribes in a formal council, yet, to ward off from

settlers as much as possible the horrors of savage warfare, I showed,

by resorting to persuasive methods, my willingness to temporize a

good deal.  An abundant supply of rations is usually effective to

keep matters quiet in such cases, so I fed them pretty freely, and

also endeavored to control them through certain men who, I found,

because of former associations, had their confidence.  These men,

employed as scouts, or interpreters, were Mr. William Comstock, Mr.

Abner S. Grover, and Mr. Richard Parr.  They had lived on the Plains

for many years with different tribes of Indians, had trapped and

hunted with them, and knew all the principal chiefs and headmen.

Through such influences, I thought I saw good chances of preserving

peace, and of inducing the discontented to go quietly to their

reservations in the Indian Territory as soon as General Hazen, the

representative of the Peace Commissioners, was ready to conduct them

there from Fort Larned.



Before returning to Leavenworth I put my mediators (as I may call

them) under charge of an officer of the army, Lieutenant F. W.

Beecher, a very intelligent man, and directed him to send them out to

visit among the different tribes, in order to explain what was

intended by the treaty of Medicine Lodge, and to make every effort

possible to avert hostilities.  Under these instructions Comstock and

Grover made it their business to go about among the Cheyennes--the

most warlike tribe of all--then camping about the headwaters of

Pawnee and Walnut creeks, and also to the north and west of Fort

Wallace, while Parr spent his time principally with the Kiowas and

Comanches.



>From the different posts--Wallace, Dodge, and Larned Lieutenant

Beecher kept up communication with all three scouts, and through him

I heard from them at least once a week.  Every now and then some

trouble along the railroad or stage routes would be satisfactorily

adjusted and quiet restored, and matters seemed to be going on very

well, the warm weather bringing the grass and buffalo in plenty, and

still no outbreak, nor any act of downright hostility.  So I began to

hope that we should succeed in averting trouble till the favorite war

season of the Indians was over, but the early days of August rudely

ended our fancied tranquility.



In July the encampments about Fort Dodge began to break up, each band

or tribe moving off to some new location north of the Arkansas,

instead of toward its proper reservation to the south of that river.

Then I learned presently that a party of Cheyennes had made a raid on

the Kaws--a band of friendly Indians living near Council Grove--and

stolen their horses, and also robbed the houses of several white

people near Council Grove.  This raid was the beginning of the Indian

war of 1868.  Immediately following it, the Comanches and Kiowas came

to Fort Larned to receive their annuities, expecting to get also the

arms and ammunition promised them at Medicine Lodge, but the raid to

Council Grove having been reported to the Indian Department, the

issue of arms was suspended till reparation was made.  This action of

the Department greatly incensed the savages, and the agent's offer of

the annuities without guns and pistols was insolently refused, the

Indians sulking back to their camps, the young men giving themselves

up to war-dances, and to powwows with " medicine-men," till all hope

of control was gone.



Brevet Brigadier-General Alfred Sully, an officer of long experience

in Indian matters, who at this time was in command Qf the District of

the Arkansas, which embraced Forts Larned and Dodge, having notified

me of these occurrences at Larned, and expressed the opinion that the

Indians were bent on mischief, I directed him there immediately to

act against them.  After he reached Larned, the chances for peace

appeared more favorable.  The Indians came to see him, and protested

that it was only a few bad young men who had been depredating, and

that all would be well and the young men held in check if the agent

would but issue the arms and ammunition.  Believing their promises,

Sully thought that the delivery of the arms would solve all the

difficulties, so on his advice the agent turned them over along with

the annuities, the Indians this time condescendingly accepting.



This issue of arms and ammunition was a fatal mistake; Indian

diplomacy had overreached Sully's experience, and even while the

delivery was in progress a party of warriors had already begun a raid

of murder and rapine, which for acts of devilish cruelty perhaps has

no parallel in savage warfare.  The party consisted of about two

hundred Cheyennes and a few Arapahoes, with twenty Sioux who had been

visiting their friends, the Cheyennes.  As near as could be

ascertained, they organized and left their camps along Pawnee Creek

about the 3d of August.  Traveling northeast, they skirted around

Fort Harker, and made their first appearance among the settlers in

the Saline Valley, about thirty miles north of that post.  Professing

friendship and asking food at the farm-houses, they saw the

unsuspecting occupants comply by giving all they could spare from

their scanty stores.  Knowing the Indian's inordinate fondness for

coffee, particularly when well sweetened, they even served him this

luxury freely.  With this the demons began their devilish work.

Pretending to be indignant because it was served them in tin cups,

they threw the hot contents into the women's faces, and then, first

making prisoners of the men, they, one after another, ravished the

women till the victims became insensible.  For some inexplicable

reason the two farmers were neither killed nor carried off, so after

the red fiends had gone, the unfortunate women were brought in to

Fort Harker, their arrival being the first intimation to the military

that hostilities had actually begun.



Leaving the Saline, this war-party crossed over to the valley of the

Solomon, a more thickly settled region, and where the people were in

better circumstances, their farms having been started two or three

years before.  Unaware of the hostile character of the raiders, the

people here received them in the friendliest way, providing food, and

even giving them ammunition, little dreaming of what was impending.

These kindnesses were requited with murder and pillage, and worse,

for all the women who fell into their hands were subjected to horrors

indescribable by words.  Here also the first murders were committed,

thirteen men and two women being killed.  Then, after burning five

houses and stealing all the horses they could find, they turned back

toward the Saline, carrying away as prisoners two little girls named

Bell, who have never been heard of since.



It was probably the intention to finish, as they marched back to the

south, the devilish work begun on the Saline, but before they reached

that valley on the return, the victims left there originally had fled

to Fort Harker, as already explained, and Captain Benteen was now

nearing the little settlement with a troop of cavalry, which he had

hurriedly marched from Fort Zarah.  The savages were attacking the

house of a Mr. Schermerhorn, where a few of the settlers had

collected for defense, when Benteen approached.  Hearing the firing,

the troopers rode toward the sound at a gallop, but when they

appeared in view, coming over the hills, the Indians fled in all

directions, escaping punishment through their usual tactics of

scattering over the Plains, so as to leave no distinctive trail.



When this frightful raid was taking place, Lieutenant Beecher, with

his three scouts--Comstock, Grover, and Parr--was on Walnut Creek.

Indefinite rumors about troubles on the Saline and Solomon reaching

him, he immediately sent Comstock and Grover over to the headwaters

of the Solomon, to the camp of a band of Cheyennes, whose chief was

called "Turkey Leg," to see if any of the raiders belonged there; to

learn the facts, and make explanations, if it was found that the

white people had been at fault.  For years this chief had been a

special friend of Comstock and Grover.  They had trapped, hunted, and

lived with his band, and from this intimacy they felt confident of

being able to get "Turkey Leg" to quiet his people, if any of them

were engaged in the raid; and, at all events, they expected, through

him and his band, to influence the rest of the Cheyennes.  From the

moment they arrived in the Indian village, however, the two scouts

met with a very cold reception.  Neither friendly pipe nor food was

offered them, and before they could recover from their chilling

reception, they were peremptorily ordered out of the village, with

the intimation that when the Cheyennes were on the war-path the

presence of whites was intolerable.  The scouts were prompt to leave,

of course, and for a few miles were accompanied by an escort of seven

young men, who said they were sent with them to protect the two from

harm.  As the party rode along over the prairie, such a depth of

attachment was professed for Comstock and Grover that,

notwithstanding all the experience of their past lives, they were

thoroughly deceived, and in the midst of a friendly conversation some

of the young warriors fell suddenly to the rear and treacherously

fired on them.



At the volley Comstock fell from his horse instantly killed.  Grover,

badly wounded in the shoulder, also fell to the ground near Comstock

Seeing his comrade was dead,Grover made use of his friend's body to

protect himself, lying close behind it.  Then took place a remarkable

contest, Grover, alone and severely wounded, obstinately fighting the

seven Indians, and holding them at bay for the rest of the day.

Being an expert shot, and having a long-range repeating rifle, he

"stood off " the savages till dark.  Then cautiously crawling away on

his belly to a deep ravine, he lay close, suffering terribly from his

wound, till the following night, when, setting out for Fort Wallace,

he arrived there the succeeding day, almost crazed from pain and

exhaustion.



Simultaneously with the fiendish atrocities committed on the Saline

and Solomon rivers and the attack on Comstock and Grover, the

pillaging and murdering began on the Smoky Hill stage-route, along

the upper Arkansas River and on the headwaters of the Cimarron.  That

along the Smoky Hill and north of it was the exclusive work of, the

Cheyennes, a part of the Arapahoes, and the few Sioux allies

heretofore mentioned, while the raiding on the Arkansas and Cimarron

was done principally by the Kiowas under their chief, Satanta, aided

by some of the Comanches.  The young men of these tribes set out on

their bloody work just after the annuities and guns were issued at

Larned, and as soon as they were well on the road the rest of the

Comanches and Kiowas escaped from the post and fled south of the

Arkansas.  They were at once pursued by General Sully with a small

force, but by the time he reached the Cimarron the war-party had

finished its raid on tHe upper Arkansas, and so many Indians combined

against Sully that he was compelled to withdraw to Fort Dodge, which

he reached not without considerable difficulty, and after three

severe fights.



These, and many minor raids which followed, made it plain that a

general outbreak was upon us.  The only remedy, therefore, was to

subjugate the savages immediately engaged in the forays by forcing

the several tribes to settle down on the reservations set apart by

the treaty of Medicine Lodge.  The principal mischief-makers were the

Cheyennes.  Next in deviltry were the Kiowas, and then the Arapahoes

and Comanches.  Some few of these last two tribes continued friendly,

or at least took no active part in the raiding, but nearly all the

young men of both were the constant allies of the Cheyennes and

Kiowas.  All four tribes together could put on the war-path a

formidable force of about 6,000 warriors.  The subjugation of this

number of savages would be no easy task, so to give the matter my

undivided attention I transferred my headquarters from Leavenworth to

Fort Hays, a military post near which the prosperous town of Hays

City now stands.



Fort Hays was just beyond the line of the most advanced settlements,

and was then the terminus of the Kansas-Pacific railroad.  For this

reason it could be made a depot of supplies, and was a good point

from which to supervise matters in the section of country to be

operated in, which district is a part of the Great American Plains,

extending south from the Platte River in Nebraska to the Red River in

the Indian Territory, and westward from the line of frontier

settlements to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains, a vast region

embracing an area of about 150,000 square miles.  With the exception

of a half-dozen military posts and a few stations on the two overland

emigrant routes--the Smoky Hill to Denver, and the Arkansas to New

Mexico--this country was an unsettled waste known only to the Indians

and a few trappers.  There were neither roads nor well-marked trails,

and the only timber to be found--which generally grew only along the

streams--was so scraggy and worthless as hardly to deserve the name.

Nor was water by any means plentiful, even though the section is

traversed by important streams, the Republican, the Smoky Hill, the

Arkansas, the Cimarron, and the Canadian all flowing eastwardly, as

do also their tributaries in the main.  These feeders are sometimes

long and crooked, but as a general thing the volume of water is

insignificant except after rain-falls.  Then, because of unimpeded

drainage, the little streams fill up rapidly with torrents of water,

which quickly flows off or sinks into the sand, leaving only an

occasional pool without visible inlet or outlet.



At the period of which I write, in 1868, the Plains were covered with

vast herds of buffalo--the number has been estimated at 3,000,000

head--and with such means of subsistence as this everywhere at hand,

the 6,000 hostiles were wholly unhampered by any problem of food-

supply.  The savages were rich too according to Indian standards,

many a lodge owning from twenty to a hundred ponies; and

consciousness of wealth and power, aided by former temporizing, had

made them not only confident but defiant.  Realizing that their

thorough subjugation would be a difficult task, I made up my mind to

confine operations during the grazing and hunting season to

protecting the people of the new settlements and on the overland

routes, and then, when winter came, to fall upon the savages

relentlessly, for in that season their ponies would be thin, and weak

from lack of food, and in the cold and snow, without strong ponies to

transport their villages and plunder, their movements would be so

much impeded that the troops could overtake them.



At the outbreak of hostilities I had in all, east of New Mexico, a

force of regulars numbering about 2,600 men--1,200 mounted and 1,400

foot troops.  The cavalry was composed of the Seventh and Tenth

regiments; the infantry, of the Third and Fifth regiments and four

companies of the Thirty-Eighth.  With these few troops all the posts

along the Smoky Hill and Arkansas had to be garrisoned, emigrant

trains escorted, and the settlements and routes of travel and the

construction parties on the Kansas-Pacific railway protected.  Then,

too, this same force had to furnish for the field small movable

columns, that were always on the go, so it will be rightly inferred

that every available man was kept busy from the middle of August till

November; especially as during this period the hostiles attacked over

forty widely dispersed places, in nearly all cases stealing horses,

burning houses, and killing settlers.  It was of course impossible to

foresee where these descents would be made, but as soon as an attack

was heard of assistance was always promptly rendered, and every now

and then we succeeded in killing a few savages.  As a general thing,

though, the raiders escaped before relief arrived, and when they had

a few miles the start, all efforts to catch them were futile.  I

therefore discouraged long pursuits, and, in fact, did not approve of

making any at all unless the chances of obtaining paying results were

very evident, otherwise the troops would be worn out by the time the

hard work of the winter was demanded from them.



To get ready for a winter campaign of six months gave us much to do.

The thing most needed was more men, so I asked for additional

cavalry, and all that could be spareds--even troops of the Fifth

Cavalry--was sent tome.  Believing this reinforcement insufficient,

to supplement it I applied for a regiment of Kansas volunteers, which

request being granted, the organization of the regiment was

immediately begun at Topeka.  It was necessary also to provide a

large amount of transportation and accumulate quantities of stores,

since the campaign probably would not end till spring.  Another

important matter was to secure competent guides for the different

columns of troops, for, as I have said, the section of country to be

operated in was comparatively unknown.



In those days the railroad town of Hays City was filled with so

called "Indian scouts," whose common boast was of having slain scores

of redskins, but the real scout--that is, a 'guide and trailer

knowing the habits of the Indians--was very scarce, and it was hard

to find anybody familiar with the country south of the Arkansas,

where the campaign was to be made.  Still, about Hays City and the

various military posts there was some good material to select from,

and we managed to employ several men, who, from their experience on

the Plains in various capacities, or from natural instinct and

aptitude, soon became excellent guides and courageous and valuable

scouts, some of them, indeed, gaining much distinction.  Mr. William

F. Cody ("Buffalo Bill"), whose renown has since become world-wide,

was one of the men thus selected.  He received his sobriquet from his

marked success in killing buffaloes for a contractor, to supply fresh

meat to the construction parties, on the Kansas-Pacific railway.  He

had given up this business, however, and was now in the employ of the

quartermaster's department of the army, and was first brought to my

notice by distinguishing himself in bringing me an important despatch

from Fort Larned to Fort Hays, a distance of sixty-five miles,

through a section infested with Indians.  The despatch informed me

that the Indians near Larned were preparing to decamp, and this

intelligence required that certain orders should be carried to Fort

Dodge, ninety-five miles south of Hays.  This too being a

particularly dangerous route--several couriers having been killed on

it--it was impossible to get one of the various "Petes," "Jacks," or

"Jims" hanging around Hays City to take my communication.  Cody

learning of the strait I was in, manfully came to the rescue, and

proposed to make the trip to Dodge, though he had just finished his

long and perilous ride from Larned.  I gratefully accepted his offer,

and after four or five hours' rest he mounted a fresh horse and

hastened on his journey, halting but once to rest on the way, and

then only for an hour, the stop being made at Coon Creek, where he

got another mount from a troop of cavalry.  At Dodge he took six

hours' sleep, and then continued on to his own post--Fort Larned--

with more despatches.  After resting twelve hours at Larned, he was

again in the saddle with tidings for me at Fort Hays, General Hazen

sending him, this time, with word that the villages had fled to the

south of the Arkansas.  Thus, in all, Cody rode about 350 miles in

less than sixty hours, and such an exhibition of endurance and

courage was more than enough to convince me that his services would

be extremely valuable in the campaign, so I retained him at Fort Hays

till the battalion of the Fifth Cavalry arrived, and then made him

chief of scouts for that regiment.



The information brought me by Cody on his second trip from Larned

indicated where the villages would be found in the winter, and I

decided to move on them about the 1st of November.  Only the women

and children and the decrepit old men were with the villages, however

enough, presumably, to look after the plunder most of the warriors

remaining north of the Arkansas to continue their marauding.  Many

severe fights occurred between our troops and these marauders, and in

these affairs, before November 1 over a hundred Indians were killed,

yet from the ease with which the escaping savages would disappear

only to fall upon remote settlements with pillage and murder, the

results were by no means satisfactory.  One of the most noteworthy of

these preliminary affairs was the gallant fight made on the

Republican River the 17th of September by my Aide, Colonel George A.

Forsyth, and party, against about seven hundred Cheyennes and Sioux.

Forsyth, with Lieutenant Beecher, and Doctor J. H. Mooers as surgeon,

was in charge of a company of citizen scouts, mostly expert rifle-

shots, but embracing also a few Indian fighters, among these Grover

and Parr.  The company was organized the latter part of August for

immediate work in defense of the settlements, and also for future use

in the Indian Territory when the campaign should open there.  About

the time the company had reached its complement--it was limited to

forty-seven men and three officers--a small band of hostiles began

depredations near Sheridan City, one of the towns that grew up over-

night on the Kansas-Pacific railway.  Forsyth pursued this party, but

failing to overtake it, made his way into Fort Wallace for rations,

intending to return from there to Fort Hays.  Before he started back,

however, another band of Indians appeared near the post and stole

some horses from the stage company.  This unexpected raid made

Forsyth hot to go for the marauders, and he telegraphed me for

permission, which I as promptly gave him.  He left the post on the

10th of September, the command consisting of himself, Lieutenant

Beecher, Acting Assistant Surgeon Mooers, and the full strength,

forty-seven men, with a few pack mules carrying about ten days'

rations.



He headed north toward the Republican River.  For the first two days

the trail was indistinct and hard to follow.  During the next three

it continued to grow much larger, indicating plainly that the number

of Indians ahead was rapidly increasing.  Of course this sign meant a

fight as soon as a large enough force was mustered, but as this was

what Forsyth was after, he pushed ahead with confidence and alacrity.

The night of the 16th of September he encamped on the Arickaree

branch of the Republican, not far from the forks of the river, with

the expectation of resuming the march as usual next day, for the

indications were that the main body of the savages must be still a

long way off, though in the preceding twenty-four hours an occasional

Indian had been seen.



But the enemy was much nearer than was thought, for at daybreak on

the morning of the 17th he made known his immediate presence by a

sudden dash at Forsyth's horses, a few of which were stampeded and

captured before the scouts could reach them.  This dash was made by a

small party only to get the horses, so those engaged in it were soon

driven off, but a few minutes later hundreds of savages--it was

afterward learned that seven hundred warriors took part in the fight-

-hitherto invisible, showed themselves on the hills overlooking the

camp and so menacingly as to convince Forsyth that his defense must

be one of desperation.  The only place at hand that gave any hope of

successful resistance was a small island in the Arickaree, the

channel on one side being about a foot deep while on the other it was

completely dry; so to this position a hurried retreat was made.  All

the men and the remaining animals reached the island in safety, but

on account of the heavy fire poured in from the neighboring hills the

packs containing the rations and medicines had to be abandoned.



On seeing Forsyth's hasty move, the Indians, thinking they had him,

prepared to overwhelm the scouts by swooping down on one side of the

island with about five hundred mounted warriors, while about two

hundred, covered by the tall grass in the river-bottom attacked the

other side, dismounted.  But the brave little band sadly disappointed

them.  When the charge came it was met with such a deadly fire that a

large number of the fiends were killed, some of them even after

gaining the bank of the island.  This check had the effect of making

the savages more wary, but they were still bold enough to make two

more assaults before mid-day.  Each of these ending like the first,

the Indians thereafter contented themselves with shooting all the

horses, which had been tied up to some scraggy little cottonwood-

trees, and then proceeded to lay siege to the party.



The first man struck was Forsyth himself.  He was hit three times in

all--twice in one leg, both serious wounds, and once on the head, a

slight abrasion of the scalp.  A moment later Beecher was killed and

Doctor Mooers mortally wounded: and in addition to these misfortunes

the scouts kept getting hit, till several were killed, and the whole

number of casualties had reached twenty-one in a company of forty-

seven.  Yet with all this, and despite the seeming hopelessness of

the situation, the survivors kept up their pluck undiminished, and

during a lull succeeding the third repulse dug into the loose soil

till the entire party was pretty well protected by rifle-pits.  Thus

covered they stood off the Indians for the next three days, although

of course their condition became deplorable from lack of food, while

those who were hurt suffered indescribable agony, since no means were

at hand for dressing their wounds.



By the third day the Indians, seeming to despair of destroying the

beleaguered party before succor might arrive, began to draw off, and

on the fourth wholly disappeared.  The men were by this time nearly

famished for food.  Even now there was nothing to be had except

horse-meat from the carcasses of the animals killed the first day,

and this, though decidedly unpalatable, not to say disgusting, had to

be put up with, and so on such unwholesome stuff they managed to live

for four days longer, at the end of which time they were rescued by a

column of troops under Colonel Bankhead, which had hastened from Fort

Wallace in response to calls for help, carried there by two brave

fellows--Stilwell and Truedell--who, volunteering to go for relief,

had slipped through the Indians, and struck out for that post in the

night after the first day's fight.









CHAPTER XIII,



FITTING OUT THE WINTER EXPEDITION--ACCOMPANYING THE MAIN FORCE--THE

OTHER COLUMNS--STRUCK BY A BLIZZARD--CUSTER'S FIGHT ON THE WASHITA--

DEFEAT AND DEATH OF BLACK KETTLE--MASSACRE OF ELLIOTT'S PARTY--RELIEF

OF COLONEL CRAWFORD.



The end of October saw completed the most of my arrangements for the

winter campaign, though the difficulties and hardships to be

encountered had led several experienced officers of the army, and

some frontiersmen like Mr. James Bridger, the famous scout and, guide

of earlier days, to discourage the project.  Bridger even went so far

as to come out from St. Louis to dissuade me, but I reasoned that as

the soldier was much better fed and clothed than the Indian, I had

one great advantage, and that, in short, a successful campaign could

be made if the operations of the different columns were energetically

conducted.  To see to this I decided to go in person with the main

column, which was to push down into the western part of the Indian

Territory, having for its initial objective the villages which, at

the beginning of hostilities, had fled toward the head-waters of the

Red River, and those also that had gone to the same remote region

after decamping from the neighborhood of Larned at the time that

General Hazen sent Buffalo Bill to me with the news.



The column which was expected to do the main work was to be composed

of the Nineteenth Kansas Volunteer Cavalry, commanded by Colonel

Crawford; eleven troops of the Seventh United States Cavalry, under

General Custer, and a battalion of five companies of infantry under

Brevet Major John H. Page.  To facilitate matters, General Sully, the

district commander, was ordered to rendezvous these troops and

establish a supply depot about a hundred miles south of Fort Dodge,

as from such a point operations could be more readily conducted.  He

selected for the depot a most suitable place at the confluence of

Beaver and Wolf creeks, and on his arrival there with Custer's and

Page's commands, named the place Camp Supply.



In conjunction with the main column, two others also were to

penetrate the Indian Territory.  One of these, which was to march

east from New Mexico by way of Fort Bascom was to be composed of six

troops of the Third Cavalry and two companies of infantry, the whole

under Colonel A. W. Evans.  The other, consisting of seven troops of

the Fifth Cavalry, and commanded by Brevet Brigadier-General Eugene

A. Carr, was to march southeast from Fort Lyon; the intention being

that Evans and Carr should destroy or drive in toward old Fort Cobb

any straggling bands that might be prowling through the country west

of my own line of march; Carr, as he advanced, to be joined by Brevet

Brigadier-General W. H. Penrose, with five troops of cavalry already

in the field southeast of Lyon.  The Fort Bascom column, after

establishing a deepot of supplies at Monument Creek, was to work down

the main Canadian, and remain out as long as it could feed itself

from New Mexico; Carr, having united with Penrose on the North

Canadian, was to operate toward the Antelope Hills and headwaters of

the Red River; while I, with the main column was to move southward to

strike the Indians along the Washita, or still farther.  south on

branches of the Red River.



It was no small nor easy task to outfit all these troops by the time

cold weather set in, and provide for them during the winter, but by

the 1st of November I had enough supplies accumulated at Forts Dodge

and Lyon for my own and Carr's columns, and in addition directed

subsistence and forage for three months to be sent to Fort Gibson for

final delivery at Fort Arbuckle, as I expected to feed the command

from this place when we arrived in the neighborhood of old Fort Cobb,

but through some mismanagement few of these stores got further than

Gibson before winter came on.



November 1, all being ready, Colonel Grawford was furnished with

competent guides, and, after sending two troops to Fort Dodge to act

as my escort, with the rest of his regiment he started from Topeka

November 5, under orders to march straight for the rendezvous at the

junction of Beaver and Wolf creeks.  He was expected to reach his

destination about the 20th, and there unite with the Seventh Cavalry

and the battalion of infantry, which in the mean time were on the

march from Dodge.  A few days later Carr and Evans began their march

also, and everything being now in motion, I decided to go to Camp

Supply to give the campaign my personal attention, determined to

prove that operations could be successfully conducted in spite of

winter, and bent on showing the Indians that they were not secure

from punishment because of inclement weather--an ally on which they

had hitherto relied with much assurance.



We started from Fort Hays on the 15th of N6vember, and the first

night out a blizzard struck us and carried away our tents; and as the

gale was so violent that they could not be put up again, the rain and

snow drenched us to the skin.  Shivering from wet and cold, I took

refuge under a wagon, and there spent such a miserable night that,

when at last morning came, the gloomy predictions of old man Bridger

and others rose up before me with greatly increased force.  As we

took the road the sleet and snow were still falling, but we labored

on to Dodge that day in spite of the fact that many of the mules

played out on the way.  We stayed only one night at Dodge, and then

on the 17th, escorted by a troop of cavalry and Forsyth's scouts, now

under the command of Lieutenant Lewis Pepoon, crossed the Arkansas

and camped the night of the 18th at Bluff Creek, where the two troops

of the Nineteenth Kansas, previously detailed as my escort, were

awaiting our coming.  As we were approaching this camp some

suspicious looking objects were seen moving off at a long distance to

the east of us, but as the scouts confidently pronounced them

buffalo, we were unaware of their true character till next morning,

when we became satisfied that what we had seen were Indians, for

immediately after crossing Beaver Creek we struck a trail, leading to

the northeast, of a war party that evidently came up from the head-

waters of the Washita River.



The evening of November 21we arrived at the Camp Supply depot, having

traveled all day in another snowstorm that did not end till twenty-

four hours later.  General Sully, with Custer's regiment and the

infantry battalion, had reached the place several days before, but

the Kansas regiment had not yet put in an appearance.  All hands were

hard at work trying to shelter the stores and troops, but from the

trail seen that morning, believing that an opportunity offered to

strike an effective blow, I directed Custer to call in his working

parties and prepare to move immediately, without waiting for

Crawford's regiment, unaccountably absent.  Custer was ready to start

by the 23d, and he was then instructed to march north to where the

trail had been seen near Beaver Creek and follow it on the back

track, for, being convinced that the war party had come from the

Washita, I felt certain that this plan would lead directly to the

villages.



The difficulties attending a winter campaign were exhibited now with

their full force, as the march had to be conducted through a snow-

storm that hid surrounding objects, and so covered the country as to

alter the appearance of the prominent features, making the task of

the guides doubly troublesome; but in spite of these obstacles

fifteen miles had been traversed when Custer encamped for the night.

The next day the storm had ceased, and the weather was clear and

cold.  The heavy fall of snow had of course obliterated the trail in

the bottoms, and everywhere on the level; but, thanks to the wind,

that had swept comparatively bare the rough places and high ground,

the general direction could be traced without much trouble.  The

day's march, which was through a country abounding with buffalo, was

unattended by any special incident at first, but during the

afternoon, after getting the column across the Canadian River--an

operation which, on account of the wagons, consumed considerable

time--Custer's scouts (friendly Osages) brought back word that, some

miles ahead, they had struck fresh signs, a trail coming into the old

one from the north, which, in their opinion, indicated that the war

party was returning to the villages.



On the receipt of this news, Custer, leaving a guard with the wagons,

hastily assembled the rest of his men' and pushing on rapidly,

overtook the scouts and a detailed party from his regiment which had

accompanied them, all halted on the new trail awaiting his arrival.

A personal examination satisfied Custer that the surmises of his

scouts were correct; and also that the fresh trail in the deep snow

could at night be followed with ease.  After a short halt for supper

and rest the pursuit was resumed, the Osage scouts in advance, and

although the hostile Indians were presumed to be yet some distance

off, every precaution was taken to prevent detection and to enable

our troops to strike them unawares.  The fresh trail, which it was

afterward ascertained had been made by raiders from Black Kettle's

village of Cheyennes, and by some Arapahoes, led into the valley of

the Washita, and growing fresher as the night wore on, finally

brought the Osages upon a campfire, still smoldering, which, it was

concluded, had been built by the Indian boys acting as herders of the

ponies during the previous day.  It was evident, then, that the

village could be but a few miles off; hence the pursuit was continued

with redoubled caution until, a few hours before dawn of the 27th, as

the leading scouts peered over a rise on the line of march, they

discovered a large body of animals in the valley below.



As soon as they reported this discovery, Custer determined to

acquaint himself with the situation by making a reconnoissance in

person, accompanied by his principal officers.  So, sending back word

to halt the cavalry, he directed the officers to ride forward with

him; then dismounting, the entire party crept cautiously to a high

point which overlooked the valley, and from where, by the bright moon

then shining, they saw just how the village was situated. Its

position was such as to admit of easy approach from all sides.  So,

to preclude an escape of the Indians, Custer decided to attack at

daybreak, and from four different directions.



The plan having been fully explained to the officers, the remaining

hours of the night were employed in making the necessary

dispositions.  Two of the detachments left promptly, since they had

to make a circuitous march of several miles to Teach the points

designated for their attack; the third started a little later; and

then the fourth and last, under Custer himself, also moved into

position.  As the first light grew visible in the east, each column

moved closer in to the village, and then, all dispositions having

been made according to the prearranged plan, from their appointed

places the entire force to the opening notes of "Garry Owen," played

by the regimental band as the signal for the attack--dashed at a

gallop into the village.  The sleeping and unsuspecting savages were

completely surprised by the onset; yet after the first confusion,

during which the impulse to escape principally actuated them, they

seized their weapons, and from behind logs and trees, or plunging

into the stream and using its steep bank as a breastwork, they poured

upon their assailants a heavy fire, and kept on fighting with every

exhibition of desperation.  In such a combat mounted men were

useless, so Custer directed his troopers to fight on, foot, and the

Indians were successively driven from one point of vantage to

another, until, finally, by 9 o'clock the entire camp was in his

possession and the victory complete.  Black Kettle and over one

hundred of his warriors were killed, and about fifty women and

children captured; but most of the noncombatants, as well as a few

warriors and boys, escaped in the confusion of the fight.  Making

their way down the river, these fugitives alarmed the rest of the

Cheyennes and Arapahoes, and also the Kiowas and Comanches, whose

villages were in close proximity--the nearest not more than two miles

off.



Then of course all the warriors of these tribes rallied to attack

Custer, who meantime was engaged burning Black Kettle's camp and

collecting his herds of ponies.  But these new foes were rather wary

and circumspect, though they already had partial revenge in an

unlooked for way by cutting off Major Elliott and fifteen men, who

had gone off in pursuit of a batch of young warriors when the fight

was going on at the village.  In fact, the Indians had killed

Elliott's whole party, though neither the fate of the poor fellows,

nor how they happened to be caught, was known till long afterward.

It was then ascertained that the detachment pursued a course due

south, nearly at right angles to the Washita River, and after

galloping a couple of miles over the hills, crossing a small branch

of the Washita on the way, they captured some of the fugitives.  In

bringing the prisoners back, Elliott was in turn attacked on the open

prairie by a large number of savages from farther down the Washita,

who by this time were swarming to the aid of Black Kettle's village.

The little band fought its way gallantly to within rifle-range of the

small creek referred to, but could get no farther, for the Indians

had taken up a position in the bed of the stream, and from under

cover of its banks Elliott and all his remaining men were quickly

killed.  No relief was sent them, for Custer, not having seen Elliott

set out, knew nothing of the direction taken, and, besides, was busy

burning the villages and securing the ponies, and deeply concerned,

too, with defending himself from the new dangers menacing him.

Elliott and his brave little party were thus left to meet their fate

alone.



While Custer was burning the lodges and plunder and securing the

ponies, the Indians from the villages down the Washita were gathering

constantly around him till by mid-day they had collected in

thousands, and then came a new problem as to what should be done.  If

he attacked the other villages, there was great danger of his being

overwhelmed, and should he start back to Camp Supply by daylight, he

would run the risk of losing his prisoners and the ponies, so,

thinking the matter over, he decided to shoot all the ponies, and

keep skirmishing with the savages till nightfall, and then, under

cover of the darkness, return to Camp Supply; a programme that was

carried out successfully, but Custer's course received some severe

criticism because no effort was made to discover what had become of

Elliott.



Custer had, in all, two officers and nineteen men killed, and two

officers and eleven men wounded.  The blow struck was a most

effective one, and, fortunately, fell on one of the most villanous of

the hostile bands that, without any provocation whatever, had

perpetrated the massacres on the Saline and Solomon, committing

atrocities too repulsive for recital, and whose hands were still red

from their bloody work on the recent raid.  Black Kettle, the chief,

was an old man, and did not himself go with the raiders to the Saline

and Solomon, and on this account his fate was regretted by some.  But

it was old age only that kept him back, for before the demons set out

from Walnut Creek he had freely encouraged them by "making medicine,"

and by other devilish incantations that are gone through with at war

and scalp dances.



When the horrible work was over he undertook to shield himself by

professions of friendship, but being put to the test by my offering

to feed and care for all of his band who would come in to Fort Dodge

and remain there peaceably, he defiantly refused.  The consequence of

this refusal was a merited punishment, only too long delayed.



I received the first news of Custer's fight on theWashita on the

morning of November 29.  It was brought to me by one of his white

scouts, "California Joe," a noted character, who had been

experiencing the ups and downs of pioneer life ever since crossing

the Plains in 1849.  Joe was an invaluable guide and Indian fighter

whenever the clause of the statute prohibiting liquors in theIndian

country happened to be in full force.  At the time in question the

restriction was by no means a dead letter, and Joe came through in

thirty-six hours, though obliged to keep in hiding during daylight of

the 28th.  The tidings brought were joyfully received by everybody at

Camp Supply, and they were particularly agreeable tome, for, besides

being greatly worried about the safety of the command in the extreme

cold and deep snows, I knew that the immediate effect a victory would

be to demoralize the rest of the hostiles, which of course would

greatly facilitate and expedite our ultimate success.  Toward evening

the day after Joe arrived the head of Custer's column made its

appearance on the distant hills, the friendly Osage scouts and the

Indian prisoners in advance.  As they drew near, the scouts began a

wild and picturesque performance in celebration of the victory,

yelling, firing their guns, throwing themselves on the necks and

sides of their horses to exhibit their skill in riding, and going

through all sorts of barbaric evolutions and gyrations, which were

continued till night, when the rejoicings were ended with the hideous

scalp dance.



The disappearance of Major Elliott and his party was the only damper

upon our pleasure, and the only drawback to the very successful

expedition.  There was no definite information as to the detachment,

--and Custer was able to report nothing more than that he had not

seen Elliott since just before the fight began.  His theory was,

however, that Elliott and his men had strayed off on account of

having no guide, and would ultimately come in all right to Camp

Supply or make their way back to Fort Dodge; a very unsatisfactory

view of the matter, but as no one knew the direction Elliott had

taken, it was useless to speculate on other suppositions, and

altogether too late to make any search for him.  I was now anxious to

follow up Custer's stroke by an immediate move to the south with the

entire column, but the Kansas regiment had not yet arrived.  At first

its nonappearance did not worry me much, for I attributed the delay

to the bad weather, and supposed Colonel Crawford had wisely laid up

during the worst storms.  Further ,waiting, however, would give the

Indians a chance to recover from the recent dispiriting defeat, so I

sent out scouting parties to look Crawford up and hurry him along.

After a great deal of searching, a small detachment of the regiment

was found about fifty miles below us on the North Canadian, seeking

our camp.  This detachment was in a pretty bad plight, and when

brought in, the officer in charge reported that the regiment, by not

following the advice of the guide sent to conduct it to Camp Supply,

had lost its way.  Instead of relying on the guides, Crawford had

undertaken to strike through the canyons of the Cimarron by what

appeared to him a more direct route, and in the deep gorges, filled

as they were with snow, he had been floundering about for days

without being able to extricate his command.  Then, too, the men were

out of rations, though they had been able to obtain enough buffalo

meat to keep from starving.  As for the horses, since they could get

no grass, about seven hundred of them had already perished from

starvation and exposure.  Provisions and guides were immediately sent

out to the regiment, but before the relief could reach Crawford his

remaining horses were pretty much all gone, though the men were

brought in without loss of life.  Thus, the regiment being dismounted

by this misfortune at the threshold of the campaign, an important

factor of my cavalry was lost to me, though as foot-troops the Kansas

volunteers continued to render very valuable services till mustered

out the next spring.









CHAPTER XIV.



A WINTER EXPEDITION--HERDS OF BUFFALO--WOLVES--BLIZZARDS--A TERRIBLE

NIGHT--FINDING THE BODIES OF ELLIOTT'S PARTY--THE ABANDONED INDIAN

CAMPS--PUSHING DOWN THE WASHITA--THE CAPTURED CHIEFS--EVANS'S

SUCCESSFUL FIGHT--ESTABLISHING FORT SILL--"CALIFORNIA JOE"--DUPLICITY

OF THE CHEYENNES--ORDERED TO REPAIR TO WASHINGTON.



A few days were necessarily lost setting up and refitting the Kansas

regiment after its rude experience in the Cimarron canyons.  This

through with, the expedition, supplied with thirty days' rations,

moved out to the south on the 7th of December, under my personal

command.  We headed for the Witchita Mountains, toward which rough

region all the villages along the Washita River had fled after

Custer' s fight with Black Kettle.  My line of march was by way of

Custer's battle-field, and thence down the Washita, and if the

Indians could not sooner be brought to terms, I intended to follow

them into the Witchita Mountains from near old Fort Cobb.  The snow

was still deep everywhere, and when we started the thermometer was

below zero, but the sky being clear and the day very bright, the

command was in excellent spirits.  The column was made up of ten

companies of the Kansas regiment, dismounted; eleven companies of the

Seventh Cavalry, Pepoon's scouts, and the Osage scouts.  In addition

to Pepoon's men and the Osages, there was also "California Joe," and

one or two other frontiersmen besides, to act as guides and

interpreters.  Of all these the principal one, the one who best knew

the country, was Ben Clark, a young man who had lived with the

Cheyennes during much of his boyhood, and who not only had a pretty

good knowledge of the country, but also spoke fluently the Cheyenne

and Arapahoe dialects, and was an adept in the sign language.



The first day we made only about ten miles, which carried us to the

south bank of Wolf Creek.  A considerable part of the day was devoted

to straightening out matters in the command, and allowing time for

equalizing the wagon loads, which as a general thing, on a first

day's march, are unfairly distributed.  And then there was an

abundance of fire-wood at Wolf Creek; indeed, here and on Hackberry

Creek--where I intended to make my next camp--was the only timber

north of the Canadian River; and to select the halting places near a

plentiful supply of wood was almost indispensable, for as the men

were provided with only shelter-tents, good fires were needed in

order to keep warm.



The second day, after marching for hours through vast herds of

buffalo, we made Hackberry Creek; but not, however, without several

stampedes in the wagon-train, the buffalo frightening the mules so

that it became necessary to throw out flankers to shoot the leading

bulls and thus turn off the herds.  In the wake of every drove

invariably followed a band of wolves.  This animal is a great coward

usually, but hunger had made these so ravenous that they would come

boldly up to the column, and as quick as a buffalo was killed, or

even disabled, they would fall upon the carcass and eagerly devour

it.  Antelope also were very numerous, and as they were quite tame--

being seldom chased--and naturally very inquisitive, it was not an

unfrequent thing to see one of the graceful little creatures run in

among the men and be made a prisoner.  Such abundance of game

relieved the monotony of the march to Hackberry Creek, but still,

both men and animals were considerably exhausted by their long tramp,

for we made over thirty miles that day.



We camped in excellent shape on the creek and it was well we did, for

a "Norther," or , "blizzard," as storms on the Plains are now termed

struck us in the night.  During the continuance of these blizzards,

which is usually about three days, the cold wind sweeps over the

Plains with great force, and, in the latitude of the Indian

Territory, is weighted with great quantities of sleet and snow,

through which it is often impossible to travel; indeed, these

"Northers" have many times proved fatal to the unprotected

frontiersman.  With our numbers the chance of any one's being lost,

and perishing alone (one of the most common dangers in a blizzard),

was avoided; but under any circumstances such a storm could but

occasion intense suffering to all exposed to it, hence it would have

been well to remain in camp till the gale was over, but the time

could not be spared.  We therefore resumed the march at an early hour

next morning, with the expectation of making the south bank of the

main Canathan and there passing the night, as Clark assured me that

timber was plentiful on that side of the river.  The storm greatly

impeded us, however, many of the mules growing discouraged, and some

giving out entirely, so we could not get to Clark's "good camp," for

with ten hours of utmost effort only about half a day's distance

could be covered, when at last, finding the struggle useless, we were

forced to halt for the night in a bleak bottom on the north bank of

the river.  But no one could sleep, for the wind swept over us with

unobstructed fury, and the only fuel to be had was a few green

bushes.  As night fell a decided change of temperature added much to

our misery, the mercury, which had risen when the "Norther" began,

again falling to zero.  It can be easily imagined that under such

circumstances the condition of the men was one of extreme discomfort;

in truth, they had to tramp up and down the camp all night long to

keep from freezing.  Anything was a relief to this state of things,

so at the first streak of day we quit the dreadful place and took up

the march.



A seemingly good point for crossing the Canadian was found a couple

of miles down the stream, where we hoped to get our train over on the

ice, but an experiment proving that it was not strong enough, a ford

had to be made, which was done by marching some of the cavalry

through the river, which was about half a mile wide, to break up the

large floes when they had been cut loose with axes.  After much hard

work a passage-way was thus opened, and by noon the command was

crossed to the south bank, and after thawing out and drying our

clothes before big fires, we headed for a point on the Washita, where

Clark said there was plenty of wood, and good water too, to make us

comfortable till the blizzard had blown over.



We reached the valley of the Washita a little before dark, and camped

some five or six miles above the scene of Custer's fight, where I

concluded to remain at least a day, to rest the command and give it a

chance to refit.  In the mean time I visited the battle-field in

company with Custer and several other officers, to see if there was a

possibility of discovering any traces of Elliotts party.  On arriving

at the site of the village, and learning from Custer what

dispositions had been made in approaching for the attack, the

squadron of the escort was deployed and pushed across the river at

the point where Elliott had crossed.  Moving directly to the south,

we had not gone far before we struck his trail, and soon the whole

story was made plain by our finding, on an open level space about two

miles from the destroyed village, the dead and frozen bodies of the

entire party.  The poor fellows were all lying within a circle not

more than fifteen or twenty paces in diameter, and the little piles

of empty cartridge shells near each body showed plainly that every

man had made a brave fight.  None were scalped, but most of them were

otherwise horribly mutilated, which fiendish work is usually done by

the squaws.  All had been stripped of their clothing, but their

comrades in the escort were able to identify the bodies, which being

done, we gave them decent burial.  Their fate was one that has

overtaken many of our gallant army in their efforts to protect the

frontiersmen's homes and families from savages who give no quarter,

though they have often received it, and where the possibility of

defeat in action carries with it the certainty of death and often of

preceding torture.



>From the meadow where Elliott was found we rode to the Washita, and

then down the river through the sites of the abandoned villages, that

had been strung along almost continuously for about twelve miles in

the timber skirting the stream.  On every hand appeared ample

evidence that the Indians had intended to spend the winter here, for

the ground was littered with jerked meat, bales of buffalo robes,

cooking utensils, and all sorts of plunder usually accumulated in a

permanent Indian camp.  There were, also, lying dead near the

villages hundreds of ponies, that had been shot to keep them from

falling into our hands, the scant grazing and extreme cold having

made them too weak to be driven along in the flight.  The wholesale

slaughter of these ponies was a most cheering indication that our

campaign would be ultimately successful, and we all prayed for at

least a couple of months more of cold weather and plenty of snow.



At the Kiowa village we found the body of a white woman--a Mrs.

Blynn--and also that of her child.  These captives had been taken by

the Kiowas near Fort Lyon the previous summer, and kept close

prisoners until the stampede began, the poor woman being reserved to

gratify the brutal lust of the chief, Satanta; then, however, Indian

vengeance demanded the murder of the poor creatures, and after

braining the little child against a tree, the mother was shot through

the forehead, the weapon, which no doubt brought her welcome release,

having been fired so close that the powder had horribly disfigured

her face.  The two bodies were wrapped in blankets and taken to camp,

and afterward carried along in our march, till finally they were

decently interred at Fort Arbuckle..



At an early hour on December 12 the command pulled out from its cosy

camp and pushed down the valley of the Washita, following immediately

on the Indian trail which led in the direction of Fort Cobb, but

before going far it was found that the many deep ravines and canyons

on this trail would delay our train very much, so we moved out of the

valley and took the level prairie on the divide.  Here the traveling

was good, and a rapid gait was kept up till mid-day, when, another

storm of sleet and snow coming on, it became extremely difficult for

the guides to make out the proper course; and fearing that we might

get lost or caught on the open plain without wood or water--as we had

been on the Canadian--I turned the command back to the valley,

resolved to try no more shortcuts involving the risk of a disaster to

the expedition.  But to get back was no slight task, for a dense fog

just now enveloped us, obscuring all landmarks.  However, we were

headed right when the fog set in, and we had the good luck to reach

the valley before night-fall, though there was a great deal of

floundering about, and also much disputing among the guides as to

where the river would be found Fortunately we struck the stream right

at a large grove of timber, and established ourselves, admirably.  By

dark the ground was covered with twelve or fifteen inches of fresh

snow, and as usual the temperature rose very sensibly while the storm

was on, but after night-fall the snow ceased and the skies cleared

up.  Daylight having brought zero weather again, our start on the

morning of the 17th was painful work, many of the men freezing their

fingers while handling the horse equipments, harness, and tents.

However, we got off in fairly good season, and kept to the trail

along the Washita notwithstanding the frequent digging and bridging

necessary to get the wagons over ravines.



Continuing on this line for three days, we at length came to a point

on the Washita where all signs indicated that we were nearing some of

the villages.  Wishing to strike them as soon as possible, we made a

very early start next morning, the 17th.  A march of four or five

miles brought us to a difficult ravine, and while we were making

preparations to get over, word was brought that several Indians had

appeared in our front bearing a white flag and making signs that they

had a communication to deliver.  We signaled back that they would be

received, when one of the party came forward alone and delivered a

letter, which proved to be from General Hazen, at Fort Cobb.  The

letter showed that Hazen was carrying on negotiations with the

Indians, and stated that all the tribes between Fort Cobb and my

column were friendly , but the intimation was given that the

Cheyennes and Arapahoes were still hostile, having moved off

southward toward, the Red River.  It was added that Satanta and Lone

Wolf--the chiefs of the Kiowas--would give information of the

whereabouts of the hostiles; and such a communication coming direct

from the representative of the Indian Department, practically took

the Kiowas--the village at hand was of that tribe--under its

protection, and also the Comanches, who were nearer in to Cobb.  Of

course, under such circumstances I was compelled to give up the

intended attack, though I afterward regretted that I had paid any

heed to the message, because Satanta and Lone Wolf proved, by

trickery and double dealing, that they had deceived Hazen into

writing the letter.



When I informed the Klowas that I would respect Hazen's letter

provided they all came into Fort Cobb and gave themselves up, the two

chiefs promised submission, and, as an evidence of good faith,

proposed to accompany the column to Fort Cobb with a large body of

warriors, while their villages moved to the same point by easy

stages, along the opposite bank of the river--claiming this to be

necessary from the poor condition of the ponies.  I had some

misgivings as to the sincerity of Satanta and Lone Wolf, but as I

wanted to get the Kiowas where their surrender would be complete, so

that the Cheyennes and Arapahoes could then be pursued, I agreed to

the proposition, and the column moved on.  All went well that day,

but the next it was noticed that the warriors were diminishing, and

an investigation showed that a number of them had gone off on various

pretexts--the main one being to help along the women and children

with the villages.  With this I suspected that they were playing me

false, and my suspicions grew into certainty when Satanta himself

tried to make his escape by slipping beyond the flank of the column

and putting spurs to his pony.  Fortunately, several officers saw

him, and quickly giving chase, overhauled him within a few hundred

yards.  I then arrested both him and Lone Wolf and held them as

hostages--a measure that had the effect of bringing back many of the

warriors already beyond our reach.



When we arrived at Fort Cobb we found some of the Comanches already

there, and soon after the rest.  of them, excepting one band, came in

to the post.  The Kiowas, however, were not on hand, and there were

no signs to indicate their coming.  At the end of two days it was

plain enough that they were acting in bad faith, and would continue

to unless strong pressure was brought to bear.  Indeed, they had

already started for the Witchita Mountains, so I put on the screws at

once by issuing an order to hang Satanta and Lone Wolf, if their

people did not surrender at Fort Cobb within forty-eight hours.  The

two chiefs promised prompt compliance, but begged for more time,

seeking to explain the non-arrival of the women and children through

the weak condition of the ponies; but I was tired of their duplicity,

and insisted on my ultimatum.



The order for the execution brought quick fruit.  Runners were sent

out with messages, by the two prisoners, appealing to their people to

save the lives of their chiefs, and the result was that the whole

tribe came in to the post within the specified time.  The two

manacled wretches thus saved their necks; but it is to be regretted

that the execution did not come off; for some years afterward their

devilish propensities led them into Texas, where both engaged in the

most horrible butcheries.



The Kiowas were now in our hands, and all the Comanches too, except

one small band, which, after the Custer fight, had fled toward the

headwaters of the Red River.  This party was made up of a lot of very

bad Indians--outlaws from the main tribe--and we did not hope to

subdue them except by a fight, and of this they got their fill; for

Evans, moving from Monument Creek toward the western base of the

Witchita Mountains on Christmas Day, had the good fortune to strike

their village.  In the snow and cold his approach was wholly

unexpected, and he was thus enabled to deal the band a blow that

practically annihilated it.  Twenty-five warriors were killed

outright, most of the women and children captured, and all the

property was destroyed.  Only a few of the party escaped, and some of

these made their way in to Fort Cobb, to join the rest of their tribe

in confinement; while others, later in the season, surrendered at

Fort Bascom.



This sudden appearance of Evans in the Red River region also alarmed

the Cheyennes and Arapahoes, and their thoughts now began to turn to

submission.  Food was growing scarce with them, too, as there was but

little game to be found either in the Witchita Mountains or on the

edge of the Staked Plains, and the march of Carr's column from

Antelope Hills precluded their returning to where the buffalo ranged.

Then, too, many of their ponies were dead or dying, most of their

tepees and robes had been abandoned, and the women and children,

having been kept constantly on the move in the winter's storms, were

complaining bitterly of their sufferings.



In view of this state of things they intimated, through their

Comanche-Apache friends at Fort Cobb, that they would like to make

terms.  On receiving their messages I entered into negotiations with

Little Robe, chief of the Cheyennes, and Yellow Bear, chief of the

Arapahoes, and despatched envoys to have both tribes understand

clearly that they must recognize their subjugation by surrendering at

once, and permanently settling on their reservations in the spring.

Of course the usual delays of Indian diplomacy ensued, and it was

some weeks before I heard the result.



Then one of my messengers returned with word that Little Robe and

Yellow Bear were on their way to see me.  They arrived a few days

later, and, promptly acceding to the terms, promised to bring their

people in, but as many of them would have to come on foot on account

of the condition of the ponies, more time was solicited.  Convinced

of the sincerity of their professions I gave them a reasonable

extension, and eventually Yellow Bear made good his word, but Little

Robe, in spite of earnest and repeated efforts, was unable to deliver

his people till further operations were begun against them.



While these negotiations were in progess I came to the conclusion

that a permanent military post ought to be established well down on

the Kiowa and Comanche reservation, in order to keep an eye on these

tribes in the future, Fort Cobb, being an unsuitable location,

because too far to the north to protect the Texas frontier, and too

far away from where it was intended to permanently place the Indians.

With this purpose in view I had the country thoroughly explored, and

afterward a place was fixed upon not far from the base of the

Witchita Mountains, and near the confluence of Medicine Bluff and

Cash creeks, where building stone and timber could be obtained in

plenty, and to this point I decided to move.  The place was named

Camp Sill-now Fort Sill--in honor of my classmate, General Sill,

killed at Stone River; and to make sure of the surrendered Indians, I

required them all, Kiowas, Comanches, and Comanche-Apaches, to

accompany us to the new post, so they could be kept under military

control till they were settled.



During the march to the new camp the weather was not so cold as that

experienced in coming down from Camp Supply; still, rains were

frequent, and each was invariably followed by a depression of

temperature and high winds, very destructive to our animals, much

weakened by lack of food.  The men fared pretty well, however, for on

the rough march along the Washita, and during our stay at Fort Cobb,

they had learned to protect themselves materially from the cold.  For

this they had contrived many devices, the favorite means being

dugouts--that is, pits dug in the ground, and roofed over, with

shelter-tents, and having at one end a fire-place and chimney

ingeniously constructed with sod.  In these they lived very snugly--

four men in each--and would often amuse themselves by poking their

heads out and barking at the occupants of adjacent huts in imitation

of the prairie-dog, whose comfortable nests had probably suggested

the idea of dugouts.  The men were much better off, in fact, than

many of the officers, for the high winds frequently made havoc with

our wall-tents.  The horses and mules suffered most of all.  They

could not be sheltered, and having neither grain nor grass, the poor

beasts were in no condition to stand the chilling blasts.  Still, by

cutting down cottonwood-trees, and letting the animals browse on the

small soft branches, we managed to keep them up till, finally even

this wretched food beginning to grow scarce, I had all except a few

of the strongest sent to Fort Arbuckle, near which place we had been

able, fortunately, to purchase some fields of corn from the half-

civilized Chickasaws and Choctaws.



Through mismanagement, as previously noted, the greater part of the

supplies which I had ordered hauled to Arbuckle the preceding fall

had not got farther on the way than Fort Gibson, which post was about

four hundred miles off, and the road abominable, particularly east of

Arbuckle, where it ran through a low region called "boggy bottom."

All along this route were abandoned wagons, left sticking in the mud,

and hence the transportation was growing so short that I began to

fear trouble in getting subsistence up for the men.  Still, it would

not do to withdraw, so I made a trip to Arbuckle chiefly for the

purpose of reorganizing the transportation, but also with a view to

opening a new route to that post, the road to lie on high ground, so

as to avoid the creeks and mud that had been giving us so much

trouble.  If such a road could be made, I hoped to get up enough

rations and grain from the cornfields purchased to send out a

formidable expedition against the Cheyennes, so I set out for

Arbuckle accompanied by my quartermaster, Colonel A. J. McGonigle.

"California Joe" also went along to guide us through the scrub-oaks

covering the ridge, but even the most thorough exploration failed to

discover any route more practicable than that already in use; indeed,

the high ground was, if anything, worse than the bottom land, our

horses in the springy places and quicksands often miring to their

knees.  The ground was so soft and wet, in fact, that we had to make

most of the way on foot, so by the time we reached Arbuckle I was

glad to abandon the new road project.



Finding near Arbuckle more fields of corn than those already

purchased, I had them bought also, and ordered more of the horses

back there to be fed.  I next directed every available mule to be put

to hauling rations, having discovered that the full capacity of the

transportation had not yet been brought into play in forwarding

stores from Gibson, and with this regulation of the supply question I

was ready to return immediately to Camp Sill.  But my departure was

delayed by California Joe, who, notwithstanding the prohibitory laws

of the Territory, in some unaccountable way had got gloriously tipsy,

which caused a loss of time that disgusted me greatly; but as we

could not well do without Joe, I put off starting till the next day,

by which time it was thought he would sober up.  But I might just as

well have gone at first, for at the end of the twenty-four hours the

incorrigible old rascal was still dead drunk.  How he had managed to

get the grog to keep up his spree was a mystery which we could not

solve, though we had had him closely watched, so I cut the matter

short by packing him into my ambulance and carrying him off to Camp

Sill.



By the time I got back to Sill, the Arapahoes were all in at the

post, or near at hand.  The promised surrender of the Cheyennes was

still uncertain of fulfillment, however, and although Little Robe and

his family had remained with us in evidence of good faith, the

messages he sent to his followers brought no assurance of the tribe's

coming in--the runners invariably returning with requests for more

time, and bringing the same old excuse of inability to move because

the ponies were so badly off.  But more time was just what I was

determined not to grant, for I felt sure that if a surrender was not

forced before the spring grass came, the ponies would regain their

strength, and then it would be doubtful if the Cheyennes came in at

all.



To put an end to these delays, Custer proposed to go out and see the

Cheyennes himself, taking with him for escort only such number of men

as could be fairly well mounted from the few horses not sent back to

Arbuckle.  At first I was inclined to disapprove Custer's

proposition, but he urged it so strongly that I finally consented,

though with some misgivings, for I feared that so small a party might

tempt the Cheyennes to forget their pacific professions and seek to

avenge the destruction of Black Kettle's band.  However, after

obtaining my approval, Custer, with characteristic energy, made his

preparations, and started with three or four officers and forty

picked men, taking along as negotiators Yellow Bear and Little Robe,

who were also to conduct him to the head-waters of the Red River,

where it was supposed the Cheyennes would be found.  His progress was

reported by couriers every few days, and by the time he got to the

Witchita foot-hills he had grown so sanguine that he sent California

Joe back to me with word that he was certain of success.  Such

hopeful anticipation relieved me greatly, of course, but just about

the time I expected to hear that his mission had been achieved I was

astonished by the party's return.  Inquiring as to the trouble, I

learned that out toward the Staked Plains every sign of the Cheyennes

had disappeared.  Surprised and disappointed at this, and discouraged

by the loneliness of his situation--for in the whole region not a

trace of animal life was visible, Custer gave up the search, and none

too soon, I am inclined to believe, to save his small party from

perishing.



This failure put a stop to all expeditions till the latter part of

February, by which time I had managed to lay in enough rations to

feed the command for about thirty days; and the horses back at

Arbuckle having picked up sufficiently for field service they were

ordered to Sill, and this time I decided to send Custer out with his

own and the Kansas regiment, with directions to insist on the

immediate surrender of the Cheyennes, or give them a sound thrashing.

He was ordered to get everything ready by March 1, and then move to

the mouth of Salt Creek, on the North Fork of the Red River, at which

place I proposed to establish a new depot for feeding the command.

Trains could reach this point from Camp Supply more readily than from

Arbuckle, and wishing to arrange this part of the programme in

person, I decided to return at once to Supply, and afterward rejoin

Custer at Salt Creek, on what, I felt sure, was to be the final

expedition of the campaign.  I made the three hundred and sixty miles

from Sill to Supply in seven days, but much to my surprise there

found a despatch from General Grant directing me to repair

immediately to Washington.  These orders precluded, of course, my

rejoining the command; but at the appointed time it set out on the

march, and within three weeks brought the campaign to a successful

close.



In this last expedition, for the first few days Custer's route was by

the same trail he had taken in January--that is to say, along the

southern base of the Witchita Mountains--but this time there was more

to encourage him than before, for, on getting a couple of marches

beyond old Camp Radziminski, on all sides were fresh evidences of

Indians, and every effort was bent to strike them.



>From day to day the signs grew hotter, and toward the latter part of

March the game was found.  The Indians being in a very forlorn

condition, Custer might have destroyed most of the tribe, and

certainly all their villages, but in order to save two white women

whom, it was discovered, they held as captives, he contented himself

with the renewal of the Cheyennes' agreement to come in to Camp

Supply.  In due time the entire tribe fulfilled its promise except

one small band under "Tall Bull," but this party received a good

drubbing from General Carr on the Republican early in May.  After

this fight all the Indians of the southern Plains settled down on

their reservations, and I doubt whether the peace would ever again

have been broken had they not in after years been driven to

hostilities by most unjust treatment.



It was the 2d of March that I received at Camp Supply Grant's

despatch directing me to report immediately in Washington.  It had

been my intention, as I have said, to join Custer on the North Fork

of the Red River, but this new order required me to recast my plans,

so, after arranging to keep the expedition supplied till the end of

the campaign, I started for Washington, accompanied by three of my

staff--Colonels McGonigle and Crosby, and Surgeon Asch, and Mr. DeB.

Randolph Keim, a representative of the press, who went through the

whole campaign, and in 1870 published a graphic history of it.  The

day we left Supply we, had another dose of sleet and snow, but

nevertheless we made good time, and by night-fall reached Bluff

Creek.  In twenty-four hours more we made Fort Dodge, and on the 6th

of March arrived at Fort Hays.  Just south of the Smoky Hill River, a

little before we got to the post, a courier heading for Fort Dodge

passed us at a rapid gait.  Suspecting that he had despatches for me,

I directed my outrider to overtake him and find out.  The courier

soon turned back, and riding up to my ambulance handed me a telegram

notifying me that General Grant, on the day of his inauguration,

March 4, 1869, had appointed me Lieutenant-General of the Army.  When

I reported in Washington, the President desired me to return to New

Orleans and resume command of the Fifth Military District, but this

was not at all to my liking, so I begged off, and was assigned to

take charge of the Division of the Missouri, succeeding General

Sherman, who had just been ordered to assume command of the Army.









CHAPTER XV.



INSPECTING MILITARY POSTS IN UTAH AND MONTANA--DESIRE TO WITNESS THE

FRANCO-GERMAN WAR--ON A SAND-BAR IN THE MISSOURI--A BEAR HUNT--AN

INDIAN SCARE--MYRIADS OF MOSQUITOES--PERMISSION GIVEN TO VISIT

EUROPE--CALLING ON PRESIDENT GRANT--SAILING FOR LIVERPOOL--ARRIVAL IN

BERLIN.



After I had for a year been commanding the Division of the Missouri,

which embraced the entire Rocky Mountain region, I found it necessary

to make an inspection of the military posts in northern Utah and

Montana, in order by personal observation to inform myself of their

location and needs, and at the same time become acquainted with the

salient geographical and topographical features of that section of my

division.  Therefore in May, 1870, I started west by the Union-

Pacific railroad, and on arriving at Corinne' Station, the next

beyond Ogden, took passage by stage-coach for Helena, the capital of

Montana Territory.  Helena is nearly five hundred miles north of

Corinne, and under ordinary conditions the journey was, in those

days, a most tiresome one.  As the stage kept jogging on day and

night, there was little chance for sleep, and there being with me a

sufficient number of staff-officers to justify the proceeding, we

chartered the "outfit," stipulating that we were to stop over one

night on the road to get some rest.  This rendered the journey more

tolerable, and we arrived at Helena without extraordinary fatigue.



Before I left Chicago the newspapers were filled with rumors of

impending war between Germany and France.  I was anxious to observe

the conflict, if it was to occur, but reports made one day concerning

the beginning of hostilities would be contradicted the next, and it

was not till I reached Helena that the despatches lost their doubtful

character, and later became of so positive a nature as to make it

certain that the two nations would fight.  I therefore decided to cut

short my tour of inspection, so that I could go abroad to witness the

war, if the President would approve.  This resolution limited my stay

in Helena to a couple of days, which were devoted to arranging for an

exploration of what are now known as the Upper and the Lower Geyser

Basins of the Yellowstone Park.  While journeying between Corinne and

Helena I had gained some vague knowledge of these geysers from an old

mountaineer named Atkinson, but his information was very indefinite,

mostly second-hand; and there was such general uncertainty as to the

character of this wonderland that I authorized an escort of soldiers

to go that season from Fort Ellis with a small party, to make such

superficial explorations as to justify my sending an engineer officer

with a well-equipped expedition there next summer to scientifically

examine and report upon the strange country.  When the arrangements

for this preliminary expedition were completed I started for Fort

Benton, the head of navigation on the Missouri River, on the way

passing through Fort Shaw, on Sun River.  I expected to take at

Benton a steamboat to Fort Stevenson, a military post which had been

established about eighty miles south of Fort Buford, near a

settlement of friendly Mandan and Arickaree Indians, to protect them

from the hosiile Sioux.  From there I was to make my way overland,

first to Fort Totten near Devil's lake in Dakota, and thence by way

of Fort Abercrombie to Saint Cloud, Minnesota, the terminus of the

rallroad.



Luckily I met with no delay in getting a boat at Benton, and though

the water was extremely low, we steamed down the channel of the

Missouri with but slight detention till we got within fifty miles of

Fort Buford.  Here we struck on a sandbar with such force of steam

and current as to land us almost out of the water from stem to

midships.  This bad luck was tantalizing, for to land on a bar when

your boat is under full headway down-stream in the Missouri River is

no trifling matter, especially if you want to make time, for the

rapid and turbid stream quickly depositing sand under the hull, makes

it commonly a task of several days to get your boat off again.  As

from our mishap the loss of much time was inevitable, I sent a

messenger to Fort Buford for a small escort, and for horses to take

my party in to the post.  Colonel Morrow, the commandant, came

himself to meet us, bringing a strong party of soldiers and some

friendly Indian scouts, because, he said, there were then in the

region around Buford so many treacherous band of Sioux as to make

things exceedingly unsafe.



Desiring to reach the post without spending more than one night on

the way, we abandoned our steamer that evening, and set off at an

early hour the next morning.  We made camp at the end of the day's

march within ten miles of Buford, and arrived at the post without

having had any incident of moment, unless we may dignify as one a

battle with three grizzly bears, discovered by our friendly Indians

the morning of our second day's journey.  While eating our breakfast-

-a rather slim one, by the way--spread on a piece of canvas, the

Indians, whose bivouac was some distance off, began shouting

excitedly, "Bear! bear!" and started us all up in time to see, out on

the plain some hundreds of yards away, an enormous grizzly and two

almost full-grown cubs.  Chances like this for a bear hunt seldom

offered, so there was hurried mounting--the horses being already

saddled--and a quick advance made on the game from many directions,

Lieutenant Townsend, of the escort, and five or six of the Indians

going with me.  Alarmed by the commotion, bruin and her cubs turned

about, and with an awkward yet rapid gait headed for a deep ravine,

in which there was brushwood shelter.



My party rode directly across the prairie and struck the trail not

far behind the game.  Then for a mile or more the chase was kept up,

but with such poor shooting because of the "buck fever" which had

seized most of us, that we failed to bring down any of the grizzlies,

though the cubs grew so tired that the mother was often obliged to

halt for their defense, meanwhile urging them on before her.  When

the ravine was gained she hid the cubs away in the thick brushwood,

and then coming out where we could plainly see her, stood on the

defense just within the edge of the thicket, beyond the range of our

rifles though, unless we went down into the canyon, which we would

have to do on foot, since the precipitous wall precluded going on

horseback.  For an adventure like this I confess I had little

inclination, and on holding a council of war, I found that the

Indians had still less, but Lieutenant Townsend, who was a fine shot,

and had refrained from firing hitherto in the hope that I might bag

the game, relieved the embarrassing situation and saved the credit of

the party by going down alone to attack the enemy.  Meanwhile I

magnanimously held his horse, and the Sioux braves did a deal of

shouting, which they seemed to think of great assistance.



Townsend, having descended to the bottom of the ravine, approached

within range, when the old bear struck out, dashing into and out of

the bushes so rapidly, however, that he could not get fair aim at

her, but the startled cubs running into full view, he killed one at

the first shot and at the second wounded the other.  This terribly

enraged the mother, and she now came boldly out to fight, exposing

herself in the open ground so much as to permit a shot, that brought

her down too, with a broken shoulder.  Then the Indians and I,

growing very brave, scrambled down to--take part in the fight.  It

was left for me to despatch the wounded cub and mother, and having

recovered possession of my nerves, I did the work effectively, and we

carried off with us the skins of the three animals as trophies of the

hunt and evidence of our prowess.



As good luck would have it, when we reached Buford we found a

steamboat there unloading stores, and learned that it would be ready

to start down the river the next day.  Embarking on her, we got to

Stevenson in a few hours, and finding at the post camp equipage that

had been made ready for our use in crossing overland to Fort Totten,

we set out the following forenoon, taking with us a small escort of

infantry, transported in two light wagons, a couple of Mandans and

the post interpreter going along as mounted guides.



To reach water we had to march the first day to a small lake forty

miles off, and the oppressive heat, together with the long distance

traveled, used up one of the teams so much that, when about to start

out the second morning, we found the animals unable to go on with any

prospect of finishing the trip, so I ordered them to be rested forty-

eight hours longer, and then taken back to Stevenson.  This

diminished the escort by one-half, yet by keeping the Indians and

interpreter on the lookout, and seeing that our ambulance was kept

closed up on the wagon carrying the rest of the detachment, we could,

I thought, stand off any ordinary party of hostile Indians.



About noon I observed that the scouts in advance had left the trail

and begun to reconnoitre a low ridge to their right, the sequel of

which was that in a few minutes they returned to the wagons on a dead

run and reported Sioux just ahead.  Looking in the direction

indicated, I could dimly see five or six horsemen riding in a circle,

as Indians do when giving warning to their camp, but as our halt

disclosed that we were aware of their proximity, they darted back

again behind the crest of the ridge.  Anticipating from this move an

immediate attack, we hastily prepared for it by unhooking the mules

from the wagon and ambulance, so that we could use the vehicles as a

barricade.  This done, I told the interpreter to take the Mandan

scouts and go over toward the ridge and reconnoitre again.  As the

scouts neared the crest two of them dismounted, and, crawling slowly

on their bellies to the summit, took a hasty look and returned at

once to their horses, coming back with word that in the valley beyond

was a camp of at least a hundred Sioux lodges, and that the Indians

were hurriedly getting ready to attack us.  The news was anything but

cheering, for with a village of that size the warriors would number

two or three hundred, and could assail us from every side.



Still, nothing could be done, but stand and take what was to come,

for there was no chance of escape--it being supreme folly to

undertake in wagons a race with Indians to Fort Stevenson, sixty

miles away.  To make the best of the situation, we unloaded the

baggage, distributing and adjusting the trunks, rolls of bedding,

crackerboxes, and everything else that would stop a bullet, in such

manner as to form a square barricade, two sides of which were the

wagons, with the mules haltered to the wheels.  Every man then

supplied himself with all the ammunition he could carry, and the

Mandan scouts setting up the depressing wail of the Indian death-

song, we all awaited the attack with the courage of despair.



But no attack came; and time slipping by, and we still unmolested,

the interpreter and scouts were sent out to make another

reconnoissance.  Going through just such precautions as before in

approaching the ridge, their slow progress kept us in painful

suspense; but when they got to the crest the strain on our herves was

relieved by seeing them first stand up boldly at full height, and

then descend beyond.  Quickly returning, they brought welcome word

that the whole thing was a mistake, and no Sioux were there at all.

What had been taken for a hundred Indian lodges turned out to be the

camp of a Government train on its way to Fort Stevenson, and the

officer in charge seeing the scouts before they discovered him, and

believing them to be Sioux, had sent out to bring his herds in.  It

would be hard to exaggerate the relief that this discovery gave us,

and we all breathed much easier.  The scare was a bad one, and I have

no hesitation in saying that, had we been mounted, it is more than

likely that, instead of showing fight, we would have taken up a

lively pace for Fort Stevenson.



After reciprocal explanations with the officer in charge of the

train, the march was resumed, and at the close of that day we camped

near a small lake about twenty miles from Fort Totten.  From Totten

we journeyed on to Fort Abercrombie.  The country between the two

posts is low and flat, and I verily believe was then the favorite

abiding-place of the mosquito, no matter where he most loves to dwell

now; for myriads of the pests rose up out of the tall rank grass--

more than I ever saw before or since--and viciously attacked both men

and animals.  We ourselves were somewhat protected by gloves and

head-nets, provided us before leaving Totten, but notwithstanding

these our sufferings were well-nigh intolerable; the annoyance that

the poor mules experienced must, therefore, have been extreme;

indeed, they were so terribly stung that the blood fairly trickled

down their sides.  Unluckily, we had to camp for one night in this

region; but we partly evaded the ravenous things by banking up our

tent walls with earth, and then, before turning in, sweeping and

smoking out such as had got inside.  Yet with all this there seemed

hundreds left to sing and sting throughout the night.  The mules

being without protection, we tried hard to save them from the vicious

insects by creating a dense smoke from a circle of smothered fires,

within which chain the grateful brutes gladly stood; but this relief

was only partial, so the moment there was light enough to enable us

to hook up we pulled out for Abercrombie in hot haste.



>From Abercrombie we drove on to Saint Cloud, the terminus of the

railroad, where, considerably the worse for our hurried trip and

truly wretched experience with the mosquitoes, we boarded the welcome

cars.  Two days later we arrived in Chicago, and having meanwhile

received word from General Sherman that there would be no objection

to my going to Europe, I began making arrangements to leave, securing

passage by the steamship Scotia.



President Grant invited me to come to see him at Long Branch before I

should sail, and during my brief visit there he asked which army I

wished to accompany, the German or the French.  I told him the

German, for the reason that I thought more could be seen with the

successful side, and that the indications pointed to the defeat of

the French.  My choice evidently pleased him greatly, as he had the

utmost contempt for Louis Napoleon, and had always denounced him as a

usurper and a charlatan.  Before we separated, the President gave me

the following letter to the representatives of our Government abroad,

and with it I not only had no trouble in obtaining permission to go

with the Germans, but was specially favored by being invited to

accompany the headquarters of the King of Prussia:



"LONG BRANCH, N. J., July 25, 1870.



"Lieutenant-General P. H. Sheridan, of the United State Army, is

authorized to visit Europe, to return at his own pleasure, unless

otherwise ordered.  He is commended to the good offices of all

representatives of this Government whom he may meet abroad.



"To citizens and representatives of other Governments I introduce

General Sheridan as one of the most skillful, brave and deserving

soldiers developed by the great struggle through which the United

States Government has just passed.  Attention paid him will be duly

appreciated by the country he has served so faithfully and

efficiently.



"U. S. GRANT."





Word of my intended trip was cabled to Europe in the ordinary press

despatches, and our Minister to France, Mr. Elihu B. Washburn, being

an intimate friend of mine, and thinking that I might wish to attach

myself to the French army, did me the favor to take preliminary steps

for securing the necessary authority.  He went so far as to broach

the subject to the French Minister of War, but in view of the

informality of the request, and an unmistakable unwillingness to

grant it being manifested, Mr. Washburn pursued the matter no

further.  I did not learn of this kindly interest in my behalf till

after the capitulation of Paris, when Mr. Washburn told me what he

had done of his own motion.  Of course I thanked him gratefully, but

even had he succeeded in getting the permission he sought I should

not have accompanied the French army.



I sailed from New York July 27, one of my aides-de-camp, General

James W. Forsyth, going with me.  We reached Liverpool August 6, and

the next day visited the American Legation in London, where we saw

all the officials except our Minister, Mr. Motley, who, being absent,

was represented by Mr. Moran, the Secretary of the Legation.  We left

London August 9 for Brussels, where we were kindly cared for by the

American Minister, Mr. Russell Jones who the same evening saw us off

for Germany.  Because of the war we secured transportation only as

far as Vera, and here we received information that the Prussian

Minister of War had telegraphed to the Military Inspector of

Railroads to take charge of us on our arrival a Cologne, and send us

down to the headquarter of the Prussian army, but the Inspector, for

some unexplained reason, instead of doing this, sent us on to Berlin.

Here our Minister, Mr. George Bancroft, met us with a telegram from

the German Chancellor, Count Bismarck, saying we were expected to

come direct to the King's headquarters and we learned also that a

despatch had been sent to the Prussian Minister at Brussels directing

him to forward us from Cologne to the army, instead of allowing us to

go on to Berlin, but that we had reached and quit Brussels without

the Minister's knowledge.









CHAPTER XVI.



LEAVING FOR THE SEAT OF WAR--MEETING WITH PRINCE BISMARCK--HIS

INTEREST IN PUBLIC OPINION IN AMERICA--HIS INCLINATIONS IN EARLY

LIFE--PRESENTED TO THE KING--THE BATTLE OF GRAVELOTTE--THE GERMAN

PLAN--ITS FINAL SUCCESS--SENDING NEWS OF THE VICTORY--MISTAKEN FOR A

FRENCHMAN.



Shortly after we arrived in Berlin the Queen sent a messenger

offering us an opportunity to pay our respects, and fixed an hour for

the visit, which was to take place the next day; but as the tenor of

the despatch Mr. Bancroft had received from Count Bismarck indicated

that some important event which it was desired I should witness was

about to happen at the theatre of war, our Minister got us excused

from our visit of ceremony, and we started for the headquarters of

the German army that evening--our stay in the Prussian capital having

been somewhat less than a day.



Our train was a very long one, of over eighty cars, and though drawn

by three locomotives, its progress to Cologne was very slow and the

journey most tedious.  From Cologne we continued on by rail up the

valley of the Rhine to Bingebruck, near Bingen, and thence across

through Saarbrucken to Remilly, where we left the railway and rode in

a hay-wagon to Pont-a-Mousson, arriving there August 17, late in the

afternoon.  This little city had been ceded to France at the Peace of

Westphalia, and although originally German, the people had become, in

the lapse of so many years, intensely French in sentiment.  The town

was so full of officers and men belonging to the German army that it

was difficult to get lodgings, but after some delay we found quite

comfortable quarters at one of the small hotels, and presently, after

we had succeeded in getting a slender meal, I sent my card to Count

von Bismarck, the Chancellor of the North German Confederation, who

soon responded by appointing an hour--about 9 o'clock the same

evening--for an interview.



When the Count received me he was clothed in the undress uniform of

the Cuirassier regiment, of which he was the colonel.  During the

interview which ensued, he exhibited at times deep anxiety regarding

the conflict now imminent, for it was the night before the battle of

Gravelotte, but his conversation was mostly devoted to the state of

public sentiment in America, about which he seemed much concerned,

inquiring repeatedly as to which side--France or Prussia--was charged

with bringing on the war.  Expressing a desire to witness the battle

which was expected to occur the next day, and remarking that I had

not had sufficient time to provide the necessary transportation, he

told me to be ready at 4 o'clock in the morning, and he would take me

out in his own carriage and present me to the King--adding that he

would ask one of his own staff-officers, who he knew had one or two

extra horses, to lend me one.  As I did not know just what my status

would be, and having explained to the President before leaving

America that I wished to accompany the German army unofficially, I

hardly knew whether to appear in uniform or not, so I spoke of this

matter too, and the Count, after some reflection, thought it best for

me to wear my undress uniform, minus the sword, however, because I

was a non combatant.



At 4 o'clock the next morning, the 18th, I repaired to the

Chancellor's quarters.  The carriage was at the door, also the

saddle-horse, but as no spare mount could be procured for General

Forsyth, he had to seek other means to reach the battle-field.  The

carriage was an open one with two double seats, and in front a single

one for a messenger; it had also a hand-brake attached.





Count Bismarck and I occupied the rear seat, and Count Bismarck-

Bohlen--the nephew and aide-decamp to the Chancellor--and Doctor

Busch were seated facing us.  The conveyance was strong, serviceable,

and comfortable, but not specially prepossessing, and hitched to it

were four stout horses--logy, ungainly animals, whose clumsy harness

indicated that the whole equipment was meant for heavy work.  Two

postilions in uniform, in high military saddles on the nigh horse of

each span, completed the establishment.



All being ready, we took one of the roads from Pont-a-Mousson to

Rezonville, which is on the direct road from Metz to Chalons, and

near the central point of the field where, on the 16th of August, the

battle of Mars-la-Tour had been fought.  It was by this road that the

Pomeranians, numbering about 30,000 men, had been ordered to march to

Gravelotte, and after proceeding a short distance we overtook the

column.  As this contingent came from Count Bismarck's own section of

Germany, there greeted us as we passed along, first in the dim light

of the morning, and later in the glow of the rising sun, continuous

and most enthusiastic cheering for the German Chancellor.



On the way Count Bismarck again recurred to the state of public

opinion in America with reference to the war.  He also talked much

about our form of government, and said that in early life his

tendencies were all toward republicanism, but that family influence

had overcome his preferences, and intimated that, after adopting a

political career, he found that Germany was not sufficiently advanced

for republicanism.  He said, further, that he had been reluctant to

enter upon this public career, that he had always longed to be a

soldier, but that here again family opposition had turned him from

the field of his choice into the sphere of diplomacy.



Not far from Mars-la-Tour we alighted, and in a little while an aide-

de-camp was introduced, who informed me that he was there to conduct

and present me to his Majesty, the King of Prussia.  As we were

walking along together, I inquired whether at the meeting I should

remove my cap, and he said no; that in an out-of-door presentation it

was not etiquette to uncover if in uniform.  We were soon in presence

of the King, where--under the shade of a clump of second-growth

poplar-trees, with which nearly all the farms in the north of France

are here and there dotted--the presentation was made in the simplest

and most agreeable manner.



His Majesty, taking my hand in both of his, gave me a thorough

welcome, expressing, like Count Bismarck, though through an

interpreter, much interest as to the sentiment in my own country

about the war.  At this time William the First of Prussia was

seventy-three years of age, and, dressed in the uniform of the

Guards, he seemed to be the very ideal soldier, and graced with most

gentle and courteous manners.  The conversation, which was brief, as

neither of us spoke the other's native tongue, concluded by his

Majesty's requesting me in the most cordial way to accompany his

headquarters during the campaign.  Thanking him for his kindness, I

rejoined Count Bismarck's party, and our horses having arrived

meantime, we mounted and moved off to the position selected for the

King to witness the opening of the battle.



This place was on some high ground overlooking the villages of

Rezonville and Gravelotte, about the centre of the battlefield of

Mars-la-Tour, and from it most of the country to the east toward Metz

could also be seen.  The point chosen was an excellent one for the

purpose, though in one respect disagreeable, since the dead bodies of

many of the poor fellows killed there two days before were yet

unburied.  In a little while the King's escort began to remove these

dead, however, bearing them away on stretchers improvised with their

rifles, and the spot thus cleared was much more acceptable.  Then,

when such unexploded shells as were lying around loose had been

cautiously carried away, the King, his brother, Prince Frederick

Charles Alexander, the chief-of-staff, General von Moltke, the

Minister of War, General von Roon, and Count von Bismarck assembled

on the highest point, and I being asked to join the group, was there

presented to General von Moltke.  He spoke our language fluently, and

Bismarck having left the party for a time to go to a neighboring

house to see his son, who had been wounded at Mars-la-Tour, and about

whom he was naturally very anxious, General von Moltke entertained me

by explaining the positions of the different corps, the nature and

object of their movements then taking place, and so on.



Before us, and covering Metz, lay the French army, posted on the

crest of a ridge extending north, and about its centre curving

slightly westward toward the German forces.  The left of the French

position was but a short distance from the Moselle, and this part of

the line was separated from the Germans by a ravine, the slopes,

fairly well wooded, rising quite sharply; farther north, near the

centre, this depression disappeared, merged in the general swell of

the ground, and thence on toward the right the ground over which an

approach to the French line must be made was essentially a natural

open glacis, that could be thoroughly swept by the fire of the

defenders.



The line extended some seven or eight miles.  To attack this

position, formidable everywhere, except perhaps on the right flank,

the Germans were bringing up the combined forces of the First and

Second armies, troops that within the past fortnight had already

successfully met the French in three pitched battles.  On the right

was the First Army, under command of General Von Steinmetz, the

victors, August 6, of Spicheren, near Saar, and, eight days later, of

Colombey, to the east of Metz; while the centre and left were

composed of the several corps of the Second Army, commanded by Prince

Frederick Charles of Prussia, a part of whose troops had just been

engaged in the sanguinary battle of Mars-la-Tour, by which Bazaine

was cut off from the Verdun road, and forced back toward Metz.



At first the German plan was simply to threaten with their right,

while the corps of the Second Army advanced toward the north, to

prevent the French, of whose intentions there was much doubt, from

escaping toward Chalons; then, as the purposes of the French might

be, developed, these corps were to change direction toward the enemy

successively, and seek to turn his right flank.  But the location of

this vital turning-point was very uncertain, and until it was

ascertained and carried, late in the afternoon, the action raged with

more or less intensity along the entire line.



But as it is not my purpose to describe in detail the battle of

Gravelotte, nor any other, I will speak of some of its incidents

merely.  About noon, after many preliminary skirmishes, the action

was begun according to the plan I have already outlined, the Germans

advancing their left while holding on strongly with their right, and

it was this wing (the First Army) that came under my observation from

the place where the King's headquarters were located.  From here we

could see, as I have said, the village of Gravelotte.  Before it lay

the German troops, concealed to some extent, especially to the left,

by clumps of timber here and there.  Immediately in front of us,

however, the ground was open, and the day being clear and sunny, with

a fresh breeze blowing (else the smoke from a battle between four

hundred thousand men would have obstructed the view altogether), the

spectacle presented Was of unsurpassed magnificence and sublimity.

The German artillery opened the battle, and while the air was filled

with shot and shell from hundreds of guns along their entire line,

the German centre and left, in rather open order, moved out to the

attack, and as they went forward the reserves, in close column, took

up positions within supporting distances, yet far enough back to be

out of range.



The French artillery and mitrailleuses responded vigorously to the

Krupps, and with deadly effect, but as far as we could see the German

left continued its advance, and staff-officers came up frequently to

report that all was going on well at points hidden from our view

These reports were always made to the King first, and whenever

anybody arrived with tidings of the fight we clustered around to hear

the news, General Von Moltke unfolding a map meanwhile, and

explaining the situation.  This done, the chief of the staff, while

awaiting the next report, would either return to a seat that had been

made for him with some knapsacks, or would occupy the time walking

about, kicking clods of dirt or small stones here and there, his

hands clasped behind his back, his face pale and thoughtful.  He was

then nearly seventy years old, but because of his emaciated figure,

the deep wrinkles in his face, and the crow's-feet about his eyes, he

looked even older, his appearance being suggestive of the practice of

church asceticisms rather than of his well-known ardent devotion to

the military profession.



By the middle of the afternoon the steady progress of the German left

and centre had driven the French from their more advanced positions

from behind stone walls and hedges, through valleys and hamlets, in

the direction of Metz, but as yet the German right had accomplished

little  except to get possession of the village of Gravelotte,

forcing the French across the deep ravine I have mentioned, which

runs north and south a little distance east of ihe town.



But it was now time for the German right to move in earnest to carry

the Rozerieulles ridge, on which crest the French had evidently

decided to make an obstinate fight to cover their withdrawal to Metz.

As the Germans moved to the attack here, the French fire became heavy

and destructive, so much so, indeed, as to cause General Von

Steinmetz to order some cavalry belonging to the right wing to make a

charge.  Crossing the ravine before described, this body of horse

swept up the slope beyond, the front ranks urged forward by the

momentum from behind.  The French were posted along a sunken road,

behind stone walls and houses, and as the German cavalry neared these

obstructions it received a dreadful fire without the least chance of

returning it, though still pushed on till the front ranks were

crowded into the deep cut of the road.  Here the slaughter was

terrible, for the horsemen could make no further headway; and because

of the blockade behind, of dead and wounded men and animals, an

orderly retreat was impossible, and disaster inevitable.



About the time the charge was ordered, the phase of the battle was

such that the King concluded to move his headquarters into the

village of Gravelotte; and just after getting there, we first learned

fully of the disastrous result of the charge which had been entered

upon with such spirit; and so much indignation was expressed against

Steinmetz, who, it was claimed, had made an unnecessary sacrifice of

his cavalry, that I thought he would be relieved on the spot; though

this was not done.



Followed by a large staff, General Steinmetz appeared in the village

presently, and approached the King.  When near, he bowed with great

respect, and I then saw that he was a very old man though his

soldierly figure, bronzed face, and shortcropped hair gave some

evidence of vigor still.  When the King spoke to him I was not close

enough to learn what was said; but his Majesty's manner was

expressive of kindly feeling, and the fact that in a few moments the

veteran general returned to the command of his troops, indicated

that, for the present at least, his fault had been overlooked.



The King then moved out of the village, and just a little to the east

and north of it the headquarters were located on high, open ground,

whence we could observe the right of the German infantry advancing up

the eastern face of the ravine.  The advance, though slow and

irregular, resulted in gradually gaining ground, the French resisting

stoutly with a stubborn musketry fire all along the slopes.  Their

artillery was silent, however; and from this fact the German

artillery officers grew jubilant, confidently asserting that their

Krupp guns had dismounted the French batteries and knocked their

mitrailleuses to pieces.  I did not indulge in this confidence,

however; for, with the excellent field-glass I had, I could

distinctly see long columns of French troops moving to their right,

for the apparent purpose of making a vigorous fight on that flank;

and I thought it more than likely that their artillery would be heard

from before the Germans could gain the coveted ridge.



The Germans labored up the glacis slowly at the most exposed places;

now crawling on their bellies, now creeping on hands and knees, but,

in the main, moving with erect and steady bearing.  As they

approached within short range, they suddenly found that the French

artillery and mitrallleuses had by no means been silenced--about two

hundred pieces opening on them with fearful effect, while at the same

time the whole crest blazed with a deadly fire from the Chassepot

rifles.  Resistance like this was so unexpected by the Germans that

it dismayed them; and first wavering a moment, then becoming panic-

stricken, they broke and fled, infantry, cavalry, and artillery

coming down the slope without any pretence of formation, the French

hotly following and pouring in a heavy and constant fire as the

fugitives fled back across the ravine toward Gravelotte.  With this

the battle on the right had now assumed a most serious aspect, and

the indications were that the French would attack the heights of

Gravelotte; but the Pomeranian corps coming on the field at this

crisis, was led into action by Von Moltke, himself, and shortly after

the day was decided in favor of the Germans.



When the French guns opened fire, it was discovered that the King's

position was within easy range, many of the shells falling near

enough to make the place extremely uncomfortable; so it was suggested

that he go to a less exposed point.  At first he refused to listen to

this wise counsel, but yielded finally--leaving the ground with

reluctance, however--and went back toward Rezonville.  I waited for

Count Bismarck, who did not go immediately with the King, but

remained at Gravelotte, looking after some of the escort who had been

wounded.  When he had arranged for their care, we set out to rejoin

the King, and before going far, overtook his Majesty, who had stopped

on the Chalons road, and was surrounded by a throng of fugitives,

whom he was berating in German so energetic as to remind me forcibly

of the "Dutch" swearing that I used to hear in my boyhood in Ohio.

The dressing down finished to his satisfaction, the King resumed his

course toward Re'zonville, halting, however, to rebuke in the same

emphatic style every group of runaways he overtook.



Passing through Rezonville, we halted just beyond the village; there

a fire was built, and the King, his brother, Prince Frederick

Charles, and Von Roon were provided with rather uncomfortable seats

about it, made by resting the ends of a short ladder on a couple of

boxes.  With much anxiety and not a little depression of spirits news

from the battle-field was now awaited, but the suspense did not last

long, for presently came the cheering intelligence that the French

were retiring, being forced back by the Pomeranian corps, and some of

the lately broken right wing organizations, that had been rallied on

the heights of Gravelotte.  The lost ground being thus regained, and

the French having been beaten on their right, it was not long before

word came that Bazaine's army was falling back to Metz, leaving the

entire battle-field in possession of the Germans.



During the excitement of the day I had not much felt the want of

either food or water, but now that all was over I was nearly

exhausted, having had neither since early morning.  Indeed, all of

the party were in like straits; the immense armies had not only eaten

up nearly everything in the country, but had drunk all the wells dry,

too, and there seemed no relief for us till, luckily, a squad of

soldiers came along the road with a small cask of wine in a cart.

One of the staff-officers instantly appropriated the keg, and

proceeded to share his prize most generously.  Never had I tasted

anything so refreshing and delicious, but as the wine was the

ordinary sour stuff drunk by the peasantry of northern France, my

appreciation must be ascribed to my famished condition rather than to

any virtues of the beverage itself.



After I had thus quenched my thirst the King's, brother called me

aside, and drawing from his coat-tail pocket a piece of stale black

bread, divided it with me, and while munching on this the Prince

began talking of his son--General Prince Frederick Charles, popularly

called the Red Prince--who was in command of the Second Army in this

battle--the German left wing.  In recounting his son's professional

career the old man's face was aglow with enthusiasm, and not without

good cause, for in the war between Prussia and Austria in 1866, as

well as in the present campaign, the Red Prince had displayed the

highest order of military genius.



The headquarters now became the scene of much bustle, despatches

announcing the victory being sent in all directions.  The first one

transmitted was to the Queen, the King directing Count Bismarck to

prepare it for his signature; then followed others of a more official

character, and while these matters were being attended to I thought I

would ride into the village to find, if possible, some water for my

horse.  Just as I entered the chief street, however, I was suddenly

halted by a squad of soldiers, who, taking me for a French officer

(my coat and forage cap resembling those of the French), leveled

their pieces at me.  They were greatly excited, so much so, indeed,

that I thought my hour had come, for they could not understand

English, and I could not speak German, and dare not utter

explanations in French.  Fortunately a few disconnected German words

came to me in the emergency.  With these I managed to delay my

execution, and one of the party ventured to come up to examine the

"suspect" more closely.  The first thing he did was to take off my

cap, and looking it over carefully, his eyes rested on the three

stars above the visor, and, pointing to them, he emphatically

pronounced me French.  Then of course they all became excited again,

more so than before, even, for they thought I was trying to practice

a ruse, and I question whether I should have lived to recount the

adventure had not an officer belonging to the King's headquarters

been passing by just then, when, hearing the threatenings and

imprecations, he rode up to learn the cause of the hubbub, and

immediately recognized and released me.  When he told my wrathy

captors who I was, they were much mortified of course, and made the

most profuse apologies, promising that no such mistake should occur

again, and so on; but not feeling wholly reassured, for my uniform

was still liable to mislead, I was careful to return to headquarters

in company with my deliverer.  There I related what had occurred, and

after a good laugh all round, the King provided me with a pass which

he said would preclude any such mishap in the future, and would also

permit me to go wherever I pleased--a favor rarely bestowed.









CHAPTER XVII



SEARCHING FOR QUARTERS--HUNTING UP PROVISIONS--A SLENDER BREAKFAST--

GOING OVER THE BATTLEFIELD--THE GERMAN ARTILLERY--A GROUP OF WOUNDED-

-DINING WITH THE KING--ON THE MARCH--THE BAVARIANS--KIRSCHWASSER--

URGING ON THE TROOPS.



While I was absent, as related in the preceding chapter, it had been

decided that the King's quarters should be established for the night

in the village of Rezonville; and as it would be very difficult, at

such a late hour, to billet the whole party regularly, Count Bismarck

and I went off to look for shelter for ourselves.  Remembering that I

had seen, when seeking to water my horse, a partly burned barn with

some fresh-looking hay in it, I suggested that we lodge there.  He

too thought it would answer our purpose, but on reaching it we found

the unburned part of the barn filled with wounded, and this

necessitating a further search we continued on through the village in

quest of some house not yet converted into a hospital.  Such,

however, seemed impossible to come upon, so at last the Count fixed

on one whose upper floor, we learned, was unoccupied, though the

lower one was covered with wounded.



Mounting a creaky ladder--there was no stairway--to the upper story,

we found a good-sized room with three large beds, one of which the

Chancellor assigned to the Duke of Mecklenburg and aide, and another

to Count Bismarck-Bohlen and me, reserving the remaining one for

himself.  Each bed, as is common in Germany and northern France, was

provided with a feather tick, but the night being warm, these spreads

were thrown off, and discovering that they would make a comfortable

shakedown on the floor, I slept there leaving Bismarck-Bohlen

unembarrassed by companionship--at least of a human kind.



At daylight I awoke, and seeing that Count Bismarck was already

dressed and about to go down the ladder, I felt obliged to follow his

example, so I too turned out, and shortly descended to the ground--

floor, the only delays of the toilet being those incident to

dressing, for there were no conveniences for morning ablutions.  Just

outside the door I met the Count, who, proudly exhibiting a couple of

eggs he had bought from the woman of the house, invited me to

breakfast with him, provided we could beg some coffee from the king's

escort.  Putting the eggs under my charge, with many injunctions as

to their safe-keeping, he went off to forage for the coffee, and

presently returned, having been moderately successful.  One egg

apiece was hardly enough, however, to appease the craving of two

strong men ravenous from long fasting.  Indeed, it seemed only to

whet the appetite, and we both set out on an eager expedition for

more food.  Before going far I had the good luck to meet a sutler's

wagon, and though its stock was about all sold, there were still left

four large bologna sausages, which I promptly purchased--paying a

round sum for them too--and hastening back found the Count already

returned, though without bringing anything at all to eat; but he had

secured a couple of bottles of brandy, and with a little of this--it

was excellent, too--and the sausages, the slim ration of eggs and

coffee was amply reinforced.



Breakfast over, the Chancellor invited me to accompany him in a ride

to the battle-field, and I gladly accepted, as I very much desired to

pass over the ground in front of Gravelotte, particularly so to see

whether the Krupp guns had really done the execution that was claimed

for them by the German artillery officers.  Going directly through

the village of Gravelotte, following the causeway over which the

German cavalry had passed to make its courageous but futile charge,

we soon reached the ground where the fighting had been the most

severe.  Here the field was literally covered with evidences of the

terrible strife, the dead and wounded strewn thick on every side.



In the sunken road the carnage had been awful; men and horses having

been slaughtered there by hundreds, helpless before the murderous

fire delivered from behind a high stone wall impracticable to mounted

troops.  The sight was sickening to an extreme, and we were not slow

to direct our course elsewhere, going up the glacis toward the French

line, the open ground over which we crossed being covered with

thousands of helmets, that had been thrown off by the Germans during

the fight and were still dotting the field, though details of

soldiers from the organizations which had been engaged here were

about to begin to gather up their abandoned headgear.



When we got inside the French works, I was astonished to observe how

little harm had been done the defenses by the German artillery, for

although I had not that serene faith in the effectiveness of their

guns held by German artillerists generally, yet I thought their

terrific cannonade must have left marked results.  All I could

perceive, however, was a disabled gun, a broken mitrailleuse, and two

badly damaged caissons.



Everything else, except a little ammunition in the trenches, had been

carried away, and it was plain to see, from the good shape in which

the French left wing had retired to Metz, that its retreat had been

predetermined by the disasters to the right wing.



By this hour the German cavalry having been thrown out to the front

well over toward Metz, we, following it to get a look at the city,

rode to a neighboring summit, supposing it would be a safe point of

observation; but we shortly realized the contrary, for scarcely had

we reached the crest when some of the French pickets, lying concealed

about six hundred yards off, opened fire, making it so very hot for

us that, hugging the necks of our horses, we incontinently fled.

Observing what had taken place, a troop of German cavalry charged the

French outpost and drove it far enough away to make safe our return,

and we resumed possession of the point, but only to discover that the

country to the east was so broken and hilly that no satisfactory view

of Metz could be had.



Returning to Gravelotte, we next visited that part of the battlefield

to the northeast of the village, and before long Count Bismarck

discovered in a remote place about twenty men dreadfully wounded.

These poor fellows had had no attention whatever, having been

overlooked by the hospital corps, and their condition was most

pitiful.  Yet there was one very handsome man in the group--a captain

of artillery--who, though shot through the right breast, was

talkative and cheerful, and felt sure of getting well.  Pointing,

however, to a comrade lying near, also shot in the breast, he

significantly shook his head; it was easy to see on this man's face

the signs--of fast approaching death.



An orderly was at once despatched for a surgeon, Bismarck and I doing

what we could meanwhile to alleviate the intense sufferings of the

maimed men, bringing them water and administering a little brandy,

for the Count still had with him some of the morning's supply.  When

the surgeons came, we transferred the wounded to their care, and

making our way to Rezonville, there took the Count's carriage to

rejoin the King's headquarters, which in the mean time had been moved

to Pont-a-Mousson.  Our route led through the village of Gorze, and

here we found the streets so obstructed with wagons that I feared it

would take us the rest of the day to get through, for the teamsters

would not pay the slightest heed to the cries of our postilions.  The

Count was equal to the emergency, however, for, taking a pistol from

behind his cushion, and bidding me keep my seat, he jumped out and

quickly began to clear the street effectively, ordering wagons to the

right and left.  Marching in front of the carriage and making way for

us till we were well through the blockade, he then resumed his seat,

remarking, "This is not a very dignified business for the Chancellor

of the German Confederation, but it's the only way to get through."



At Pont-a-Mousson I was rejoined by my aide, General Forsyth, and for

the next two days our attention was almost wholly devoted to securing

means of transportation.  This was most difficult to obtain, but as I

did not wish to impose on the kindness of the Chancellor longer, we

persevered till, finally, with the help of Count Bismarck-Bohlen, we

managed to get tolerably well equipped with a saddle-horse apiece,

and a two-horse carriage.  Here also, on the afternoon of August 21,

I had the pleasure of dining with the King.  The dinner was a simple

one, consisting of soup, a joint, and two or three vegetables; the

wines vin ordinaire and Burgundy.  There were a good many persons of

high rank present, none of whom spoke English, however, except

Bismarck, who sat next the King and acted as interpreter when his

Majesty conversed with me.  Little was said of the events taking

place around us, but the King made many inquiries concerning the war

of the rebellion, particularly with reference to Grant's campaign at

Vicksburg; suggested, perhaps, by the fact that there, and in the

recent movements of the German army, had been applied many similar

principles of military science.



The French army under Marshal Bazaine having retired into the

fortifications of Metz, that stronghold was speedily invested by

Prince Frederick Charles.  Meantime the Third Army, under the Crown

Prince of Prussia--which, after having fought and won the battle of

Worth, had been observing the army of Marshal MacMahon during and

after the battle of Gravelotte--was moving toward Paris by way of

Nancy, in conjunction with an army called the Fourth, which had been

organized from the troops previously engaged around Metz, and on the

22d was directed toward Bar-le-Duc under the command of the Crown

Prince of Saxony.  In consequence of these operations the King

decided to move to Commercy, which place we reached by carriage,

traveling on a broad macadamized road lined on both sides with

poplar-trees, and our course leading through a most beautiful country

thickly dotted with prosperous-looking villages.



On reaching Commercy, Forsyth and I found that quarters had been

already selected for us, and our names written on the door with chalk

the quartermaster charged with the billeting of the officers at

headquarters having started out in advance to perform this duty and

make all needful preparations for the King before he arrived, which

course was usually pursued thereafter, whenever the royal

headquarters took up a new location.



Forsyth and I were lodged with the notary of the village, who over

and over again referred to his good fortune in not having to

entertain any of the Germans.  He treated us most hospitably, and

next morning,  on departing, we offered compensation by tendering a

sum--about what our bill would have been at a good hotel--to be used

for the "benefit of the wounded or the Church."  Under this

stipulation the notary accepted, and we followed that plan of paying

for food and lodging afterward, whenever quartered in private houses.



The next day I set out in advance of the headquarters, and reached

Bar-le-Duc about noon, passing on the way the Bavarian contingent of

the Crown Prince's army.  These Bavarians were trim-looking soldiers,

dressed in neat uniforms of light blue; they looked healthy and

strong, but seemed of shorter stature than the North Germans I had

seen in the armies of Prince Frederick Charles and General von

Steinmetz.  When, later in the day the King arrived, a guard for him

was detailed from this Bavarian contingent; a stroke of policy no

doubt, for the South Germans were so prejudiced against their

brothers of the North that no opportunity to smooth them down was

permitted to go unimproved.



Bar-le-Duc, which had then a population of about 15,000, is one of

the prettiest towns I saw in France, its quaint and ancient buildings

and beautiful boulevards charming the eye as well as exciting deep

interest.  The King and his immediate suite were quartered on one of

the best boulevards in a large building--the Bank of France--the

balcony of which offered a fine opportunity to observe a part of the

army of the Crown Prince the next day on its march toward Vitry.

This was the first time his Majesty had had a chance to see any of

these troops--as hitherto he had accompanied either the army of

Prince Frederick Charles, or that of General Steinmetz--and the

cheers with which he was greeted by the Bavarians left no room for

doubting their loyalty to the Confederation, notwithstanding ancient

jealousies.



While the troops were passing, Count Bismarck had the kindness to

point out to me the different organizations, giving scraps of their

history, and also speaking concerning the qualifications of the

different generals commanding them.  When the review was over we went

to the Count's house, and there, for the first time in my life, I

tasted kirschwasser, a very strong liquor distilled from cherries.

Not knowing anything about the stuff, I had to depend on Bismarck's

recommendation, and he proclaiming it fine, I took quite a generous

drink, which nearly strangled me and brought on a violent fit of

coughing.  The Chancellor said, however, that this was in no way due

to the liquor, but to my own inexperience, and I was bound to believe

the distinguished statesman, for he proved his words by swallowing a

goodly dose with an undisturbed and even beaming countenance,

demonstrating his assertion so forcibly that I forthwith set out with

Bismarck-Bohlen to lay in a supply for myself.



I spent the night in a handsome house, the property of an

exceptionally kind and polite gentleman bearing the indisputably

German name of Lager, but who was nevertheless French from head to

foot, if intense hatred of the Prussians be a sign of Gallic

nationality.  At daybreak on the 26th word came for us to be ready to

move by the Chalons road at 7 o'clock, but before we got off, the

order was suspended till 2 in the afternoon.  In the interval General

von Moltke arrived and held a long conference with the King, and when

we did pull out we traveled the remainder of the afternoon in company

with a part of the Crown Prince's army, which after this conference

inaugurated the series of movements from Bar-le-Duc northward, that

finally compelled the surrender at Sedan.  This sudden change of

direction I did not at first understand, but soon learned that it was

because of the movements of Marshal MacMahon, who, having united the

French army beaten at Worth with three fresh corps at Chalons, was

marching to relieve Metz in obedience to orders from the Minister of

War at Paris.



As we passed along the column, we noticed that the Crown Prince's

troops were doing their best, the officers urging the men to their

utmost exertions, persuading weary laggards and driving up

stragglers.  As a general thing, however, they marched in good shape,

notwithstanding the rapid gait and the trying heat, for at the outset

of the campaign the Prince had divested them of all impedimenta

except essentials, and they were therefore in excellent trim for a

forced march.



The King traveled further than usual that day--to Clermont--so we did

not get shelter till late, and even then not without some confusion,

for the quartermaster having set out toward Chalons before the change

of programme was ordered, was not at hand to provide for us.  I had

extreme good luck, though, in being quartered with a certain

apothecary, who, having lived for a time in the United States,

claimed it as a privilege even to lodge me, and certainly made me his

debtor for the most generous hospitality.  It was not so with some of

the others, however; and Count Bismarck was particularly unfortunate,

being billeted in a very small and uncomfortable house, where,

visiting him to learn more fully what was going on, I found him,

wrapped in a shabby old dressing-gown, hard at work.  He was

established in a very small room, whose only furnishings consisted of

a table--at which he was writing--a couple of rough chairs, and the

universal feather-bed, this time made on the floor in one corner of

the room.  On my remarking upon the limited character of his

quarters, the Count replied, with great good-humor, that they were

all right, and that he should get along well enough.  Even the tramp

of his clerks in the attic, and the clanking of his orderlies' sabres

below, did not disturb him much; he said, in fact, that he would have

no grievance at all were it not for a guard of Bavarian soldiers

stationed about the house for his safety, he presumed the sentinels

from which insisted on protecting and saluting the Chancellor of the

North German Confederation in and out of season, a proceeding that

led to embarrassment sometimes, as he was much troubled with a severe

dysentery.  Notwithstanding his trials, however, and in the midst of

the correspondence on which he was so intently engaged, he graciously

took time to explain that the sudden movement northward from Bar-le-

Duc was, as I have previously recounted, the result of information

that Marshal MacMahon was endeavoring to relieve Metz by marching

along the Belgian frontier; "a blundering manoeuvre," remarked the

Chancellor, "which cannot be accounted for, unless it has been

brought about by the political situation of the French."









CHAPTER XVIII.



AFTER MacMAHON--THE BATTLE AT BEAUMONT--THE FRENCH SURPRISED--THE

MARCHING OF THE GERMAN SOLDIERS--THE BATTLE OF SEDAN--GALLANT CAVALRY

CHARGES--DEFEAT OF THE FRENCH--THE SURRENDER OF NAPOLEON--BISMARCK

AND THE KING--DECORATING THE SOLDIERS.



All night long the forced march of the army went on through Clermont,

and when I turned out, just after daylight, the columns were still

pressing forward, the men looking tired and much bedraggled, as

indeed they had reason to be, for from recent rains the roads were

very sloppy.  Notwithstanding this, however, the troops were pushed

ahead with all possible vigor to intercept MacMahon and force a

battle before he could withdraw from his faulty movement, for which

it has since been ascertained he was not at all responsible.  Indeed,

those at the royal headquarters seemed to think of nothing else than

to strike MacMahon, for, feeling pretty confident that Metz could not

be relieved, they manifested not the slightest anxiety on that score.



By 8 o'clock, the skies having cleared, the headquarters set out for

Grand Pre', which place we reached early in the afternoon, and that

evening I again had the pleasure of dining with the King.  The

conversation at table was almost wholly devoted to the situation, of

course, everybody expressing surprise at the manoeuvre of the French

at this time, their march along the Belgian frontier being credited

entirely to Napoleon.  Up to bed-time there was still much

uncertainty as to the exact positions of the French, but next morning

intelligence being received which denoted the probability of a

battle, we drove about ten miles, to Buzancy, and there mounting our

horses, rode to the front.



The French were posted not far from Buzancy in a strong position,

their right resting near Stonne and the left extending over into the

woods beyond Beaumont.  About 10 o'clock the Crown Prince of Saxony

advanced against this line, and while a part of his army turned the

French right, compelling it to fall back rapidly, the German centre

and right attacked with great vigor and much skill, surprising one of

the divisions of General De Failly's corps while the men were in the

act of cooking their breakfast.



The French fled precipitately, leaving behind their tents and other

camp equipage, and on inspecting the ground which they had abandoned

so hastily, I noticed on all sides ample evidence that not even the

most ordinary precautions had been taken to secure the division from

surprise, The artillery horses had not been harnessed, and many of

them had been shot down at the picketrope where they had been

haltered the night before, while numbers of men were lying dead with

loaves of bread or other food instead of their muskets in their

hands.



Some three thousand prisoners and nearly all the artillery and

mitrailleuses of the division--were captured, while the fugitives

were pursued till they found shelter behind--Douay's corps and the

rest of De Failly's beyond Beaumont.  The same afternoon there were

several other severe combats along the Meuse, but I had no chance of

witnessing any of them, and just before night-fall I started back to

Buzancy, to which place the King's headquarters had been brought

during the day.



The morning of the 31st the King moved to Vendresse.  First sending

our carriage back to Grand Pre' for our trunks, Forsyth and I mounted

our horses and rode to the battle-field accompanied by an English

nobleman, the Duke of Manchester.  The part of the field we traversed

was still thickly strewn with the dead of both armies, though all the

wounded had been collected in the hospitals.  In the village of

Beaumont, we stopped to take a look at several thousand French

prisoners, whose worn clothing and evident dejection told that they

had been doing a deal of severe marching under great discouragements.



The King reached the village shortly after, and we all continued on

to Chemery, just beyond where his Majesty alighted from his carriage

to observe his son's troops file past as they came in from the

direction of Stonne.  This delay caused us to be as late as 9 o'clock

before we got shelter that night, but as it afforded me the best

opportunity I had yet had for seeing the German soldiers on the

march, I did not begrudge the time.  They moved in a somewhat open

and irregular column of fours, the intervals between files being

especially intended to give room for a peculiar swinging gait, with

which the men seemed to urge themselves over the ground with ease and

rapidity.  There was little or no straggling, and being strong, lusty

young fellows, and lightly equipped--they carried only needle-guns,

ammunition, a very small knapsack, a water-bottle, and a haversack-

they strode by with an elastic step, covering at least three miles an

hour.



It having been definitely ascertained that the demoralized French

were retiring to Sedan, on the evening of August 31 the German army

began the work of hemming them in there, so disposing the different

corps as to cover the ground from Donchery around by Raucourt to

Carignan.  The next morning this line was to be drawn in closer on

Sedan; and the Crown Prince of Saxony was therefore ordered to take

up a position to the north of Bazeilles, beyond the right bank of the

Meuse, while the Crown Prince of Prussia was to cross his right wing

over the Meuse at Remilly, to move on Bazeilles, his centre meantime

marching against a number of little hamlets still held by the French

between there and Donchery.  At this last-mentioned place strong

reserves were to be held, and from it the Eleventh Corps, followed by

the Fifth and a division of cavalry, was to march on St. Menges.



Forsyth and I started early next morning, September 1, and in a thick

fog-which, however, subsequently gave place to bright sunshine--we

drove to the village of Chevenges, where, mounting our horses, we

rode in a northeasterly direction to the heights of Frenois and

Wadelincourt, bordering the river Meuse on the left bank, where from

the crest we had a good view of the town of Sedan with its circling

fortifications, which, though extensive, were not so formidable as

those around Metz.  The King and his staff were already established

on these heights, and at a point so well chosen that his Majesty

could observe the movements of both armies immediately east and south

of Sedan, and also to the northwest toward Floing and the Belgian

frontier.



The battle was begun to the east and northeast of Sedan as early as

half-past 4 o'clock by the German right wing--the fighting being

desultory--and near the same hour the Bavarians attacked Bazeilles.

This village, some two miles southeast of Sedan, being of importance,

was defended with great obstinacy, the French contesting from street

to street and house to house the attack of the Bavarians till near

10 o'clock, when, almost every building being knocked to pieces, they

were compelled to relinquish the place.  The possession of this

village gave the Germans to the east of Sedan a continuous line,

extending from the Meuse northward through La Moncelle and Daigny to

Givonne, and almost to the Belgian frontier.



While the German centre and right were thus engaged, the left had

moved in accordance with the prescribed plan.  Indeed, some of these

troops had crossed the Meuse the night before, and now, at a little

after 6 o'clock, their advance could be seen just north of the

village of Floing.  Thus far these columns, under the immediate eye

of the Crown Prince of Prussia, had met with no opposition to their

march, and as soon as they got to the high ground above the village

they began extending to the east, to connect with the Army of the

Meuse.  This juncture was effected at Illy without difficulty, and

the French army was now completely encompassed.



After a severe fight, the Crown Prince drove the French through

Floing, and as the ground between this village and Sedan is an

undulating open plain, everywhere visible, there was then offered a

rare opportunity for seeing the final conflict preceding the

surrender.  Presently up out of the little valley where Floing is

located came the Germans, deploying just on the rim of the plateau a

very heavy skirmish-line, supported by a line of battle at close

distance.  When these skirmishers appeared, the French infantry had

withdrawn within its intrenched lines, but a strong body of their

cavalry, already formed in a depression to the right of the Floing

road, now rode at the Germans in gallant style, going clear through

the dispersed skirmishers to the main line of battle.  Here the

slaughter of the French was awful, for in addition to the deadly

volleys from the solid battalions of their enemies, the skirmishers,

who had rallied in knots at advantageous places, were now delivering

a severe and effective fire.  The gallant horsemen, therefore, had to

retire precipitately, but re-forming in the depression, they again

undertook the hopeless task of breaking the German infantry, making

in all four successive charges.  Their ardor and pluck were of no

avail, however, for the Germans, growing stronger every minute by the

accession of troops from Floing, met the fourth attack in such large

force that, even before coming in contact with their adversaries, the

French broke and retreated to the protection of the intrenchments,

where, from the beginning of the combat, had been lying plenty of

idle infantry, some of which at least, it seemed plain to me, ought

to have been thrown into the fight.  This action was the last one of

consequence around Sedan, for, though with the contraction of the

German lines their batteries kept cannonading more or less, and the

rattle of musketry continued to be heard here and there, yet the hard

fighting of the day practically ended on the plateau of Floing.



By 3 o'clock, the French being in a desperate and hopeless situation,

the King ordered the firing to be stopped, and at once despatched one

of his staff--Colonel von Bronsart--with a demand for a surrender.

Just as this officer was starting off, I remarked to Bismarck that

Napoleon himself would likely be one of the prizes, but the Count,

incredulous, replied, "Oh no; the old fox is too cunning to be caught

in such a trap; he has doubtless slipped off to Paris"--a belief

which I found to prevail pretty generally about headquarters.



In the lull that succeeded, the King invited many of those about him

to luncheon, a caterer having provided from some source or other a

substantial meal of good bread, chops and peas, with a bountiful

supply of red and sherry wines.  Among those present were Prince

Carl, Bismarck, Von Moltke, Von Roon, the Duke of Weimar, the Duke of

Coburg, the Grand-Duke of Mecklenburg, Count Hatzfeldt, Colonel

Walker, of the English army, General Forsyth, and I.  The King was

agreeable and gracious at all times, but on this occasion he was

particularly so, being naturally in a happy frame of mind because

this day the war had reached a crisis which presaged for the near

future the complete vanquishment of the French.



Between 4 and 5 o'clock Colonel von Bronsart returned from his

mission to Sedan, bringing word to the King that the commanding

officer there General Wimpffen, wished to know, in order that the

further effusion of blood might be spared, upon what terms he might

surrender.  The Colonel brought the intelligence also that the French

Emperor was in the town.  Soon after Von Bronsart's arrival a French

officer approached from Sedan, preceded by a white flag and two

German officers.  Coming up the road till within a few hundred yards

of us, they halted; then one of the Germans rode forward to say that

the French officer was Napoleon's adjutant, bearing an autograph

letter from the Emperor to the King of Prussia.  At this the King,

followed by Bismarck, Von Moltke, and Von Roon, walked out to the

front a little distance and halted, his Majesty still in advance, the

rest of us meanwhile forming in a line some twenty paces to the rear

of the group.  The envoy then approached, at first on horseback, but

when within about a hundred yards he dismounted, and uncovering, came

the remaining distance on foot, bearing high up in his right hand the

despatch from Napoleon.  The bearer proved to be General Reille, and

as he handed the Emperor's letter to the King, his Majesty saluted

him with the utmost formality and precision.  Napoleon's letter was

the since famous one, running so characteristically, thus: "Not

having been able to die in the midst of my troops, there is nothing

left me but to place my sword in your Majesty's hands." The reading

finished, the King returned to his former post, and after a

conference with Bismarck, Von Moltke, and Von Roon, dictated an

answer accepting Napoleon's surrender, and requesting him to

designate an officer with power to treat for the capitulation of the

army, himself naming Von Moltke to represent the Germans.  The King

then started for Vendresse, to pass the night.  It was after

7 o'clock now, and hence too late to arrange anything more where we

were, so further negotiations were deferred till later in the

evening; and I, wishing to be conveniently near Bismarck, resolved to

take up quarters in Donchery.  On our way thither we were met by the

Count's nephew, who assuring us that it would be impossible to find

shelter there in the village, as all the houses were filled with

wounded, Forsyth and I decided to continue on to Chevenge.  On the

other hand, Bismarck-Bohlen bore with him one great comfort--some

excellent brandy.  Offering the flask to his uncle, he said: "You've

had a hard day of it; won't you refresh yourself?"  The Chancellor,

without wasting time to answer, raised the bottle to his lips,

exclaiming: "Here's to the unification of Germany!" which sentiment

the gurgling of an astonishingly long drink seemed to emphasize.  The

Count then handed the bottle back to his nephew, who, shaking it,

ejaculated, "Why, we can't pledge you in return--there is nothing

left!" to which came the waggish response, I beg pardon; it was so

dark I couldn't see"; nevertheless there was a little remaining, as I

myself can aver.



Having left our carriage at Chevenge, Forsyth and I stopped there to

get it, but a long search proving fruitless, we took lodging in the

village at the house of the cure, resolved to continue the hunt in

the morning.  But then we had no better success, so concluding that

our vehicle had been pressed into the hospital service, we at an

early hour on the 2d of September resumed the search, continuing on

down the road in the direction of Sedan.  Near the gate of the city

we came on the German picket-line, and one of the Officers,

recognizing our uniforms--he having served in the war of the

rebellion--stepped forward and addressed me in good English.  We

naturally fell into conversation, and in the midst of it there came

out through the gate an open carriage, or landau, containing two men,

one of whom, in the uniform of a general and smoking a cigarette, we

recognized, when the conveyance drew near, as the Emperor Louis

Napoleon.  The landau went on toward Donchery at a leisurely pace,

and we, inferring that there was something more important at hand

just then than the recovery of our trap, followed at a respectful

distance.  Not quite a mile from Donchery is a cluster of three or

four cottages, and at the first of these the landau stopped to await,

as we afterward ascertained, Count Bismarck, with whom the diplomatic

negotiations were to be settled.  Some minutes elapsed before he

came, Napoleon remaining seated in his carriage meantime, still

smoking, and accepting with nonchalance the staring of a group of

German soldiers near by, who were gazing on their fallen foe with

curious and eager interest.



Presently a clattering of hoofs was heard, and looking toward the

sound, I perceived the Chancellor cantering down the road.  When

abreast of the carriage he dismounted, and walking up to it, saluted

the Emperor in a quick, brusque way that seemed to startle him.

After a word or two, the party moved perhaps a hundred yards further

on, where they stopped opposite the weaver's cottage so famous from

that day.  This little house is on the east side of the Donchery

road, near its junction with that to Frenois, and stands about twenty

paces back from the highway.  In front is a stone wall covered with

creeping vines, and from a gate in this wall runs to the front door a

path, at this time bordered on both sides with potato vines.



The Emperor having alighted at the gate, he and Bismarck walked

together along the narrow path and entered the cottage.  Reappearing

in about a quarter of an hour, they came out and seated themselves in

the open air, the weaver having brought a couple of chairs.  Here

they engaged in an animated conversation, if much gesticulation is

any indication.  The talk lasted fully an hour, Bismarck seeming to

do most of it, but at last he arose, saluted the Emperor, and strode

down the path toward his horse.  Seeing me standing near the gate, he

joined me for a moment, and asked if I had noticed how the Emperor

started when they first met, and I telling him that I had, he added,

"Well, it must have been due to my manners, not my words, for these

we're, "I salute your Majesty just as I would my King."  Then the

Chancellor continued to chat a few minutes longer, assuring me that

nothing further was to be done there, and that we had better go to

the Chateau Bellevue, where, he said, the formal surrender was to

take place.  With this he rode off toward Vendresse to communicate

with his sovereign, and Forsyth and I made ready to go to the Chateau

Bellevue.



Before we set out, however, a number of officers of the King's suite

arrived at the weaver's cottage, and from them I gathered that there

were differences at the royal headquarters as to whether peace should

be made then at Sedan, or the war continued till the French capital

was taken.  I further heard that the military advisers of the King

strongly advocated an immediate move on Paris, while the Chancellor

thought it best to make peace now, holding Alsace and Lorraine, and

compelling the payment of an enormous levy of money; and these rumors

were most likely correct, for I had often heard Bismarck say that

France being the richest country in Europe, nothing could keep her

quiet but effectually to empty her pockets; and besides this, he

impressed me as holding that it would be better policy to preserve

the Empire.



On our way to the chateau we fell in with a number of artillery

officers bringing up their guns hurriedly to post them closer in to

the beleaguered town on a specially advantageous ridge.  Inquiring

the cause of this move, we learned that General Wimpffen had not yet

agreed to the terms of surrender; that it was thought he would not,

and that they wanted to be prepared for any such contingency.  And

they were preparing with a vengeance too, for I counted seventy-two

Krupp guns in one continuous line trained on the Chateau Bellevue and

Sedan.



Napoleon went directly from the weaver's to the Chateau Bellevue, and

about 10 o'clock the King of Prussia arrived from Frenois,

accompanied by a few of his own suite and the Crown Prince with

several members of his staff; and Von Moltke and Wimpffen having

settled their points of difference before the two monarchs met,

within the next half-hour the articles of capitulation were formally

signed.



On the completion of the surrender--the occasion being justly

considered a great one--the Crown Prince proceeded to distribute

among the officers congregated in the chateau grounds 'the order of

the Iron Cross'--a generous supply of these decorations being carried

in a basket by one of his orderlies, following him about as he walked

along.  Meantime the King, leaving Napoleon in the chateau to

ruminate on the fickleness of fortune, drove off to see his own

victorious soldiers, who greeted him with huzzas that rent the air,

and must have added to the pangs of the captive Emperor.









CHAPTER XIX.



RIDING OVER THE BATTLEFIELD--DESTRUCTION OF BAZEILLES--MISTAKES OF

THE FRENCH--MARSHAL BAZAINE ON TO PARIS--A WEEK IN MEAUX--RHEIMS--ON

THE PICKETLINE-UNDER FIRE--A SURRENDER--AT VERSAILLES--GENERAL

BURNSIDE AND Mr. FORBES IN PARIS.



The Crown Prince having got to the bottom of his medal basket-that is

to say, having finished his liberal distribution of decorations to

his officers--Forsyth and I rode off by way of Wadelincourt to

Bazeilles to see what had taken place on that part of the field, and

the sight that met our eyes as we entered the village was truly

dreadful to look upon.  Most of the houses had been knocked down or

burned the day before, but such as had been left standing were now in

flames, the torch having been applied because, as it was claimed,

Frenchmen concealed in them had fired on the wounded.  The streets

were still encumbered with both German and French dead, and it was

evident that of those killed in the houses the bodies had not been

removed, for the air was loaded with odors of burning flesh.  From

Bazeille we rode on toward the north about two miles, along where the

fight had been largely an artillery duel, to learn what we could of

the effectiveness of the Krupp gun.  Counting all the French dead we

came across killed by artillery, they figured up about three hundred-

-a ridiculously small number; in fact, not much more than one dead

man for each Krupp gun on that part of the line.  Although the number

of dead was in utter disproportion to the terrific six-hour

cannonade, yet small as it was the torn and mangled bodies made such

a horrible sight that we turned back toward Bazeilles without having

gone further than Givonne.



At Bazeilles we met the King, accompanied by Bismarck and several of

the staff.  They too had been riding over the field, the King making

this a practice, to see that the wounded were not neglected.  As I

drew up by the party, Bismarck accosted me with, "Well, General,

aren't you hungry?  This is just the place to whet one's appetite--

these burning Frenchmen--Ugh!" and shrugging his shoulders in evident

disgust, he turned away to join his Majesty in further explorations,

Forsyth and I continuing on to Chevenges.  Here we got the first

inkling of what had become of our carriage since leaving it two days

before: it had been pressed into service to carry wounded officers

from the field during the battle, but afterward released, and was now

safe at the house in Vendresse where we had been quartered the night

of the 31st, so, on hearing this, we settled to go there again to

lodge, but our good friend, the cure', insisting that we should stay

with him, we remained in Chevenges till next morning.



On September 3 the King removed from Vendresse to Rethel, where he

remained two days; in the mean while the Germans, 240,000 strong,

beginning their direct march to Paris.  The French had little with

which to oppose this enormous force, not more, perhaps, than 50,000

regular troops; the rest of their splendid army had been lost or

captured in battle, or was cooped up in the fortifications of Metz,

Strasburg, and other places, in consequence of blunders without

parallel in history, for which Napoleon and the Regency in Paris must

be held accountable.  The first of these gross faults was the fight

at Worth, where MacMahon, before his army was mobilized, accepted

battle with the Crown Prince, pitting 50,000 men against 175,000; the

next was Bazaine's fixing upon Metz as his base, and stupidly putting

himself in position to be driven back to it, when there was no

possible obstacle to his joining forces with MacMahon at Chalons;

while the third and greatest blunder of all was MacMahon's move to

relieve Metz, trying to slip 140,000 men along the Belgian frontier.

Indeed, it is exasperating and sickening to think of all this; to

think that Bazaine carried into Metz--a place that should have been

held, if at all, with not over 25,000 men--an army of 180,000,

because it contained, the excuse was, "an accumulation of stores."

With all the resources of rich France to draw upon, I cannot conceive

that this excuse was sincere; on the contrary, I think that the

movement of Bazaine must have been inspired by Napoleon with a view

to the maintenance of his dynasty rather than for the good of France.



As previously stated, Bismarck did not approve of the German army's

moving on Paris after the battle of Sedan.  Indeed, I think he

foresaw and dreaded the establishment of a Republic, his idea being

that if peace was made then, the Empire could be continued in the

person of the Prince Imperial who--, coming to the throne under

German influences, would be pliable in his hands.  These views found

frequent expression in private, and in public too; I myself

particularly remember the Chancellor's speaking thus most unguardedly

at a dinner in Rheims.  But he could not prevent the march to Paris;

it was impossible to stop the Germans, flushed with success.  "On to

Paris" was written by the soldiers on every door, and every fence-

board along the route to the capital, and the thought of a triumphant

march down the Champs Elysees was uppermost with every German, from

the highest to the lowest grade.



The 5th of September we set out for Rheims.  There it was said the

Germans would meet with strong resistance, for the French intended to

die to the last man before giving up that city.  But this proved all

fudge, as is usual with these "last ditch" promises, the garrison

decamping immediately at the approach of a few Uhlans.  So far as I

could learn, but a single casualty happened; this occurred to an

Uhlan, wounded by a shot which it was reported was fired from a house

after the town was taken; so, to punish this breach of faith, a levy

of several hundred bottles of champagne was made, and the wine

divided about headquarters, being the only seizure made in the city,

I believe, for though Rheims, the centre of the champagne district,

had its cellars well stocked, yet most of them being owned by German

firms, they received every protection.



The land about Rheims is of a white, chalky character, and very poor,

but having been terraced and enriched with fertilizers, it produces

the champagne grape in such abundance that the region, once

considered valueless, and named by the peasantry the "land of the

louse," now supports a dense population.  We remained in Rheims eight

days, and through the politeness of the American Consul--Mr. Adolph

Gill--had the pleasure of seeing all the famous wine cellars, and

inspecting the processes followed in champagne making, from the step

of pressing the juice from the grape to that which shows the wine

ready for the market.  Mr. Gill also took us to see everything else

of special interest about the city, and there being much to look at--

fine old churches, ancient fortifications, a Roman gateway, etc.--the

days slipped by very quickly, though the incessant rains somewhat

interfered with our enjoyment.



For three or four days all sorts of rumors were rife as to what was

doing in Paris, but nothing definite was learned till about the 9th;

then Count Bismarck informed me that the Regency had been overthrown

on the 4th, and that the Empress Eugenie had escaped to Belgium.  The

King of Prussia offered her an asylum with the Emperor at

Wilhelmshohe, "where she ought to go," said the Chancellor, "for her

proper place is with her husband," but he feared she would not.  On

the same occasion he also told me that Jules Favre--the head of the

Provisional Government--had sent him the suggestion that, the Empire

being gone, peace should be made and the Germans withdrawn, but that

he (Bismarck) was now compelled to recognize the impossibility of

doing this till Paris was taken, for although immediately after the

surrender of Sedan he desired peace, the past few days had made it

plain that the troops would not be satisfied with anything short of

Paris, no matter what form of Government the French should ultimately

adopt.



The German army having met with no resistance whatever in its march

on Paris, its advance approached the capital rapidly, and by the 14th

of September the royal headquarters moved by a fine macadamized road

to the Chateau Thierry, and on the 5th reached Meaux, about twenty-

eight miles from Paris, where we remained four days awaiting the

reconstruction of some railroad and canal bridges.  The town of Meaux

has a busy population of about 10,000 souls, in peaceable times

principally occupied in manufacturing flour for the Paris market,

having a fine waterpower for the many mills.  These were kept going

day and night to supply the German army; and it was strange to see

with what zeal Frenchmen toiled to fill the stomachs of their

inveterate enemies, and with what alacrity the mayor and other.

officials filled requisitions for wine, cheese, suits of livery,

riding-whips, and even squab pigeons.



During our stay at Meaux the British Minister Lord Lyons, endeavored

to bring about a cessation of hostilities, to this end sending his

secretary out from Paris with a letter to Count Bismarck, offering to

serve as mediator.  The Chancellor would not agree to this, however,

for he conjectured that the action of the British Minister had been

inspired by Jules Favre, who, he thought, was trying to draw the

Germans into negotiations through the medium of a third party only

for purposes of delay.  So the next morning Lord Lyons's secretary,

Mr. Edward Malet, returned to Paris empty-handed, except that he bore

a communication positively declining mediation; which message,

however, led no doubt to an interview between Bismarck and Favre a

couple of days later.



The forenoon of September 19 the King removed to the Chateau

Ferrieres--a castle belonging to the Rothschild family, where

Napoleon had spent many happy days in the time of his prosperity.

His Majesty took up his quarters here at the suggestion of the owner,

we were told, so that by the presence of the King the magnificent

chateau and its treasures of art would be unquestionably protected

from all acts of vandalism.



All of the people at headquarters except the King's immediate suite

were assigned quarters at Lagny; and while Forsyth and I, accompanied

by Sir Henry Havelock, of the British army, were driving thither, we

passed on the road the representative of the National Defense

Government, Jules Favre, in a carriage heading toward Meaux.

Preceded by a flag of truce and accompanied by a single, companion,

be was searching for Count Bismarck, in conformity, doubtless, with

the message the Chancellor had sent to Paris on the 17th by the

British secretary.  A half-mile further on we met Bismarck.  He too

was traveling toward Meaux, not in the best of humor either, it

appeared, for having missed finding the French envoy at the

rendezvous where they had agreed to meet, he stopped long enough to

say that the "air was full of lies, and that there were many persons

with the army bent on business that did not concern them."



The armies of the two Crown Princes were now at the outskirts of

Paris.  They had come from Sedan mainly by two routes--the Crown

Prince of Saxony marching by the northern line, through Laon and

Soissons, and the Crown Prince of Prussia by the southern line,

keeping his right wing on the north bank of the Marne, while his left

and centre approached the French capital by roads between that river

and the Seine.



The march of these armies had been unobstructed by any resistance

worth mentioning, and as the routes of both columns lay through a

region teeming with everything necessary for their support, and rich

even in luxuries, it struck me that such campaigning was more a vast

picnic than like actual war.  The country supplied at all points

bread, meat, and wine in abundance, and the neat villages, never more

than a mile or two apart, always furnished shelter; hence the

enormous trains required to feed and provide camp equipage for an

army operating in a sparsely settled country were dispensed with; in

truth, about the only impedimenta of the Germans was their wagons

carrying ammunition, pontoon-boats, and the field-telegraph.



On the morning of the 20th I started out accompanied by Forsyth and

Sir Henry Havelock, and took the road through Boissy St. George,

Boissy St. Martins and Noisy Le Grand to Brie.  Almost every foot of

the way was strewn with fragments of glass from wine bottles, emptied

and then broken by the troops.  There was, indeed, so much of this

that I refrain from making any estimate of the number of bottles,

lest I be thought to exaggerate, but the road was literally paved

with glass, and the amount of wine consumed (none was wasted) must

have been enormous, far more, even, than I had seen evidence of at

any time before.  There were two almost continuous lines of broken

bottles along the roadsides all the way down from Sedan; but that

exhibit was small compared with what we saw about Brie.



At Brie we were taken charge of by the German commandant of the

place.  He entertained us most hospitably for an hour or so, and

then, accompanied by a lieutenant, who was to be our guide, I set out

ahead of my companions to gain a point on the picket-line where I

expected to get a good look at the French, for their rifle-pits were

but a few hundred yards off across the Marne, their main line being

just behind the rifle-pits.  As the lieutenant and I rode through the

village, some soldiers warned us that the adventure would ,be

dangerous, but that we could probably get to the desired place unhurt

if we avoided the French fire by forcing our horses to a run in

crossing some open streets where we would be exposed.  On getting to

the first street my guide galloped ahead to show the way, and as the

French were not on the lookout for anything of the kind at these

dangerous points, only a few stray shots were drawn by the

lieutenant, but when I followed, they were fully up to what was going

on, and let fly a volley every time they saw me in the open.

Fortunately, however, in their excitement they overshot, but when I

drew rein alongside of my guide under protection of the bluff where

the German picket was posted, my hair was all on end, and I was about

as badly scared as ever I had been in my life.  As soon as I could

recover myself I thought of Havelock and Forsyth, with the hope that

they would not follow; nor did they, for having witnessed my

experience, they wisely concluded that, after all, they did not care

so much to see the French rifle-pits.



When I had climbed to the top of the bluff I was much disappointed,

for I could see but little--only the advanced rifle-pits across the

river, and Fort Nogent beyond them, not enough, certainly, to repay a

non-combatant for taking the risk of being killed.  The next question

was to return, and deciding to take no more such chances as those we

had run in coming out, I said we would wait till dark, but this

proved unnecessary, for to my utter astonishment my guide informed me

that there was a perfectly safe route by which we might go back.  I

asked why we had not taken it in coming, and he replied that he had

thought it "too long and circuitous."  To this I could say nothing,

but I concluded that that was not quite the correct reason; the truth

is that early that morning the young fellow had been helping to empty

some of the many wine bottles I saw around Brie, and consequently had

a little more "Dutch courage"--was a little more rash--than would

have been the case under other conditions.



I rode back to Brie by the "long and circuitous" route, and inquiring

there for my companions, found Havelock waiting to conduct me to the

village of Villiers, whither, he said, Forsyth had been called to

make some explanation about his passport, which did not appear to be

in satisfactory shape.  Accordingly we started for Villiers, and

Havelock, being well mounted on an English "hunter," and wishing to

give me an exhibition of the animal's training and power, led the way

across ditches and fences, but my horse, never having followed "the

hounds," was unsafe to experiment with, so, after trying a low fence

or two, I decided to leave my friend alone in his diversion, and a

few moments later, seeing both horse and rider go down before a ditch

and high stone wall, I was convinced that my resolution was a

discreet one.  After this mishap, which luckily resulted in no harm,

I hoped Sir Henry would give up the amusement, but by failure

becoming only the more determined, in a second effort he cleared the

wall handsomely and rode across-country to the villages.  Following

the road till it passed under a railway bridge, I there thought I saw

a chance to gain Villiers by a short-cut, and changing my course

accordingly, I struck into a large vineyard to the left, and

proceeding a few hundred yards through the vines, came suddenly upon

a German picket-post.  The guard immediately leveled their rifles at

me, when, remembering my Rezonville experience of being taken for a

French officer because of my uniform, I hastily flung myself from the

saddle in token of surrender.  The action being rightly interpreted,

the men held their fire, and as my next thought was the King's pass I

reached under my coat-skirt for the document, but this motion being

taken as a grab for my pistol, the whole lot of them--some ten in

number--again aimed at me, and with such loud demands for surrender

that I threw up my hands and ran into their ranks.  The officer of

the guard then coming up, examined my credentials, and seeing that

they were signed by the King of Prussia, released me and directed the

recovery of my horse, which was soon caught, and I was then conducted

to the quarters of the commandant, where I found Forsyth with his

pass properly vised, entirely ignorant of my troubles, and

contentedly regaling himself on cheese and beer.  Havelock having got

to the village ahead of me, thanks to his cross-country ride, was

there too, sipping beer with Forsyth; nor was I slow to follow their

example, for the ride of the day, though rather barren in other

results, at any rate had given me a ravenous appetite.



Late that evening, the 20th, we resumed our old quarters at Lagny,

and early next day I made a visit to the royal headquarters at

Ferrires, where I observed great rejoicing going on, the occasion for

it being an important victory gained near Mendon, a French corps of

about 30,000 men under General Ducrot having been beaten by the Fifth

Prussian and Second Bavarian corps.  Ducrot had been stubbornly

holding ground near Mendon for two or three days, much to the

embarrassment of the Germans too, since he kept them from closing a

gap in their line to the southwest of Paris; but in the recent fight

he had been driven from the field with such heavy loss as to render

impossible his maintaining the gap longer.  The Crown Prince of

Prussia was thus enabled to extend his left, without danger, as far

as Bougival, north of Versailles, and eventually met the right of the

Crown Prince of Saxony, already at Denil, north of St. Denis.  The

unbroken circle of investment around Paris being well-nigh assured,

news of its complete accomplishment was momentarily expected;

therefore everybody was jubilant on account of the breaking up of

Ducrot, but more particularly because word had been received the same

morning that a correspondence had begun between Bazaine and Prince

Frederick Charles, looking to the capitulation of Metz, for the

surrender of that place would permit the Second Army to join in the

siege of Paris.



Learning all this, and seeing that the investment was about

completed, I decided to take up my quarters at Versailles, and

started for that place on the 22d, halting at Noisy le Grand to take

luncheon with some artillery officers, whose acquaintance we had made

the day of the surrender at Sedan.  During the meal I noticed two

American flags flying on a couple of houses near by.  Inquiring the

significance of this, I was told that the flags had been put up to

protect the buildings--the owners, two American citizens, having in a

bad fright abandoned their property, and, instead of remaining

outside, gone into Paris,--"very foolishly," said our hospitable

friends, "for here they could have obtained food in plenty, and been

perfectly secure from molestation."



We arrived at Versailles about 7 o'clock that evening and settled

ourselves in the Hotel Reservoir, happy to find there two or three

American families, with whom, of course, we quickly made

acquaintance.  This American circle was enlarged a few days later by

the arrival of General Wm. B. Hazen, of our army, General Ambrose E.

Burnside, and Mr. Paul Forbes.  Burnside and Forbes were hot to see,

from the French side, something of the war, and being almost beside

themselves to get into Paris, a permit was granted them by Count

Bismarck, and they set out by way of Sevres, Forsyth and I

accompanying them as far as the Palace of St. Cloud, which we,

proposed to see, though there were strict orders against its being

visited generally.  After much trouble we managed, through the "open

sesame" of the King's pass, to gain access to the palace; but to our

great disappointment we found that all the pictures had been cut from

the frames and carried off to Paris, except one portrait, that of

Queen Victoria, against whom the French were much incensed.  All

other works of art had been removed, too--a most fortunate

circumstance, for the palace being directly on the German line, was

raked by the guns from the fortress of Mont Valerien, and in a few

days burned to the ground.



In less than a week Burnside and Forbes returned from Paris.  They

told us their experience had been interesting, but were very reticent

as to particulars, and though we tried hard to find out what they had

seen or done, we could get nothing from them beyond the general

statement that they had had a good time, and that General Trochu had

been considerate enough to postpone a sortie, in order to let them

return; but this we did not quite swallow.  After a day or two they

went into Paris again, and I then began to suspect that they were

essaying the role of mediators, and that Count Bismarck was feeding

their vanity with permits, and receiving his equivalent by learning

the state of affairs within the beleaguered city.



>From about the 1st of October on, the Germans were engaged in making

their enveloping lines impenetrable, bringing up their reserves,

siege guns, and the like, the French meanwhile continuing to drill

and discipline the National Guard and relieving the monotony

occasionally by a more or less spirited, but invariably abortive,

sortie.  The most notable of these was that made by General Vinoy

against the heights of Clamart, the result being a disastrous repulse

by the besiegers.  After this, matters settled down to an almost

uninterrupted quietude, only a skirmish here and there; and it being

plain that the Germans did not intend to assault the capital, but

would accomplish its capture by starvation, I concluded to find out

from Count Bismarck about when the end was expected, with the purpose

of spending the interim in a little tour through some portions of

Europe undisturbed by war, returning in season for the capitulation.

Count Bismarck having kindly advised me as to the possible date,



Forsyth and I, on the 14th of October, left Versailles, going first

direct to the Chateau Ferrieres to pay our respects to the King,

which we did, and again took luncheon with him.  From the chateau we

drove to Meaux, and there spent the night; resuming our journey next

morning, we passed through Epernay, Rheims, and Rethel to Sedan,

where we tarried a day, and finally, on October 18, reached Brussels.









CHAPTER XX.



BRUSSELS--DECIDING TO VISIT EASTERN EUROPE--AUSTRIA--DOWN THE DANUBE-

-IN CONSTANTINOPLE--THE LADIES OF THE HAREM--THE SULTAN--TURKISH

SOLDIERS--A BANQUET--A VISIT IN ATHENS--KING GEORGE OF GREECE--VICTOR

EMMANUEL--"BEDEVILED WITH CARES OF STATE"--DEER SHOOTING--A MILITARY

DINNER--RETURN TO VERSAILLES--GERMANS ENTERING PARIS--CRITICISM ON

THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR--CONCLUSION.



On reaching Brussels, one of the first things to do was to pay my

respects to the King of Belgium, which I did, accompanied by our

Minister, Mr. Russell Jones.  Later I dined with the King and Queen,

meeting at the dinner many notable people, among them the Count and

Countess of Flanders.  A day or two in Brussels sufficed to mature

our plans for spending the time up to the approximate date of our

return to Paris; and deciding to visit eastern Europe, we made Vienna

our first objective, going there by way of Dresden.



At Vienna our Minister, Mr. John Jay, took charge of us--Forsyth was

still with me--and the few days' sojourn was full of interest.  The

Emperor being absent from the capital, we missed seeing him; but the

Prime Minister, Count von Beust, was very polite to us, and at his

house we had the pleasure of meeting at dinner Count Andrassy, the

Prime Minister of Hungary.



>From Vienna we went to Buda-Pesth, the Hungarian capital; and thence,

in a I small, crowded, and uncomfortable steamboat, down the Danube

to Rustchuck, whence we visited Bucharest--all who travel in eastern

Europe do so--and then directing our course southward, we went first

to Varna, and from that city by steamer through the Black Sea to

Constantinople.



We reached the Turkish capital at the time of Ramadan, the period of

the year (about a month) during which the Mohammedans are commanded

by the Koran to keep a rigorous fast every day from sunrise till

sunset.  All the followers of the Prophet were therefore busy with

their devotions--holding a revival, as it were; hence there was no

chance whatever to be presented to the Sultan, Abdul Aziz, it being

forbidden during the penitential season for him to receive

unbelievers, or in fact any one except the officials of his

household.  However, the Grand Vizier brought me many messages of

welcome, and arranged that I should be permitted to see and salute

his Serene Highness on the Esplanade as he rode by on horseback to

the mosque.



So, the second day after arrival, the Grand Vizier drove me in a

barouche to the Esplanade, where we took station about midway of its

length an hour or so before the Sultan was to appear.  Shortly after

we reached the Esplanade, carriages occupied by the women of the

Sultan's harem began to appear, coming out from the palace grounds

and driving up and down the roadway.  Only a few of the women were

closely veiled, a majority of them wearing an apology for veiling,

merely a strip of white lace covering the forehead down to the

eyebrows.  Some were yellow, and some white-types of the Mongolian

and Caucasian races.  Now and then a pretty face was seen, rarely a

beautiful one.  Many were plump, even to corpulence, and these were

the closest veiled, being considered the greatest beauties I presume,

since with the Turk obesity is the chief element of comeliness.  As

the carriages passed along in review, every now and then an occupant,

unable or unwilling to repress her natural promptings, would indulge

in a mild flirtation, making overtures by casting demure side-

glances, throwing us coquettish kisses, or waving strings of amber

beads with significant gestures, seeming to say: "Why don't you

follow?"  But this we could not do if we would, for the Esplanade

throughout its entire length was lined with soldiers, put there

especially to guard the harem first, and later, the Sultan on his

pilgrimage to the mosque.



But as it was now time for His Serene Highness to make his appearance

the carriages containing his wives drove off into the palace grounds,

which were inclosed by a high wall, leaving the Esplanade wholly

unencumbered except by the soldiers.  Down between the two ranks,

which were formed facing each other, came the Sultan on a white

steed--a beautiful Arabian--and having at his side his son, a boy

about ten or twelve years old, who was riding a pony, a diminutive

copy of his father's mount, the two attended by a numerous body-

guard, dressed in gorgeous Oriental uniforms.  As the procession

passed our carriage, I, as pre-arranged, stood up and took off my

hat, His Serene Highness promptly acknowledging the salute by raising

his hand to the forehead.  This was all I saw of him, yet I received

every kindness at his hands, being permitted to see many of his

troops, to inspect all the ordnance, equipment, and other military

establishments about Constantinople, and to meet numbers of the high

functionaries of the Empire.



Among other compliments tendered through his direction, and which I

gladly accepted, was a review of all the troops then in Stamboul-

about 6,000--comprising infantry, cavalry, and artillery.



They were as fine looking a body of soldiers as I ever saw--well

armed and well clothed, the men all large and of sturdy appearance.



After the review we attended a grand military dinner given by the

Grand Vizier.  At the hour set for this banquet we presented

ourselves at the palace of the Grand Vizier, and being ushered into a

large drawing-room, found already assembled there the guests invited

to meet us.  Some few spoke French, and with these we managed to

exchange an occasional remark; but as the greater number stood about

in silence, the affair, thus far, was undeniably a little stiff.

Just before the dinner was announced, all the Turkish officers went

into an adjoining room, and turning their faces to the east,

prostrated themselves to the floor in prayer.  Then we were all

conducted to a large salon, where each being provided with a silver

ewer and basin, a little ball of highly perfumed soap and a napkin,

set out on small tables, each guest washed his hands.  Adjacent to

this salon was the dining-room, or, rather, the banqueting room, a

very large and artistically frescoed hall, in the centre of which

stood a crescent-shaped table, lighted with beautiful silver

candelabra, and tastefully decorated with flowers and fruits.  The

viands were all excellent; cooked, evidently, by a French chef, and

full justice was done the dishes, especially by the Turks, who, of

course, had been fasting all day.



At the close of the banquet, which consisted of not less than fifteen

courses, we withdrew to a smoking-room, where the coffee was served

and cigarettes and chibouks offered us--the latter a pipe having a

long flexible stem with an amber mouthpiece.  I chose the chibouk,

and as the stem of mine was studded with precious stones of enormous

value, I thought I should enjoy it the more; but the tobacco being

highly flavored with some sort of herbs, my smoke fell far short of

my anticipations.  The coffee was delicious, however, and I found

this to be the case wherever I went in Constantinople, whether in

making calls or at dinner, the custom of offering coffee and tobacco

on these occasions being universal.



The temptations to linger at Constantinople were many indeed, not the

least being the delightful climate; and as time pressed, we set out

with much regret on the return journey, stopping a few days at

Athens, whence we made several short excursions into the interior.

King George and Queen Olga made our stay in Athens one of extreme

interest and exceeding pleasure.  Throwing aside all ceremony, they

breakfasted and dined us informally, gave us a fine ball, and in

addition to these hospitalities showed us much personal attention,

his Majesty even calling upon me, and the Queen sending her children

to see us at our hotel.



Of course we visited all that remained of the city's ancient

civilization--the Acropolis, temples, baths, towers, and the like;

nor did we oinit to view the spot where St. Paul once instructed the

Athenians in lessons of Christianity.  We traveled some little

through the country districts outside of Athens, and I noticed that

the peasantry, in point of picturesqueness of dress and color of

complexion, were not unlike the gypsies we see at times in America.

They had also much of the same shrewdness, and, as far as I could

learn, were generally wholly uneducated, ignorant, indeed, except as

to one subject--politics--which I was told came to them intuitively,

they taking to it, and a scramble for office, as naturally as a duck

to water.  In fact, this common faculty for politics seems a

connecting link between the ancient and modern Greek.



Leaving Athens with the pleasantest recollections, we sailed for

Messina, Sicily, and from there went to Naples, where we found many

old friends; among them Mr. Buchanan Reed, the artist and poet, and

Miss Brewster, as well as a score or more of others of our

countrymen, then or since distinguished, in art and letters at home

and abroad.  We remained some days in Naples, and during the time

went to Pompeii to witness a special excavation among the ruins of

the buried city, which search was instituted on account of our visit.

A number of ancient household articles were dug up, and one, a terra

cotta lamp bearing upon its crown in bas-relief the legend of "Leda

and the Swan," was presented to me as a souvenir of the occasion,

though it is usual for the Government to place in its museums

everything of such value that is unearthed.



>From Naples to Rome by rail was our next journey.  In the Eternal

City we saw picture-galleries, churches, and ruins in plenty, but all

these have been so well described by hundreds of other travelers that

I shall not linger even to name them.  While at Rome we also

witnessed an overflow of the Tiber, that caused great suffering and

destroyed much property.  The next stage of our tour took us to

Venice, then to Florence--the capital of Italy--for although the

troops of the King of Italy had taken possession of Rome the

preceding September, the Government itself had not yet removed

thither.



At Florence, our Minister, Mr. Marsh, though suffering with a lame

foot, took me in charge, and in due course of time I was presented to

King Victor-Emmanuel.  His Majesty received me informally at his

palace in a small, stuffy room--his office, no doubt--and an untidy

one it was too.  He wore a loose blouse and very baggy trousers; a

comfortable suit, certainly, but not at all conducing to an ideal

kingliness of appearance.



His Majesty's hobby was hunting, and no sooner had I made my bow than

he began a conversation on that subject, thrusting his hands nearly

up to the elbows into the pockets of his trousers.  He desired to

learn about the large game of America, particularly the buffalo, and

when I spoke of the herds of thousands and thousands I had seen on

the plains of western Kansas, he interrupted me to bemoan the fate

which kept him from visiting America to hunt, even going so far as to

say that "he didn't wish to be King of Italy, anyhow, but would much

prefer to pass his days hunting than be bedeviled with the cares of

state." On one of his estates, near Pisa, he had several large herds

of deer, many wild boars, and a great deal of other game. Of this

preserve he was very proud, and before we separated invited me to go

down there to shoot deer, adding that he would be there himself if he

could, but feared that a trip which he had to take to Milan would

interfere, though he wished me to go in any event.



I gladly accepted the invitation, and in two or three days was

notified when I would be expected at the estate.  At the designated

time I was escorted to Pisa by an aide-de-camp, and from there we

drove the few miles to the King's chateau, where we fortified

ourselves for the work in hand by an elaborate and toothsome

breakfast of about ten courses.  Then in a carriage we set out for

the King's stand in the hunting-grounds, accompanied by a crowd of

mounted game-keepers, who with great difficulty controlled the pack

of sixty or seventy hounds, the dogs and keepers together almost

driving me to distraction with their yelping and yelling.  On

reaching the stand, I was posted within about twenty' yards of a

long, high picket-fence, facing the fence and covered by two trees

very close together.  It was from behind these that the King usually

shot, and as I was provided with a double-barreled shot-gun, I

thought I could do well, especially since close in rear of me stood

two game-keepers to load and hand me a second gun when the first was

emptied.



Meantime the huntsmen and the hounds had made a circuit of the park

to drive up the game.  The yelps of the hounds drawing near, I

cautiously looked in the direction of the sound, and the next moment

saw a herd of deer close in to the fence, and coming down at full

speed.  Without a miss, I shot the four leading ones as they tried

to run the gauntlet, for in passing between the stand and the fence,

the innocent creatures were not more than ten to fifteen paces from

me.  At the fourth I stopped, but the gamekeepers insisted on more

butchery, saying, "No one but the King ever did the like" (I guess no

one else had ever had the chance), so, thus urged, I continued firing

till I had slaughtered eleven with eleven shots--an easy task with a

shot-gun and buckshot cartridges.



The "hunt" being ended--for with this I had had enough, and no one

else was permitted to do any shooting--the aide-decamp directed the

game to be sent to me in Florence, and we started for the chateau.

On the way back I saw a wild boar the first and only one I ever saw--

my attention being drawn to him by cries from some of the game-

keepers.  There was much commotion, the men pointing out the game and

shouting excitedly, "See the wild boar!" otherwise I should not have

known what was up, but now, looking in the indicated direction, I saw

scudding over the plain what appeared to me to be nothing but a

halfgrown black pig, or shoat.  He was not in much of a hurry either,

and gave no evidence of ferocity, yet it is said that this

insignificant looking animal is dangerous when hunted with the spear

--the customary way.  After an early dinner at the chateau we

returned to Florence, and my venison next day arriving, it was

distributed among my American friends in the city.



Shortly after the hunt the King returned from Milan, and then honored

me with a military dinner, his Majesty and all the guests, numbering

eighty, appearing in full uniform.  The banqueting hall was lighted

with hundreds of wax candles, there was a profusion of beautiful

flowers, and to me the scene altogether was one of unusual

magnificence.  The table service was entirely of gold--the celebrated

set of the house of Savoy--and behind the chair of each guest stood a

servant in powdered wig and gorgeous livery of red plush.  I sat at

the right of the King, who--his hands resting on his sword, the hilt

of which glittered with jewels--sat through the hour and a half at

table without once tasting food or drink, for it was his rule to eat

but two meals in twenty-four hours--breakfast at noon, and dinner at

midnight.  The King remained silent most of the time, but when he did

speak, no matter on what subject, he inevitably drifted back to

hunting.  He never once referred to the Franco-Prussian war, nor to

the political situation in his own country, then passing through a

crisis.  In taking leave of his Majesty I thanked him with deep

gratitude for honoring me so highly, and his response was that if

ever he came to America to hunt buffalo, he should demand my

assistance.



>From Florence I went to Milan and Geneva, then to Nice, Marseilles,

and Bordeaux.  Assembled at Bordeaux was a convention which had been

called together by the government of the National Defense for the

purpose of confirming or rejecting the terms of an armistice of

twenty-one days, arranged between Jules Favre and Count Bismarck in

negotiations begun at Versailles the latter part of January.  The

convention was a large body, chosen from all parts of France, and was

unquestionably the most noisy, unruly and unreasonable set of beings

that I ever saw in a legislative assembly.  The frequent efforts of

Thiers, Jules Favre, and other leading men to restrain the more

impetuous were of little avail.  When at the sittings a delegate

arose to speak on some question, he was often violently pulled to his

seat and then surrounded by a mob of his colleagues, who would throw

off their coats and gesticulate wildly, as though about to fight.



But the bitter pill of defeat had to be swallowed in some way, so the

convention delegated M. Thiers to represent the executive power of

the country, with authority to construct a ministry three

commissioners were appointed by the Executive, to enter into further

negotiations with Count Bismarck at Versailles and arrange a peace,

the terms of which, however, were to be submitted to the convention

for final action.  Though there had been so much discussion, it took

but a few days to draw up and sign a treaty at Versailles, the

principal negotiators being Thiers and Jules Favre for France, and

Bismarck on the part of the Germans.  The terms agreed upon provided

for the occupation of Paris till ratification should be had by the

convention at Bordeaux; learning of which stipulation from our

Minister, Mr. Washburn, I hurried off to Paris to see the conquerors

make their triumphal entry.



In the city the excitement was at fever heat, of course; the entire

population protesting with one voice that they would never, never

look upon the hated Germans marching through their beloved city.  No!

when the day arrived they would hide themselves in their houses, or

shut their eyes to such a hateful sight.  But by the 1st of March a

change had come over the fickle Parisians, for at an early hour the

sidewalks were jammed with people, and the windows and doors of the

houses filled with men, women, and children eager to get a look at

the conquerors.  Only a few came in the morning, however--an advance-

-guard of perhaps a thousand cavalry and infantry.  The main column

marched from the Arc-de-Triomphe toward the middle of the afternoon.

In its composition it represented United Germany--Saxons, Bavarians,

and the Royal Guard of Prussia--and, to the strains of martial music,

moving down the Champ Elysees to the Place de la Concorde, was

distributed thence over certain sections of the city agreed upon

beforehand.  Nothing that could be called a disturbance took place

during the march; and though there was a hiss now and then and

murmurings of discontent, yet the most noteworthy mutterings were

directed against the defunct Empire.  Indeed, I found everywhere that

the national misfortunes were laid at Napoleon's door--he, by this

time, having become a scapegoat for every blunder of the war.



The Emperor William (he had been proclaimed German Emperor at

Versailles the 18th of January) did not accompany his troops into

Paris, though he reviewed them at Long Champs before they started.

After the occupation of the city he still remained at Versailles, and

as soon as circumstances would permit, I repaired to the Imperial

headquarters to pay my respects to his Majesty under his new title

and dignities, and to say good-bye.



Besides the Emperor, the only persons I me at Versailles were General

von Moltke and Bismarck.  His Majesty was in a very agreeable frame

of mind, and as bluff and hearty as usual.  His increased rank and

power had effected no noticeable change of any kind in him, and by

his genial and cordial ways he made me think that my presence with

the German army had contributed to his pleasure.  Whether this was

really so or not, I shall always believe it true, for his kind words

and sincere manner could leave no other conclusion.



General von Moltke was, as usual, quiet and reserved, betraying not

the slightest consciousness of his great ability, nor the least

indication of pride on account of his mighty work.  I say this

advisedly, for it is an undoubted fact that it was.  his marvelous

mind that perfected the military system by which 800,000 men were

mobilized with unparalleled celerity and moved with such certainty of

combination that, in a campaign of seven months, the military power

of France was destroyed and her vast resources sorely crippled.



I said good-bye to Count Bismarck, also, for at that busy time the

chances of seeing him again were very remote.  The great Chancellor

manifested more joy over the success of the Germans than did anyone

else at the Imperial headquarters.  Along with his towering strength

of mind and body, his character partook of much of the enthusiasm and

impulsiveness commonly restricted to younger men, and now in his

frank, free way be plainly showed his light-heartedness and

gratification at success.  That which for years his genius had been

planning and striving for--permanent unification of the German

States, had been accomplished by the war.  It had welded them

together in a compact Empire which no power in Europe could disrupt,

and as such a union was the aim of Bismarck's life, he surely had a

right to feel jubilant.



Thanks to the courtesies extended me, I had been able to observe the

principal battles, and study many of the minor details of a war

between two of the greatest military nations of the world, and to

examine critically the methods followed abroad for subsisting,

equipping, and manoeuvring vast bodies of men during a stupendous,

campaign.  Of course I found a great deal to interest and instruct

me, yet nowadays war is pretty much the same everywhere, and this one

offered no marked exception to my previous experiences.  The methods

pursued on the march were the same as we would employ, with one most

important exception.  Owing to the density of population throughout

France it was always practicable for the Germans to quarter their

troops in villages, requiring the inhabitants to subsist both

officers and men.  Hence there was no necessity for camp and garrison

equipage, nor enormous provision trains, and the armies were

unencumbered by these impedimenta, indispensable when operating in a

poor and sparsely settled country.  As I have said before, the only

trains were those for ammunition, pontoon-boats, and the field

telegraph, and all these were managed by special corps.  If

transportation was needed for other purposes, it was obtained by

requisition from the invaded country, just as food and forage were

secured.  Great celerity of combination was therefore possible, the

columns moving in compact order, and as all the roads were broad and

macadamized, there was little or nothing to delay or obstruct the

march of the Germans, except when their enemy offered resistance, but

even this was generally slight and not very frequent, for the French

were discouraged by disaster from the very outset of the campaign



The earlier advantages gained bythe Germans may be ascribed to the

strikingly prompt mobilization of their armies, one of the most

noticeable features of their perfect military system, devised by

almost autocratic power; their later successes were greatly aided by

the blunders of the French, whose stupendous errors materially

shortened the war, though even if prolonged it could, in my opinion,

have had ultimately no other termination.



As I have previously stated, the first of these blunders was the

acceptance of battle by MacMahon at Worth; the second in attaching

too much importance to the fortified position of Metz, resulting in

three battles Colombey, Mars-la-Tour, and Gravelotte--all of which

were lost; and the third, the absurd movement of MacMahon along the

Belgian frontier to relieve Metz, the responsibility for which, I am

glad to say, does not belong to him.



With the hemming in of Bazaine at Metz and the capture of MacMahon's

army at Sedan the crisis of the war was passed, and the Germans

practically the victors.  The taking of Paris was but a sentiment--

the money levy could have been made and the Rhine provinces held

without molesting that city, and only the political influences

consequent upon the changes in the French Government caused peace to

be deferred.



I did not have much opportunity to observe the German cavalry, either

on the march or in battle.  The only time I saw any of it engaged was

in the unfortunate charge at Gravelotte.  That proved its mettle good

and discipline fair, but answered no other purpose.  Such of it as

was not attached to the infantry was organized in divisions, and

operated in accordance with the old idea of covering the front and

flanks of the army, a duty which it thoroughly performed.  But thus

directed it was in no sense an independent corps, and hence cannot

be, said to have accomplished anything in the campaign, or have had a

weight or influence at all proportionate to its strength.  The method

of its employment seemed to me a mistake, for, being numerically

superior to the French cavalry, had it been massed and manoeuvred

independently of the infantry, it could easily have broken up the

French communications, and done much other work of weighty influence

in the prosecution of the war.



The infantry was as fine as I ever saw, the men young and hardy in

appearance, and marching always with an elastic stride.  The infantry

regiment, however, I thought too large--too many men for a colonel to

command unless he has the staff of a general--but this objection may

be counterbalanced by the advantages resulting from associating

together thus intimately the men from the same district, or county as

we would call it; the celerity of mobilization, and, in truth, the

very foundation of the German system, being based on this local or

territorial scheme of recruiting.



There was no delay when the call sounded for the march; all turned

out promptly, and while on the road there was very little straggling,

only the sick falling out.  But on such fine, smooth roads, and with

success animating the men from the day they struck the first blow, it

could hardly be expected that the columns would not keep well closed

up.  Then, too, it must be borne in mind that, as already stated,

'campaigning' in France--that is, the marching, camping, and

subsisting of an army--is an easy matter, very unlike anything we,

had during the war of the rebellion.  To repeat: the country is rich,

beautiful, and densely populated, subsistence abundant, and the

roads--all macadamized highways; thus the conditions; are altogether

different from those existing with us.  I think that under the same

circumstances our troops would have done as well as the Germans,

marched as admirably, made combinations as quickly and accurately,,

and fought with as much success.  I can but leave to conjecture how.

the Germans would have got along on bottomless roads--often none at

all--through the swamps and quicksands of northern Virginia, from,

the Wilderness to Petersburg, and from Chattanooga to Atlanta and the

sea.



Following the operations of the German armies from the battle of

Gravelotte to the siege of Paris, I may, in conclusion, say that I

saw no new military principles developed, whether of strategy or

grand tactics, the movements of the different armies and corps being

dictated and governed by the same general laws that have so long

obtained, simplicity of combination and manoeuvre, and the

concentration of a numerically superior force at the vital point.



After my brief trip to Versailles, I remained in Paris till the

latter part of March.  In company with Mr. Washburn, I visited the

fortifications for the defense of the city, and found them to be

exceptionally heavy; so strong, indeed, that it would have been very

hard to carry the place by a general assault.  The Germans, knowing

the character of the works, had refrained from the sacrifice of life

that such an attempt must entail, though they well knew that many of

the forts were manned by unseasoned soldiers.  With only a combat

here and there, to tighten their lines or repulse a sortie, they

wisely preferred to wait till starvation should do the work with

little loss and absolute certainty.



The Germans were withdrawn from Paris on the 3d of March, and no

sooner were they gone than factional quarrels, which had been going

on at intervals ever since the flight of the Empress and the fall of

her regency on the 4th of September, were renewed with revolutionary

methods that eventually brought about the Commune.  Having witnessed

one or two of these outbreaks, and concluding that while such

turbulence reigned in the city it would be of little profit for me to

tarry there, I decided to devote the rest of the time I could be away

from home to travel in England, Ireland, and Scotland.  My journeys

through those countries were full of pleasure and instruction, but as

nothing I saw or did was markedly different from what has been so

often described by others, I will save the reader this part of my

experience.  I returned to America in the fall, having been absent a

little more than a year, and although I saw much abroad of absorbing

interest, both professional and general, yet I came back to my native

land with even a greater love for her, and with increased admiration

for her institutions.











End


