


PREFACE OF WILLIAM CAXTON

AFTER that I had accomplished and finished divers histories, as well of contemplation as of other historial and worldly acts of great conquerors and princes, and also certain books of ensamples and doctrine, many noble and divers gentlemen of this realm of England came and demanded me many and oft times, wherefore that I have not do made and imprint the noble history of the Saint Greal, and of the most renowned Christian king, first and chief of the three best Christian, and worthy, King Arthur, which ought most to be remembered among us Englishmen to-fore all other Christian kings; for it is notoyrly known through the universal world, that there be nine worthy and the best that ever were, that is to wit, three Paynims, three Jews, and three Christian men.  As for the Paynims, they were to-fore the Incarnation of Christ, which were named, the first Hector of Troy, of whom the history is comen both in ballad and in prose, the second Alexander the Great, and the third Julius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, of whom the histories be well known and had.  And as for the three Jews, which also were to-fore the incarnation of our Lord, of whom the first was duke Joshua which brought the children of Israel into the land of behest, the second David king of Jerusalem, and the third Judas Machabeus, of these three the Bible rehearseth all their noble histories and acts.  And since the said Incarnation <x>have been three noble Christian men, stalled and admitted through the universal world into the number of the nine best and worthy.  Of whom was first the noble Arthur, whose noble acts I purpose to write in this present book here following.  The second was Charlemain, or Charles the Great, of whom the history is had in many places, both in French and in English.  And the third and last was Godfrey of Boloine, of whose acts and life I made a book unto the excellent prince and king of noble memory, King Edward the Fourth.

The said noble gentlemen instantly required me to imprint the history of the said noble king and conqueror King Arthur, and of his knights, with the history of the Saint Greal, and of the death and ending of the said Arthur; affirming that I ought rather to imprint his acts and noble feats, than of Godfrey of Boloine, or any of the other eight, considering that he was a man born within this realm, and king and emperor of the same: and that there be in French divers and many noble volumes of his acts, and also of his knights.  To whom I answered that divers men hold opinion that there was no such Arthur, and that all such books as been made of him be feigned and fables, because that some chronicles make of him no mention, nor remember him nothing, nor of his knights.  Whereto they answered, and one in special said, that in him that should say or think that there was never such a king called Arthur might well be aretted great folly and blindness.  For he said that there were many evidences of the contrary.  First ye may see his sepulchre in the monastery of Glastonbury.  And also in Policronicon, in the fifth book the sixth chapter, and in the seventh book the twenty-third chapter, where his body was buried, and after found, and translated into the said monastery.  Ye shall see also in the history of Bochas, in his book De Casu Principum, part of his noble <xi>acts, and also of his fall.  Also Galfridus in his British book recounteth his life: and in divers places of England many remembrances be yet of him, and shall remain perpetually, and also of his knights.  First in the abbey of Westminster, at St. Edward's shrine, remaineth the print of his seal in red wax closed in beryl, in which is written, Patricius Arthurus Britannie, Gallie, Germanie, Dacie, Imperator.  Item in the castle of Dover ye may see Gawaine's skull, and Cradok's mantle: at Winchester the Round Table: in other places Launcelot's sword and many other things.  Then all these things considered, there can no man reasonably gainsay but there was a king of this land named Arthur.  For in all places, Christian and heathen, he is reputed and taken for one of the nine worthy, and the first of the three Christian men.  And also, he is more spoken of beyond the sea, more books made of his noble acts, than there be in England, as well in Dutch, Italian, Spanish, and Greekish, as in French.  And yet of record remain in witness of him in Wales, in the town of Camelot, the great stones and the marvellous works of iron lying under the ground, and royal vaults, which divers now living have seen.  Wherefore it is a marvel why he is no more renowned in his own country, save only it accordeth to the Word of God, which saith that no man is accepted for a prophet in his own country.

Then all these things aforesaid alleged, I could not well deny but that there was such a noble king named Arthur, and reputed one of the nine worthy, and first and chief of the Christian men.  And many noble volumes be made of him and of his noble knights in French, which I have seen and read beyond the sea, which be not had in our maternal tongue.  But in Welsh be many and also in French, and some in English but nowhere nigh all.  Wherefore, such as have late been drawn out briefly into English I have after the simple conning that God hath sent to me, under <xii>the favour and correction of all noble lords and gentlemen, enprised to imprint a book of the noble histories of the said King Arthur, and of certain of his knights, after a copy unto me delivered, which copy Sir Thomas Malorye did take out of certain books of French, and reduced it into English.  And I, according to my copy, have done set it in imprint, to the intent that noble men may see and learn the noble acts of chivalry, the gentle and virtuous deeds that some knights used in those days, by which they came to honour, and how they that were vicious were punished and oft put to shame and rebuke; humbly beseeching all noble lords and ladies, with all other estates of what estate or degree they been of, that shall see and read in this said book and work, that they take the good and honest acts in their remembrance, and to follow the same.  Wherein they shall find many joyous and pleasant histories, and noble and renowned acts of humanity, gentleness, and chivalry.  For herein may be seen noble chivalry, courtesy, humanity, friendliness, hardiness, love, friendship, cowardice, murder, hate, virtue, and sin. Do after the good and leave the evil, and it shall bring you to good fame and renown.  And for to pass the time this book shall be pleasant to read in, but for to give faith and belief that all is true that is contained herein, ye be at your liberty: but all is written for our doctrine, and for to beware that we fall not to vice nor sin, but to exercise and follow virtue, by which we may come and attain to good fame and renown in this life, and after this short and transitory life to come unto everlasting bliss in heaven; the which He grant us that reigneth in heaven, the blessed Trinity.  Amen.

Then to proceed forth in this said book, which I direct unto all noble princes, lords and ladies, gentlemen or gentlewomen, that desire to read or hear read of the noble and joyous history of the great conqueror and excellent <xiii>king, King Arthur, sometime king of this noble realm, then called Britain; I, William Caxton, simple person, present this book following, which I have enprised to imprint: and treateth of the noble acts, feats of arms of chivalry, prowess, hardiness, humanity, love, courtesy, and very gentleness, with many wonderful histories and adventures.  And for to understand briefly the content of this volume, I have divided it into XXI Books, and every book chaptered, as hereafter shall by God's grace follow.  The First Book shall treat how Uther Pendragon gat the noble conqueror King Arthur, and containeth xxviii chapters.  The Second Book treateth of Balin the noble knight, and containeth xix chapters.  The Third Book treateth of the marriage of King Arthur to Queen Guenever, with other matters, and containeth xv chapters.  The Fourth Book, how Merlin was assotted, and of war made to King Arthur, and containeth xxix chapters.  The Fifth Book treateth of the conquest of Lucius the emperor, and containeth xii chapters.  The Sixth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and Sir Lionel, and marvellous adventures, and containeth xviii chapters.  The Seventh Book treateth of a noble knight called Sir Gareth, and named by Sir Kay Beaumains, and containeth xxxvi chapters.  The Eighth Book treateth of the birth of Sir Tristram the noble knight, and of his acts, and containeth xli chapters.  The Ninth Book treateth of a knight named by Sir Kay Le Cote Male Taille, and also of Sir Tristram, and containeth xliv chapters.  The Tenth Book treateth of Sir Tristram, and other marvellous adventures, and containeth lxxxviii chapters.  The Eleventh Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and Sir Galahad, and containeth xiv chapters.  The Twelfth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and his madness, and containeth xiv chapters.  The Thirteenth Book treateth how Galahad came first to king Arthur's court, and the quest how the Sangreal was begun, and containeth xx chapters.  The Fourteenth Book <xiv>treateth of the quest of the Sangreal, and containeth x chapters.  The Fifteenth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot, and containeth vi chapters.  The Sixteenth Book treateth of Sir Bors and Sir Lionel his brother, and containeth xvii chapters.  The Seventeenth Book treateth of the Sangreal, and containeth xxiii chapters.  The Eighteenth Book treateth of Sir Launcelot and the queen, and containeth xxv chapters.  The Nineteenth Book treateth of Queen Guenever and Launcelot, and containeth xiii chapters.  The Twentieth Book treateth of the piteous death of Arthur, and containeth xxii chapters.  The Twenty-first Book treateth of his last departing, and how Sir Launcelot came to revenge his death, and containeth xiii chapters.  The sum is twenty-one books, which contain the sum of five hundred and seven chapters, as more plainly shall follow hereafter. 