
The Vested Interests and the Common Man 
by Thorstein Veblen 
1919 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
The Instability of Knowledge and Belief 
 
    As is true of any other point of view that may be 
characteristic of any other period of history, so also the modern 
point of view is a matter of habit. It is common to the modern 
civilised peoples only in so far as these peoples have come 
through substantially the same historical experience and have 
thereby acquired substantially the same habits of thought and 
have fallen into somewhat the same prevalent frame of mind. This 
modern point of view, therefore, is limited both in time and 
space. It is characteristic of the modern historical era and of 
such peoples as lie within the range of that peculiar 
civilisation which marks off the modern world from what has gone 
before and from what still prevails outside of its range. In 
other words, it is a trait of modern Christendom, of Occidental 
civilisation as it has run within the past few centuries. This 
general statement is not vitiated by the fact that there has been 
some slight diffusion of these modern and Western ideas outside 
of this range in recent times. 
    By historical accident it happens that the modern point of 
view has reached its maturest formulation and prevails with the 
least faltering among the French and English-speaking peoples; so 
that these peoples may be said to constitute the center of 
diffusion for that system of ideas which is called the modern 
point of view. Outward from this broad center the same range of 
ideas prevail throughout Christendom, but they prevail with less 
singleness of conviction among the peoples who are culturally 
more remote from this center; increasingly so with each farther 
remove. These others have carried over a larger remainder of the 
habits of thought of an earlier age, and have carried them over 
in a better state of preservation. It may also be that these 
others, or some of them, have acquired habits of thought of a new 
order which do not altogether fit into that system of ideas that 
is commonly spoken of as the modern point of view. That such is 
the case need imply neither praise nor blame. It is only that, by 
common usage, these remainders of ancient habits of thought and 
these newer preconceptions that do not fit into the framework of 
West-European conventional thinking are not ordinarily rated as 
intrinsic to the modern point of view. They need not therefore be 
less to the purpose as a guide and criterion of human living; it 
is only that they are alien to those purposes which are 
considered to be of prime consequence in civilised life as it is 
guided and tested by the constituent principles of the modern 
point of view. 
    What is spoken of as a point of view is always a composite 
affair; some sort of a rounded and balanced system of principles 
and standards, which are taken for granted, at least 
provisionally, and which serve as a base of reference and 
legitimation in all questions of deliberate opinion. So when any 
given usage or any line of conduct or belief is seen and approved 
from the modern point of view, it comes to the same as saying 
that these things are seen and accepted in the light of those 
principles which modern men habitually consider to be final and 
sufficient. They are principles of right, equity, propriety, 
duty, perhaps of knowledge, belief, and taste. 
    It is evident that these principles and standards of what is 
right, good, true, and beautiful, will vary from one age to 
another and from one people to another, in response to the 
varying conditions of life; inasmuch as these principles are 
always of the nature of habit; although the variation will of 
course range only within the limits of that human nature that 
finds expression in these same principles of right, good, truth, 
and beauty. So also, it will be found that something in the way 
of a common measure of truth and sufficiency runs through any 
such body of principles that are accepted as final and 
self-evident at any given time and place, -- in case this 
habitual body of principles has reached such a degree of poise 
and consistency that they can fairly be said to constitute a 
stable point of view. It is only because there is such a degree 
of consistency and such a common measure of validity among the 
commonly accepted principles of conduct and belief today, that it 
is possible to speak intelligently of the modern point of view, 
and to contrast it with any other point of view which may have 
prevailed earlier or elsewhere, as, e.g., in the Middle Ages or 
in Pagan Antiquity. 
    The Romans were given to saying. Tempora mutantur, and the 
Spanish have learned to speak indulgently in the name of 
Costumbres del pais. The common law of the English-speaking 
peoples does not coincide at all points with what was 
indefeasibly right and good in the eyes of the Romans; and still 
less do its principles countenance all the vagaries of the Mosaic 
code. Yet, each and several, in their due time and institutional 
setting, these have all been tried and found valid and have 
approved themselves as securely and eternally right and good in 
principle. 
    Evidently these principles, which so are made to serve as 
standards of validity in law and custom, knowledge and belief, 
are of the nature of canons, established rules, and have the 
authority of precedent, prescription. They have been defined by 
the attrition of use and wont and disputation, and they are 
accepted in a somewhat deliberate manner by common consent, and 
are upheld by a deliberate public opinion as to what is right and 
seemly. In the popular apprehension, and indeed in the 
apprehension of the trained jurists and scholars for the time 
being, these constituent principles of the accepted point of view 
are "fundamentally and eternally right and good." But this 
perpetuity with which they so are habitually invested in the 
popular apprehension, in their time, is evidently such a 
qualified perpetuity only as belongs to any settled outgrowth of 
use and wont. They are of an institutional character and they are 
endowed with that degree of perpetuity only that belongs to any 
institution. So soon as a marked change of circumstances comes 
on, -- a change of a sufficiently profound, enduring and 
comprehensive character, such as persistently to cross or to go 
beyond those lines of use and wont out of which these settled 
principles have emerged, -- then these principles and their 
standards of validity and finality must presently undergo a 
revision, such as to bring on a new balance of principles, 
embodying the habits of thought enforced by a new situation, and 
expressing itself in a revised scheme of authoritative use and 
wont, law and custom. In the transition from the medieval to the 
modern point of view, e. g., there is to be seen such a pervasive 
change in men's habitual outlook, answering to the compulsion of 
a new range of circumstances which then came to condition the 
daily life of the peoples of Christendom. In this mutation of the 
habitual outlook, between medieval and modern times, the contrast 
is perhaps most neatly shown in the altered standards of 
knowledge and belief, rather than in the settled domain of law 
and morals. Not that the mutation of habits which then overtook 
the Western world need have been less wide or less effectual in 
matters of conduct; but the change which has taken effect in 
science and philosophy, between the fourteenth century and the 
nineteenth, e. g., appears to have been of a more recognizable 
character, more easily defined in succinct and convincing terms. 
It has also quite generally attracted the attention of those men 
who have interested themselves in the course of historical 
events, and it has therefore become something of a commonplace in 
any standard historical survey of modern civilisation to say that 
the scheme of knowledge and belief underwent a visible change 
between the Middle Ages and modern times. 
    It will also be found true that the canons of knowledge and 
belief, the principles governing what is fact and what is 
credible, are more intimately and intrinsically involved in the 
habitual behavior of the human spirit than any factors of human 
habit in other bearings. Such is necessarily the case, because 
the principles which guide and limit knowledge and belief are the 
ways and means by which men take stock of what is to be done and 
by which they take thought of how it is to be done. It is by the 
use of their habitual canons of knowledge and belief, that men 
construct those canons of conduct which serve as guide and 
standards in practical life. Men do not pass appraisal on matters 
which lie beyond the reach of their knowledge and belief, nor do 
they formulate rules to govern the game of life beyond that 
limit. 
    So, congenitally blind persons do not build color schemes; 
nor will a man without an "ear for music" become a master of 
musical composition. So also, "the medieval mind" took no thought 
and made no provision for those later-arisen exigencies of life 
and those later-known facts of material science which lay yet 
beyond the bounds of its medieval knowledge and belief; but this 
"medieval mind" at the same time spent much thought and took many 
excellent precautions about things which have now come to be 
accounted altogether fanciful, -- things which the maturer 
insight, or perhaps the less fertile conceit, of a more 
experienced age has disowned as being palpably not in accord with 
fact. 
    That is to say, things which once were convincingly 
substantial and demonstrable, according to the best knowledge and 
belief of the medieval mind, can now no longer be discerned as 
facts, according to those canons of knowledge and belief that are 
now doing duty among modern men as conclusive standards of 
reality. Not that all persons who are born within modern times 
are thereby rendered unable to know and to believe in such 
medieval facts, e. g., as horoscopes, or witchcraft, or gentle 
birth, or the efficacy of prayer, or the divine right of kings; 
but, taken by and large, and in so far as it falls under the 
control of the modern point of view, the deliberate consensus of 
knowledge and belief now runs to the effect that these and other 
imponderables like them no longer belong among ascertained or 
ascertainable facts; but that they are on the other hand wholly 
illusory conceits, traceable to a mistaken point of view 
prevalent in that earlier and cruder age. 
    The principles governing knowledge and belief at any given 
time are primary and pervasive, beyond any others, in that they 
underlie all human deliberation and comprise the necessary 
elements of all human logic. But it is also to be noted that 
these canons of knowledge and belief are more immediately exposed 
to revision and correction by experience than the principles of 
law and morals. So soon as the conditions of life shift and 
change in any appreciable degree, experience will enforce a 
revision of the habitual standards of actuality and credibility, 
because of the habitual and increasingly obvious failure of what 
has before habitually been regarded as an ascertained fact. 
Things which, under the ancient canons of knowledge, have 
habitually been regarded as known facts, -- as, e. g., witchcraft 
or the action of bodies at a distance, -- will under altered 
circumstances prove themselves by experience to have only a 
supposititious reality. 
    Any knowledge that runs in such out-worn terms turns out to 
be futile, misleading, meaningless; and the habit of imputing 
qualities and behavior of this kind to everyday facts will then 
fall into disuse, progressively as experience continues to bring 
home the futility of all that kind of imputation. And presently 
the habit of perceiving that class of qualities and behavior in 
the known facts is therefore gradually lost. So also, in due time 
the observances and the precautions and provisions embodied in 
law and custom for the preservation or the control of these lost 
imponderables will also fall into disuse and disappear out of the 
scheme of institutions, by way of becoming dead letter or by 
abrogation. Particularly will such a loss of belief and insight, 
and the consequent loss of those imponderables whose ground has 
thereby gone out from under them, take effect with the passing of 
generations. 
    An Imponderable is an article of make-believe which has 
become axiomatic by force of settled habit. It can accordingly 
cease to be an Imponderable by a course of unsettling habit. 
Those elders in whom the ancient habits of faith and insight have 
been ingrained, and in whose knowledge and belief the 
imponderables in question have therefore had a vital reality, 
will presently fall away; and the new generation whose experience 
has run on other lines are in a fair way to lose these articles 
of faith and in. sight, by disuse. It is a case of obsolescence 
by habitual disuse. And the habitual disuse which so allows the 
ancient canons of knowledge and belief to fall away, and which 
thereby cuts the ground from under the traditional system of law 
and custom, is re-enforced by the advancing discipline of a new 
order of experience, which exacts an habitual apprehension of 
workday facts in terms of a different kind and thereby brings on 
a revaluation and revision of the traditional rules governing 
human relations. The new terms of workday knowledge and belief, 
which do not conform to the ancient canons, go to enforce and 
stabilise new canons and standards, of a character alien to the 
traditional point of view. It is, in other words, a case of 
obsolescence by displacement as well as by habitual disuse. 
    This unsettling discipline that is brought to bear by workday 
experience is chiefly and most immediately the discipline 
exercised by the material conditions of life, the exigencies that 
beset men in their everyday dealings with the material means of 
life; inasmuch as these material facts are insistent and 
uncompromising. And the scope and method of knowledge and belief 
which is forced on men in their everyday material concerns will 
unavoidably, by habitual use, extend to other matters as well; so 
as also to affect the scope and method of knowledge and belief in 
all that concerns those imponderable facts which lie outside the 
immediate range of material experience. It results that, the 
further course of in changing habituation, those imponderable 
relations, conventions, claims and perquisites, that make up the 
time-worn system of law and custom will unavoidably also be 
brought under review and will be revised and reorganised in the 
light of the same new principles of validity that are found to be 
sufficient in dealing with material facts. 
    Given time and a sufficiently exacting run of experience, and 
it will follow necessarily that much the same standards of truth 
and finality will come to govern men's knowledge and valuation of 
facts throughout; whether the facts in question lie in the domain 
of material things or in the domain of those imponderable 
conventions and preconceptions that decide what is right and 
proper in human intercourse. It follows necessarily, because the 
same persons, bent by the same discipline and habituation, take 
stock of both and are required to get along with both during the 
same lifetime. More or less rigorously the same scope and method 
of knowledge and valuation will control the thinking of the same 
individuals throughout; at least to the extent that any given 
article of faith and usage which is palpably at cross purposes 
with this main intellectual bent will soon begin to seem 
immaterial and irrelevant and will tend to become obsolete by 
neglect. 
    Such has always been the fate which overtakes any notable 
articles of faith and usage that belong to a bygone point of 
view. Any established system of law and order will remain 
securely stable only on condition that it he kept in line or 
brought into line to conform with those canons of validity that 
have the vogue for the time being; and the vogue is a matter of 
habits of thought ingrained by everyday experience. And the moral 
is that any established system of law and custom is due to 
undergo a revision of its constituent principles so soon as a new 
order of economic life has had time materially to affect the 
community's habits of thought. But all the while the changeless 
native proclivities of the race will assert themselves in some 
measure in any eventual revision of the received institutional 
system; and always they will stand ready eventually to break the 
ordered scheme of things into a paralytic mass of confusion if it 
can not be bent into some passable degree of congruity with the 
paramount native needs of life. 
 
    What is likely to arrest the attention of any student of the 
modern era from the outset is the peculiar character of its 
industry and of its intellectual outlook; particularly the scope 
and method of modern science and technology. The intellectual 
life of modern Europe and its cultural dependencies differs 
notably from what has gone before. There is all about it an air 
of matter-of-fact both in its technology and in its science; 
which culminates in a "mechanistic conception" of all those 
things with which scientific inquiry is concerned and in the 
light of which many of the dread realities of the Middle Ages 
look like superfluous make-believe. 
    But it has been only during the later decades of the modern 
era -- during that time interval that might fairly be called the 
post-modern era -- that this mechanistic conception of things has 
begun seriously to affect the current system of knowledge and 
belief; and it has not hitherto seriously taken effect except in 
technology and in the material sciences. So that it has not 
hitherto seriously invaded the established scheme of 
institutional arrangements, the system of law and custom, which 
governs the relations of men to one another and defines their 
mutual rights, obligations, advantages and disabilities. But it 
should reasonably be expected that this established system of 
rights, duties, proprieties and disabilities will also in due 
time come in for something in the way of a revision, to bring it 
all more nearly into congruity with that matter-of-fact 
conception of things that lies at the root of the late-modern 
civilisation. 
    The constituent principles of the established system of law 
and custom are of the nature of imponderables, of course; but 
they are imponderables which have been conceived and formulated 
in terms of a different order from those that are convincing to 
the twentieth-century scientists and engineers. Whereas the line 
of advance of the scientists and engineers, dominated by their 
mechanistic conception of things, appears to be the main line of 
march for modern civilisation. It should seem reasonable to 
expect, therefore, that the scheme of law and custom will also 
fall into line with this mechanistic conception that appears to 
mark the apex of growth in modern intellectual life. But hitherto 
the "due time" needed for the adjustment has apparently not been 
had, or perhaps the experience which drives men in the direction 
of a mechanistic conception of all things has not hitherto been 
driving them hard enough or unremittingly enough to carry such a 
revision of ideas out in the system of law and custom. The modern 
point of view in matters of law and custom appears to be somewhat 
in arrears, as measured by the later advance in science and 
technology. 
    But just now the attention of thoughtful men centers on 
questions of practical concern, questions of law and usage, 
brought to a focus by the flagrant miscarriage of that 
organisation of Christendom that has brought the War upon the 
civilised nations. The paramount question just now is, what to do 
to save the civilised nations from irretrievable disaster, and 
what further may be accomplished by taking thought so that no 
similar epoch of calamities shall be put in train for the next 
generation. It is realised that there must be something in the 
way of a "reconstruction" of the scheme of things; and it is also 
realised, though more dimly, that the reconstruction must be 
carried out with a view to the security of life under such 
conditions as men will put up with, rather than with a view to 
the impeccable preservation of the received scheme of law and 
custom. All of which is only saying that the constituent 
principles of the modern point of view are to be taken under 
advisement, reviewed and -- conceivably -- revised and brought 
into line, in so far as these principles are constituent elements 
of that received scheme of law and custom that is spoken of as 
the status quo. It is the status quo in respect of law and 
custom, not in respect of science and technology or of knowledge 
and belief, that is to be brought under review. Law and custom, 
it is believed, may be revised to meet the requirements of 
civilised men's knowledge and belief; but no man of sound mind 
hopes to revise the modern system of knowledge and belief so as 
to bring it all into conformity with the time-worn scheme of law 
and custom of the status quo. 
    Therefore the bearing of this stabilised modern point of 
view, stabilised in the eighteenth century, on these questions of 
practical concern is of present interest, -- its practical value 
as ground for a reasonably hopeful reconstruction of the 
war-shattered scheme of use and wont; its possible serviceability 
as a basis of enduring settlement; as well as the share which its 
constituent principles have had in the creation of that status 
quo out of which this epoch of calamities has been precipitated. 
The status quo ante, in which the roots of this growth of 
misfortunes and impossibilities are to be found, lies within the 
modern era, of course, and it is nowise to be decried as an 
alien, or even as an unforeseen, outgrowth of this modern era. By 
and large, this eighteenth-century stabilised modern point of 
view has governed men's dealings within this era, and its 
constituent principles of right and honest living must therefore, 
presumptively, be held answerable for the disastrous event of it 
all, -- at least to the extent that they have permissively 
countenanced the growth of those sinister conditions which have 
now ripened into a state of world-wide shame and confusion. 
    How and how far is this modern point of view, this body of 
legal and moral principles established in the eighteenth century, 
to be accounted an accessory to this crime? And if it be argued 
that this complication of atrocities has come on, not because of 
these principles of conduct which are so dear to civilised men 
and so blameless in their sight, but only in spite of them; then, 
what is the particular weakness or shortcoming inherent in this 
body of principles which has allowed such a growth of malignant 
conditions to go on and gather head? If the modern point of view, 
these settled principles of conduct by which modern men 
collectively are actuated in what they will do and in what they 
will permit, -- if these canons and standards of clean and honest 
living have proved to be a fatal snare; then it becomes an urgent 
question: Is it safe, or sane to go into the future by the light 
of these same established canons of right, equity, and propriety 
that so have been tried and found wanting? 
    Perhaps the question should rather take the less didactic 
form: Will the present experience of calamities induce men to 
revise these established principles of conduct, and the 
specifications of the code based on them, so effectually as to 
guard against any chance of return to the same desperate 
situation in the calculable future? Can the discipline of recent 
experience and the insight bred by the new order of knowledge and 
belief, re-enforced by the shock of the present miscarriage, be 
counted on to bring such a revision of these principles of law 
and custom as will preclude a return to that status quo ante from 
which this miscarriage of civilisation has resulted? The latter 
question is more to the point. History teaches that men, taken 
collectively, learn by habituation rather than by precept and 
reflection; particularly as touches those underlying principles 
of truth and validity on which the effectual scheme of law and 
custom finally rests. 
    In the last analysis it resolves itself into a question as to 
how and how far the habituation of the recent past, mobilised by 
the shock of the present conjuncture, will have affected the 
frame of mind of the common man in these civilised countries; for 
in the last analysis and with due allowance for a margin of 
tolerance it is the frame of mind of the common man that makes 
the foundation of society in the modern world; even though the 
elder statesmen continue to direct its motions from day to day by 
the light of those principles that were found good some time 
before yesterday. And the fortunes of the civilised world, for 
good or ill, have come to turn on the deeds of commission and of 
omission of these advanced peoples among whom the frame of mind 
of the common man is the finally conditioning circumstance in 
what may safely be done or left undone. The advice and consent of 
the common run has latterly come to be indispensable to the 
conduct of affairs among civilised men, somewhat in the same 
degree in which the community is to be accounted a civilised 
people. It is indispensable at least in a permissive way, at 
least to the extent that no line of policy can long be pursued 
successfully without the permissive tolerance of the common run; 
and the margin of tolerance in the case appears to be narrower 
the more alert and the more matter-of-fact the frame of mind of 
the common man. 
 
Chapter 2 
 
The Stability of Law and Custom 
 
    In so far as concerns the present question, that is to say as 
regards those standards and principles which underlie the 
established system of law and custom, the modern point of view 
was stabilised and given a definitive formulation in the 
eighteenth century; and in so far as concerns the subsequent 
conduct of practical affairs, its constituent principles have 
stood over without material change or revision since that time. 
So that for practical purposes it is fair to say that the modern 
point of view is now some one hundred and fifty years old. 
    It will not do to say that it is that much behind the times; 
because its time-worn standards of truth and validity are a very 
material factor in the makeup of "our time." That such is the 
case is due in great part to the fact that this body of 
principles was stabilised at that time and that they have 
therefore stood over intact, in spite of other changes that have 
taken place. It is only that the principles which had been tested 
and found good under the conditions of life in the modern era up 
to that time were at that time held fast, canvassed, defined, 
approved, and stabilised by being reduced to documentary form. In 
some sense they were then written into the constitution of 
civilised society, and they have continued to make up the nucleus 
of the document from that time forth; and so they have become 
inflexible, after the fashion of written constitutions. 
    In the sight of those generations who so achieved the 
definite acceptance of these enlightened modern principles, and 
who finally made good their formal installation in law and usage 
as self-balanced canons of human conduct, the principles which 
they so arrived at had all the sanction of Natural Law, -- 
impersonal, dispassionate, indefeasible and immutable; 
fundamentally and eternally right and good. That generation of 
men held "these truths to be self-evident"; and they have 
continued so to be held since that epoch by all those peoples who 
make up the effectual body of modern civilisation. And the 
backward peoples, those others who have since then been coming 
into line and making their claim to a place in the scheme of 
modern civilised life, have also successively been accepting and 
(passably) assimilating the same enlightened principles of clean 
and honest living. Christendom, as a going concern of civilised 
peoples, has continued to regulate its affairs by the help of 
these principles, which are still held to be a competent 
formulation of the aspirations of civilised mankind. So that 
these modern principles of the eighteenth century, stabilised in 
documentary form a hundred and fifty years ago, have stood over 
in immutable perfection until our time,a monument more enduring 
than brass. 
    These principles are of the nature of habits of thought, of 
course; and it is the nature of habits of thought forever to 
shift and change in response to the changing impact of 
experience, since they are creatures of habituation. But inasmuch 
as they have once been stabilised in a thoroughly competent 
fashion in the eighteenth century, and have been drafted into 
finished documentary form, they have been enabled to stand over 
unimpaired into the present with all that weight and stability 
that a well-devised documentary formulation will give. It is 
true, so far as regards the conditions of civilised life during 
the interval that has passed since these modern principles of law 
and custom took on their settled shape in the eighteenth century, 
it has been a period of unexampled change, -- swift, varied, 
profound and extensive beyond example. And it follows of 
necessity that the principles of conduct which were approved and 
stabilised in the eighteenth century, under the driving 
exigencies of that age, have not altogether escaped the 
complications of changing circumstances. They have at least come 
in for some shrewd interpretation in the course of the nineteenth 
century. There have been refinements of definition, extensions of 
application, scrutiny and exposition of implications, as new 
exigencies have arisen and the established canons have been 
required to cover unforeseen contingencies; but it has all been 
done with the explicit reservation that no material innovation 
shall be allowed to touch the legacy of modern principles handed 
down from the eighteenth century, and that the vital system of 
Natural Rights installed in the eighteenth century must not be 
deranged at any point or at any cost. 
    It is scarcely necessary to describe this modern system of 
principles that still continues to govern human intercourse among 
the civilised peoples, or to attempt an exposition of its 
constituent articles. It is all to be had in exemplary form, ably 
incorporated in such familiar documents as the American 
Declaration of Independence, the French Declaration of the Rights 
of Man, and the American Constitution; and it is all to be found 
set forth with all the circumstance of philosophical and juristic 
scholarship in the best work of such writers as John Locke. 
Montesquieu. Adam Smith, or Blackstone. It has all been 
sufficiently canvassed, through all its dips, spurs and angles, 
by the most competent authorities, who have brought their best 
will and their best abilities to bear on its elucidation at every 
point, with full documentation. Besides which, there is no need 
of recondite exposition for the present purpose; since all that 
is required by the present argument is such a degree of 
information on these matters as is familiar to English-speaking 
persons by common notoriety. 
    At the same time it may be to the purpose to call to mind 
that this secular profession of faith enters creatively into that 
established order of things which has now fallen into a state of 
havoc because it does not meet the requirements of the new order. 
This eighteenth-century modern plan specifically makes provision 
for certain untoward rights, perquisites and disabilities which 
have, in the course of time and shifting circumstance, become 
incompatible with continued peace on earth and good-will among 
men. 
    There are two main counts included in this modern -- 
eighteenth-century -- plan, which appear unremittingly to make 
for discomfort and dissension under the conditions offered by the 
New Order of things: -- National Ambition, and the Vested Rights 
of ownership. Neither of the two need be condemned as being 
intrinsically mischievous. Indeed, it may be true, as has often 
been argued, that both have served a good purpose in their due 
time and place; at least there is no need of arguing the 
contrary. Both belong in the settled order of civilised life; and 
both alike are countenanced by those principles of truth, equity 
and validity that go to make up the modern point of view. It is 
only that now, as things have been turning during the later one 
hundred years, both of these immemorially modern rights of man 
have come to yield a net return of hardship and ill-will for all 
those peoples who have bound up their fortunes with that kind of 
enterprise. The case might be stated to this effect, that the 
fault lies not in the nature of these untoward institutions of 
national sovereignty and vested rights, nor in those principles 
of self-help which underlie them, but only in those latter-day 
facts which stubbornly refuse to fall into such lines as these 
forms of human enterprise require for their perfect and 
beneficent working. The facts, particularly the facts of industry 
and science, have outrun these provisions of law and custom; and 
so the scheme of things has got out of joint by that much, 
through no inherent weakness in the underlying principles of law 
and custom. The ancient and honorable principles of self-help are 
as sound as ever; it is only that the facts have quite 
unwarrantably not remained the same. The fault lies in the 
latter-day facts, which have not continued in suitable shape. 
Such, in effect, has been the view habitually spoken for by many 
thoughtful persons of a conservative turn, who take an interest 
in concerting measures for holding fast that which once was good, 
in the face of distasteful facts. 
    The vested right of ownership in all kinds of property has 
the sanction of the time-honored principles of individual 
self-direction, equal opportunity, free contract, security of 
earnings and belongings, self-help, in the simple and honest 
meaning of the word. It would be quite bootless to find fault 
with these reasonable principles of tolerance and security. Their 
definitive acceptance and stabilisation in the eighteenth century 
are among the illustrious achievements of Western civilisation; 
and their roots lie deep in the native wisdom of mankind. They 
are obvious corollaries under the rule of Live and let live, -- 
an Accidental version of the Golden Rule. Yet in practical effect 
those vested rights which rest blamelessly on these reasonable 
canons of tolerance and good faith have today become the focus of 
vexation and misery in the life of the civilised peoples. 
Circumstances have changed to such effect that provisions which 
were once framed to uphold a system of neighborly good-will have 
now begun to run counter to one another and are working mischief 
to the common good. 
    Any impartial survey of the past one-hundred-fifty years will 
show that the constituent principles of this modern point of view 
governing the mutual rights and obligations of men within the 
civilised nations have held their ground, on the whole, without 
material net gain or net loss. It is the ground of Natural 
Rights, of self-help and free bargaining. Civil rights and the 
perquisites and obligations of ownership have remained 
substantially intact over this interval of a hundred and fifty 
years, but with some slight advance in the way of Live and let 
live at certain points, and some slight retrenchment at other 
points. So far as regards the formal stipulations, in law and 
custom, the balance of class interests within these countries 
has, on the whole, not been seriously disturbed. In this system 
of Natural Rights, as it has worked out in practice, the rights 
of ownership are paramount; largely because the other personal 
rights in the case have come to be a matter of course and so have 
ceased to hold men's attention. 
    So, in the matter of the franchise, e.g., the legal 
provisions more nearly meet the popular ideals of the modern 
point of view today than ever before. An the other hand the 
guiding principles in the case at certain other points have 
undergone a certain refinement of interpretation with a view to 
greater ease and security for trade and investment; and there 
has, in effect, been some slight abridgement of the freedom of 
combination and concerted action at any point where an unguarded 
exercise of such freedom would hamper trade or curtail the 
profits of business, -- for the modern era has turned out to be 
an era of business enterprise, dominated by the paramount claims 
of trade and investment. In point of formal requirements, these 
restrictions imposed on concerted action "in restraint of trade" 
fall in equal measure on the vested interests engaged in business 
and on the working population engaged in industry. So that the 
measures taken to safeguard the natural rights of ownership apply 
with equal force to those who own and those who do not. "The 
majestic equality of the law forbids the rich as well as the poor 
to sleep under bridges or to beg on the street corners." But it 
has turned out on trial that the vested interests of business are 
not seriously hampered by these restrictions; inasmuch as any 
formal restriction on any concerted action between the owners of 
such vested interests can always be got around by a formal 
coalition of ownership in the shape of a corporation. The 
extensive resort to corporate combination of ownership, which is 
so marked a feature of the nineteenth century, was not foreseen 
and was not taken into account in the eighteenth century, when 
the constituent principles of the modern point of view found 
their way into the common law. The system of Natural Rights is a 
system of personal rights, among which the rights of ownership 
are paramount; and among the rights of ownership is the right of 
free disposal and security of ownership and of credit 
obligations. 
    The same line of evasion is not available in the same degree 
for concerted action between persons who own nothing. Still, in 
neither case, neither as regards the owners of the country's 
wealth nor as regards the common man, can these restrictions on 
personal freedom of action be said to be a serious burden. And 
any slight mutilation or abridgement of the rule of self-help in 
their economic relations has been offset by an increasingly broad 
and liberal construction of the principles of self-direction and 
equality among men in their civil capacity and their personal 
relations. Indeed, the increasingly exacting temper of the common 
man in these countries during this period has made such an 
outcome unavoidable. By and large, in its formal vindication of 
personal liberty and equality before the law, the modern point of 
view has with singular consistency remained intact in the shape 
in which its principles were stabilised in the eighteenth 
century, in spite of changing circumstances. In point of formal 
compliance with their demands, the enlightened ideals of the 
eighteenth century are, no doubt, more commonly realised in 
practice today than at any earlier period. So that the modern 
civilised countries are now, in point of legal form and perhaps 
also in practical effect, more nearly a body of ungraded and 
masterless men than any earlier generation has known how to be. 
 
    In this modern era, as well as elsewhere and in other times, 
the circumstances that make for change and reconstruction have 
been chiefly the material circumstances of everyday life, -- 
circumstances affecting the ordinary state of industry and 
ordinary intercourse. These material circumstances have changed 
notably during the modern era. There has been a progressive 
change in the state of the industrial arts, which has materially 
altered the scope and method of industry and the conditions under 
which men live in all the civilised countries. Accordingly, as a 
point of comparison, it will be to the purpose to call to mind 
what were the material circumstances, and more particularly the 
state of the industrial arts, which underlay and gave character 
to the modern point of view at the period when its constituent 
principles were found good and worked out as a stable and 
articulate system, in the shape in which they have continued to 
be held since then. 
    The material conditions of industry, trade and daily life 
during the period of transition and approach to this modern 
ground created that frame of mind which we call the modern point 
of view and dictated that reconstruction of institutional 
arrangements which has been worked out under its guidance. 
Therefore the economic situation which so underlay and 
conditioned this modern point of view at the period when it was 
given its stable form becomes the necessary point of departure 
for any argument bearing on the changes that have been going 
forward since then, or on any prospective reconstruction that may 
be due to follow from these changed conditions in the calculable 
future. An this head, the students of history are in a singularly 
fortunate position. The whole case is set forth in the works of 
Adam Smith, with a comprehension and lucidity which no longer 
calls for praise. Beyond all other men Adam Smith is the approved 
and faithful spokesman of this modern point of view in all that 
concerns the economic situation which it assumes as its material 
ground; and his description of the state of civilised society, 
trade and industry, as he saw it in his time and as he wished it 
to stand over into the future, is to be taken without abatement 
as a competent exposition of those material conditions which were 
then conceived to underlie civilised society and to dictate the 
only sound reconstruction of civil and economic institutions 
according to the modern plan. 
    But like other men. Adam Smith was a creature of his own 
time, and what he has to say applies to the state of things as he 
saw them. What he describes and inquires into is that state of 
things which was to him the "historical present"; which always 
signifies the recent past, -- that is to say, the past as it had 
come under his observation and as it had shaped his outlook. 
    As it is conventionally dated, the Industrial Revolution took 
effect within Adam Smith's active lifetime, and some of its more 
significant beginnings passed immediately under his eyes; indeed, 
it is related that he took an active personal interest in at 
least one of the epoch-making mechanical inventions from which 
the era of the machine industry takes its date. Yet the 
Industrial Revolution does not lie within Adam Smith's 
"historical present," nor does his system of economic doctrines 
make provision for any of its peculiar issues. What he has to say 
on the mechanics of industry is conceived in terms derived from 
an older order of things than that machine industry which was 
beginning to get under way in his own life-time; and all his 
illustrative instances and arguments on trade and industry are 
also such as would apply to the state of things that was passing, 
but they are not drawn with any view to that new order which was 
then coming on in the world of business enterprise. 
    The economic situation contemplated by Adam Smith as the 
natural (and ultimate) state of industry and trade in any 
enlightened society, conducted on sane and sound lines according 
to the natural order of human relations, was of a simple 
structure and may be drawn in few lines, -- neglecting such minor 
extensions and exceptions as would properly be taken account of 
in any exhaustive description. Industry is conceived to be of the 
nature of handicraft; not of the nature of mechanical 
engineering, such as it has in effect and progressively come to 
be since his time. It is described as a matter of workmanlike 
labor, "and of the skill, dexterity and judgment with which it is 
commonly applied." It is a question of the skilled workman and 
his use of tools. Mechanical inventions are "labor-saving 
devices," which "facilitate and abridge labor." The material 
equipment is the ways and means by manipulation of which the 
workman gets his work done. "Capital stock" is spoken of as 
savings parsimoniously accumulated out of the past industry of 
its owner, or out of the industry of those persons from whom he 
has legally acquired it by inheritance or in exchange for the 
products of his own labor. Business is of the nature of "petty 
trade" and the business man is a "middle man" who is employed for 
a livelihood in the distribution of goods to the consumers. Trade 
is subsidiary to industry, and money is a vehicle designed to be 
used for the distribution of goods. Credit is an expedient of the 
needy; a dubious expedient. Profits (including interest) are 
justified as a reasonable remuneration for productive work done, 
and for the labor-saving use of property derived from the owner's 
past labor. The efforts of masters and workmen alike are 
conceived to be bent on turning out the largest and most 
serviceable output of goods; and prices are competitively 
determined by the labor-cost of the goods. 
    Like other men Adam Smith did not see into the future beyond 
what was calculable on the data given by his own historical 
present; and in his time that later and greater era of investment 
and financial enterprise which has made industry subsidiary to 
business was only beginning to get under way and only obscurely 
so. So that he was still able to think of commercial enterprise 
as a middle-man's traffic in merchandise, subsidiary to a 
small-scale industry on the order of handicraft, and due to an 
assumed propensity in men "to truck, barter, and exchange one 
thing for another." And so much as he could not help seeing of 
the new order of business enterprise which was coming in was not 
rated by him as a sane outgrowth of that system of Natural 
Liberty for which he spoke and about which his best affections 
gathered. In all this he was at one with his thoughtful 
contemporaries. 
    That generation of public-spirited men went, perforce, on the 
scant data afforded by their own historical present, the economic 
situation as they saw it in the perspective and with the 
preconceptions of their own time; and to them it was accordingly 
plain that when all unreasonable restrictions are taken away, 
"the obvious and simple system of natural liberty establishes 
itself of its own accord." To this "natural" plan of free 
workmanship and free trade all restraint or retardation by 
collusion among business men was wholly obnoxious, and all 
collusive control of industry or of the market was accordingly 
execrated as unnatural and subversive. It is true, there were 
even then some appreciable beginnings of coercion and retardation 
-- lowering of wages and limitation of output -- by collusion 
between owners and employers who should by nature have been 
competitive producers of an unrestrained output of goods and 
services according to the principles of that modern point of view 
which animated Adam Smith and his generation; but coercion and 
unearned gain by a combination of ownership, of the now familiar 
corporate type, was virtually unknown in his time. So Adam Smith 
saw and denounced the dangers of unfair combination between 
"masters" for the exploitation of their workmen, but the modern 
use of credit and corporation finance for the collective control 
of the labor market and the goods market of course does not come 
within his horizon and does not engage his attention. 
    So also Adam Smith knows and denounces the use of protective 
tariffs for private gain. That means of pilfering was familiar 
enough in his time. But he spends little indignation on the 
equally nefarious use of the national establishment for 
safe-guarding and augmenting the profits of traders, 
concessionaires, investors and creditors in foreign parts at the 
cost of the home community. That method of taxing the common man 
for the benefit of the vested interests has also grown to more 
formidable proportions since his time. The constituent principles 
of the modern point of view, as accepted advisedly or by 
oversight by Adam Smith and his generation, supply all the 
legitimation required for this larcenous use of the national 
establishment; but the means of communication were still too 
scant, and the larger use of credit was too nearly untried, as 
contrasted with what has at a later date gone to make the 
commercial ground and incentive of imperialist politics. 
Therefore the imperialist policies of public enterprise for 
private gain also do not come greatly within the range of Adam 
Smith's vision of the future, nor does the "obvious and simple 
system" on which he and his generation of thoughtful men take 
their stand comprise anything like explicit declarations for or 
against this later-matured chicane of the gentlemen-investors who 
have been managing the affairs of the civilised nations. 
 
    Adam Smith's work and life-time falls in with the high tide 
of eighteenth-century insight and understanding, and it marks an 
epoch of spiritual achievement and stabilisation in civil 
institutions, as well as in those principles of conduct that have 
governed economic rights and relations since that date. But it 
marks also the beginning of a new order in the state of the 
industrial arts as well as in those material sciences which come 
directly in touch with the industrial arts and which take their 
logical bent from the same range of tangible experience. So it 
happens that this modern point of view reached a stable and 
symmetrical finality about the same date when the New Order of 
experience and insight was beginning to bend men's habits of 
thought into lines that run at cross purposes with this same 
stabilised point of view. It is in the ways and means of industry 
and in the material sciences that the new order of knowledge and 
belief first comes into evidence; because it is in this domain of 
workday facts that men's experience began about that time to take 
a decisive turn at variance with the received canons. A 
mechanistic conception of things began to displace those 
essentially romantic notions of untrammeled initiative and 
rationality that governed the intellectual life of the era of 
enlightenment which was then drawing to a close. 
    It is logically due to follow that the same general 
principles of knowledge and validity will presently undergo a 
revision of the same character where they have to do with those 
imponderable facts of human conduct and those conventions of law 
and custom that govern the duties and obligations of men in 
society. Here and now as elsewhere and in other times the 
stubborn teaching that comes of men's experience with the 
tangible facts of industry should confidently be counted on to 
make the outcome, so as to bring on a corresponding revision of 
what is right and good in that world of make-believe that always 
underlies any established system of law and custom. The material 
exigencies of the state of industry are unavoidable, and in great 
part unbending; and the economic conditions which follow 
immediately from these exigencies imposed by the ways and means 
of industry are only less uncompromising than the mechanical 
facts of industry itself. And the men who live under the rule of 
these economic exigencies are constrained to make their peace 
with them, to enter into such working arrangements with one 
another as these unbending conditions of the state of the 
industrial arts will tolerate, and to cast their system of 
imponderables on lines which can be understood by the same men 
who understand the industrial arts and the system of material 
science which underlies the industrial arts. So that, in due 
course, the accredited schedule of legal and moral rights, 
perquisites and obligations will also presently be brought into 
passable consistency with the ways and means whereby the 
community gets its living. 
    But it is also logically to be expected that any revision of 
the established rights, obligations, perquisites and vested 
interests will trail along behind the change which has taken 
effect in the material circumstances of the community and in the 
community's knowledge and belief with regard to these material 
circumstances; since any such revision of ancient rights and 
perquisites will necessarily be consequent upon and conditioned 
by that change, and since the axioms of law and custom that 
underlie any established schedule of rights and perquisites are 
always of the nature of make-believe; and the make-believe is 
necessarily built up out of conceptions derived from the 
accustomed range of knowledge and belief. 
    Out-worn axioms of this make-believe order become 
superstitions when the scope and method of workday knowledge has 
outgrown that particular range of preconceptions out of which 
these make-believe axioms are constructed; which comes to saying 
that the underlying principles of the system of law and morals 
are therewith caught in a process of obsolescence, -- 
"depreciation by supersession and disuse." By a figure of speech 
it might be said that the community's intangible assets embodied 
in this particular range of imponderables have shrunk by that 
much, through the decay of these imponderables that are no longer 
seasonable, and through their displacement by other figments of 
the human brain, -- a consensus of brains trained into closer 
consonance with the latter-day material conditions of life. 
Something of this kind, something in the way of depreciation by 
displacement, appears now to be overtaking that system of 
imponderables that has been handed down into current law and 
custom out of that range of ideas and ideals that had the vogue 
before the coming of the machine industry and the material 
sciences. 
    Since the underlying principles of the established order are 
of this make-believe character, that is to say, since they are 
built up out of the range of conceptions that have habitually 
been doing duty as the substance of knowledge and belief in the 
past, it follows in the nature of the case that any 
reconstruction of institutions will be made only tardily, 
reluctantly, and sparingly; inasmuch as settled habits of thought 
are given up tardily, reluctantly and sparingly. And this will 
particularly be true when the reconstruction of unseasonable 
institutions runs counter to a settled and honorable code of 
ancient principles and a stubborn array of vested interests, as 
in this instance. Such is the promise of the present situation, 
and such is also the record of the shift that was once before 
made from medieval to modern times. It should be a case of break 
or bend. 
 
Chapter 3 
 
The State of the Industrial Arts 
 
    The modern point of view, with its constituent principles of 
equal opportunity, self-help, and free bargaining, was given its 
definitive formulation in the eighteenth century, as a balanced 
system of Natural Rights; and it has stood over intact since that 
time, and has served as the unquestioned and immutable ground of 
public morals and expediency, on which the advocates of 
enlightened and liberal policies have always been content to rest 
in their case. The truths which it holds to be self-evident and 
indefeasible are conceived to be intrinsically bound up in an 
over-ruling Order of Nature; in which thoughtful men habitually 
believed at that time and in which less thoughtful men have 
continued to believe since then. This eighteenth-century order of 
nature, in the magic name of which Adam Smith was in the habit of 
speaking, was conceived on lines of personal initiative and 
activity. It is an order of things in which men were conceived to 
be effectually equal in all those respects that are of any 
decided consequence, -- in intelligence, working capacity, 
initiative, opportunity, and personal worth; in which the 
creative factor engaged in industry was the workman, with his 
personal skill, dexterity and judgment; in which, it was 
believed, the employer ("master") served his own ends and sought 
his own gain by consistently serving the needs of creative labor, 
and thereby serving the common good; in which the traders 
("middle-men") made an honest living by supplying goods to 
consumers at a price determined by labor cost, and so serving the 
common good. 
    This characterisation of the "obvious and simple system" that 
lies at the root of the liberal ideals may seem too much of a 
dream to any person who shuns "the scientific use of the 
imagination"; its imponderables may seem to lack that axiomatic 
self-sufficiency which one would like to find in the spiritual 
foundations of a working system of law and custom. Indeed, the 
best of its imponderables are in a fair way now to drop back into 
the discard of uncertified make-believe. But in point of 
historical fact it appears to have stood the test of time and 
use, so far as appears formally on the face of law and custom. 
For a hundred years and more it has continued to stand as a 
familiar article of faith and aspiration among the advocates of a 
Liberal policy in civil and economic affairs; and Adam Smith's 
followers -- the economists and publicists of the Liberal 
movement -- have spoken for it as being the normal system of 
economic life, the "natural state of man," from which the course 
of events has been conceived to depart only under pressure of 
"disturbing causes," and to which the course of events must be 
pruned back at all hazards in the event of any threatened advance 
or departure beyond the "natural" bounds set by this working 
ideal. 
    However, the subsequent course of events has shown no 
indisposition to depart from this normal system of economic life, 
this "natural state of man," on the effectual reality of which 
the modern point of view rests its inviolate principles of law 
and morals and economic expediency. A new order of things has 
been taking effect in the state of the industrial arts and in the 
material sciences that lie nearest to that tangible body of 
experience out of which the state of the industrial arts is 
framed. And the new order of industrial ways and means has been 
progressively going out of touch with the essential requirements 
of this established scheme of individual self-help and personal 
initiative, on the realisation and maintenance of which the best 
endeavors of the Liberals have habitually been spent. 
    Under the new order the first requisite of ordinary 
productive industry is no longer the workman and his manual 
skill, but rather the mechanical equipment and the standardised 
processes in which the mechanical equipment is engaged. And this 
latter-day industrial equipment and process embodies not the 
manual skill, dexterity and judgment of an individual workman, 
but rather the accumulated technological wisdom of the community. 
Under the new order of things the mechanical equipment -- the 
"industrial plant" -- takes the initiative, sets the pace, and 
turns the workman to account in the carrying-on of those 
standardised processes of production that embody this mechanistic 
state of the industrial arts; very much as the individual 
craftsman in his time held the initiative in industry, set the 
pace, and made use of his tools according to his own discretion 
in the exercise of his personal skill, dexterity and judgment, 
under that now obsolescent industrial order which underlies the 
eighteenth-century modern point of view, and which still colors 
the aspirations of Liberal statesmen and economists, as well as 
the standard economic theories. 
    The workman -- and indeed it is still the skilled workman -- 
is always indispensable to the due working of this mechanistic 
industrial process, of course; very much as the craftsman's 
tools, in his time, were indispensable to the work which he had 
in hand. But the unit of industrial organization and procedure, 
what may be called the "going concern" in production, is now the 
outfit of industrial equipment, a works, engaged in a given 
standardised mechanical process designed to turn out a given 
output of standardised product; it is the plant, or the shop. And 
under this new order of industrial methods and values it has 
already come to be a commonplace of popular "knowledge and 
belief" that the mechanical equipment is the creative factor in 
industry, and the "production" of the output is credited to the 
plant's working capacity and set down to its account as a going 
concern; whereas the other factors engaged, as e.g., workmen and 
materials, are counted in as auxiliary factors which are 
indispensable but subsidiary -- items of production-cost which 
are incorporated in the running expenses of the plant and its 
productive process. 
    Under the new order the going concern in production is the 
plant or shop, the works, not the individual workman. The plant 
embodies a standardised industrial process. The workman is made 
use of according as the needs of the given mechanical process may 
require. The time, place, rate, and material conditions of the 
work in hand are determined immediately by the mechanically 
standardised process in which the given plant is engaged; and 
beyond that all these matters are dependent on the exigencies and 
manoeuvres of business, largely by way of moderating the rate of 
production and keeping the output reasonably short of maximum 
capacity. The workman has become subsidiary to the mechanical 
equipment, and productive industry has become subservient to 
business, in all those countries which have come in for the 
latter-day state of the industrial arts, and which so have fallen 
under the domination of the price system. 
    Such is the state of things throughout in those greater 
industries that are characteristic of the New Order; and these 
greater industries now set the pace and make the standards of 
management and valuation for the rest. At the same time these 
greater industries of the machine era extend their domination 
beyond their own immediate work, and enforce a standardisation of 
much the same mechanical character in the community at large; in 
the ways and means of living as well as in the ways and means of 
work. The effects of their mechanically standardised production, 
in the way of goods and services as well as in the similarly 
standardised traffic through which these goods and services are 
distributed to the consumers, reach out into the everyday life of 
all classes; but most immediately and imperatively they reach the 
working class of the industrial centers. So they largely set the 
pace for the ordinary occupations of the common man even apart 
from any employment in the greater mechanical industries. It is 
especially the latter-day system of transport and communication 
as it works out under the new order highly mechanical and 
exactingly scheduled for time, rate and place -- that so controls 
and standardises the ordinary life of the common man on 
mechanical lines. 
    The training enforced by this mechanical standardisation, 
therefore, is of much the same order throughout the community as 
it is within the mechanical industries proper, and it drives to 
the same outcome, -- submergence of the personal equation. So 
that the workday information and the reasoning by use of which 
all men carry on their daily life under the new order is of the 
same general character as that information and reasoning which 
guides the mechanical engineers; and the unremitting habituation 
to its scope and method, its principles of knowledge and belief, 
leads headlong to a mechanistic conception of things, ways, 
means, ends, and values, whether it is called by that name or 
not. The resulting frame of mind is often spoken of as 
Materialism. This impersonal character of workday habituation is 
particularly to be counted on to take decisive effect wherever 
the latter-day scheme of mechanical standardisation takes effect 
with all that wide sweep and massive drift with which it now 
dominates the larger centers of population. 
 
    Since the modern era began, the state of the industrial arts 
has been undergoing a change of type. Such as the followers of 
Mendel would call a "mutation." And in the course of this 
mutation the workman and his part in the conduct of industry have 
suffered as great a dislocation as any of the other factors 
involved. But it is also to be admitted that the typical 
owner-employer of the earlier modern time, such as he stood in 
the mind's eye of the eighteenth-century doctrinaires, -- this 
traditional owner-employer has also come through the period of 
the mutation in a scarcely better state of preservation. At the 
period of this stabilisation of principles in the eighteenth 
century, he could still truthfully be spoken of as a "master," a 
foreman of the shop, and he was then still invested with a large 
reminiscence of the master-craftsman, as known in the time of the 
craft-gilds. He stood forth in the eighteenth-century argument on 
the Natural Order of things as the wise and workmanlike designer 
and guide of his workmen's handiwork, and he was then still 
presumed to be living in workday contact and communion with them 
and to deal with them on an equitable footing of personal 
interest. 
    Such a characterisation of the capitalist-employer who was 
doing business at the time of the Industrial Revolution may seem 
over-drawn; and there is no need of insisting on its precise 
accuracy as a description of eighteenth-century facts. But it 
should not be extremely difficult to show that substantially such 
a figure of an employer-owner was had in mind by those who then 
argued the questions of wages and employment and laid down the 
lines on which the employment of labor would be expected to 
arrange itself under the untroubled system of natural liberty. 
But what is more to the point is that which is beyond question. 
In practical fact, almost as fully as in the speculations of the 
doctrinaires, the employer of labor in the staple industries of 
that time was, in his own person, commonly also the owner of the 
establishment in which his hired workmen were employed; and also 
-- again in passable accord with the facts -- he was presumed 
personally to come to terms with his workmen about wages and 
conditions of work. Employment was considered to be a relation of 
man to man. That much is explicit in the writings which bear the 
date-mark of this modern Liberal point of view; and the same 
assumption has continued to stand over as a self-sufficient 
premise among the defenders of the free competitive system in 
industry, for three or four generations after that period. 
    But the course of events has gone its own way, and about that 
time -- somewhere along in the middle half of the eighteenth 
century -- that type of employer began to be displaced in those 
staple industries which have since then set the pace and made the 
outcome for wages and conditions of work. So soon as the machine 
industry began to make headway, the industrial plant increased in 
size, and the number of workmen employed in each establishment 
grew continually larger; until in the course of time the large 
scale of organisation in industry has put any relation of man to 
man out of the question between employers and workmen in the 
leading industries. Indeed, it is not unusual to find that in an 
industrial plant of a large or middling size, a factory, mill, 
works, mine, shipyard or railway of the ordinary sort, very few 
of the workmen would be able, under oath, to identify their 
owner. At the same time, and owing to the same requirements of 
large-scale and mechanical organisation, the ownership of the 
works has also progressively been changing character; so that 
today, in the large and leading industries, the place of the 
personal employer-owner is taken by a composite business concern 
which represents a combination of owners, no one of whom is 
individually responsible for the concern's transactions. So true 
is this, that even where the ownership of a given industrial 
establishment still vests wholly or mainly in a single person, it 
has commonly been found expedient to throw the ownership into the 
corporate form, with limited liability. 
    The personal employer-owner has virtually disappeared from 
the great industries. His place is now filled by a list of 
corporation securities and a staff of corporation officials and 
employees who exercise a limited discretion. The personal note is 
no longer to be had in the wage relation, except in those 
backward, obscure and subsidiary industries in which the 
mechanical reorganisation of the new order has not taken effect. 
So, even that contractual arrangement which defines the workman's 
relation to the establishment in which he is employed, and to the 
anonymous corporate ownership by which he is employed, now takes 
the shape of a statistical reckoning, in which virtually no trace 
of the relation of man to man is to be found. Yet the principles 
of the modern point of view governing this contractual relation, 
in current law and custom, are drawn on the assumption that wages 
and conditions of work are arranged for by free bargaining 
between man and man on a footing of personal understanding and 
equal opportunity. 
    That the facts of the New Order have in this way departed 
from the ground on which the constituent principles of the modern 
point of view are based, and on which therefore the votaries of 
the established system take their stand, -- this state of things 
can not be charged to anyone's personal account and made a 
subject of recrimination. In fact, it is not a case for personal 
discretion and responsibility in detail, but rather for concerted 
action looking to some practicable working arrangement. 
    The personal equation is no longer a material factor in the 
situation. Ownership, too, has been caught in the net of the New 
Order and has been depersonalised to a degree beyond what would 
have been conceivable a hundred years ago, especially so far as 
it has to do with the use of material resources and man power in 
the greater industries. Ownership has been "denatured" by the 
course of events; so that it no longer carries its earlier duties 
and responsibilities. It used to be true that personally 
responsible discretion in all details was the chief and abiding 
power conferred by ownership; but wherever it has to do with the 
machine industry and large-scale organisation, ownership now has 
virtually lost this essential part of its ordinary functions. It 
has taken the shape of an absentee ownership of anonymous 
corporate capital, and in the ordinary management of this 
corporate capital the greater proportion of the owners have no 
voice. 
    This impersonal corporate capital, which is taking the place 
of the personal employer-owner of earlier times, is the outcome 
of a mutation of the scheme of things in business enterprise, 
scarcely less profound than the change which has overtaken the 
material equipment in the shift from handicraft methods to the 
machine technology. In practical fact today, corporate capital is 
the capitalised earning capacity of the corporation considered as 
a going business concern; and the ownership of this capital 
therefore foots up to a claim on the earnings of the corporation. 
    Corporate capital of this kind is impersonal in more than one 
sense: it may be transferred piecemeal from one owner to another 
without visibly affecting the management or the rating of the 
concern whose securities change hands in this way; and the 
personal identity of the owner of any given block of this capital 
need not be known even to the concern itself, to its 
administrative officers, or to those persons whose daily work and 
needs are bound up with the daily transactions of the concern. 
For most purposes and as regards the greater proportion of the 
investors who in this way own the corporation's capital, these 
owners are, in effect, anonymous creditors, whose sole effectual 
relation to the enter prise is that of a fixed "overhead charge" 
on its operations. Such is the case even in point of form as 
regards the investors in corporate bonds and preferred stock. The 
ordinary investor is, in effect, an anonymous pensioner on the 
enterprise; his relation to industry is in the nature of a 
liability, and his share in the conduct of this industry is much 
like the share which the Old Man of the Sea once had in the 
promenades of Sinbad. 
    No doubt, any reasonably skilful economist any certified 
accountant of economic theory -- could successfully question the 
goodness of this characterisation of corporate capital. It is, in 
fact, not such a description as is commonly met with in those 
theories of ownership and investment that trace back to the 
formal definitions of Ricardo and Adam Smith. Nor is this 
description of latter-day facts here set down as a formal 
definition of corporate capital and its uses; nor is it designed 
to fit into that traditional scheme of conceptions that still 
holds the attention of the certified economists. Its aim is the 
less ambitious one of describing, in a loose and informal way, 
what is the nature and uses of this corporate capital and its 
ownership, in the apprehension of the common man out of doors. He 
is not so familiar with the recondite wisdom of the past, or with 
subtle definitions, other than the latter-day subtleties of the 
market, the crop season, the blast-furnace and refinery, the 
internal-combustion engine, and such like hard and fast matters 
with which he is required to get along from day to day. The 
purpose here is only to bring out, without undue precision, what 
these interesting phenomena of capital, investment, fixed 
charges, and the like, may be expected to foot up to in terms of 
tangible performance, in the unschooled reflections of the common 
man, who always comes in as "the party of the second part" in all 
these manoeuvres of corporation finance. He commonly has no more 
than a slender and sliding grasp of those honorable principles of 
certified make-believe that distinguish the modern point of view 
in all that relates to property and its uses; but he has had the 
benefit of some exacting experience in the ways of the new order 
and its standards of reckoning. By consequence of much untempered 
experience the common man is beginning to see these things in the 
glaring though fitful light of that mechanistic conception that 
rates men and things on grounds of tangible performance, -- 
without much afterthought. As seen in this light, and without 
much afterthought, very much of the established system of 
obligations, earnings, perquisites and emoluments, appears to 
rest on a network of make-believe. Now, it may be deplorable, 
perhaps inexcusable, that the New Order in industry should 
engender habits of thought of this unprofitable kind; but then, 
after all, regrets and excuses do not make the outcome, and with 
sufficient reason attention today centers on the outcome. 
 
    To the common man who has taken to reckoning in terms of 
tangible performance, in terms of man power and material 
resources, these returns on investment that rest on productive 
enterprise as an overhead charge are beginning to look like 
unearned income. Indeed, the same unsympathetic preconception has 
lately come in for a degree of official recognition. High 
officials who are presumed to speak with authority, discretion 
and an unbiassed mind have lately spoken of incomes from 
investments as "unearned incomes," and have even entertained a 
project for subjecting such incomes to a differential rate of 
taxation above what should fairly be imposed on "earned incomes," 
All this may, of course, be nothing more than an unseasonable 
lapse of circumspection on the part of the officials, who have 
otherwise, on the whole, consistently lived up to the best 
traditions of commercial sagacity; and a safe and sane 
legislature has also canvassed the matter and solemnly disallowed 
any such invidious distinction between earned and unearned 
incomes. Still, this passing recognition of unearned incomes is 
scarcely less significant for being unguarded; and the occurrence 
lends a certain timeliness to any inquiry into the source and 
nature of that net product of industry out of which any fixed 
overhead charges of this kind are drawn. 
    To come to an understanding of the source and origin of this 
margin of disposable revenue that goes to the earnings of 
corporate capital, it is necessary to come to an understanding of 
the industrial system out of which the disposable margin of 
revenue arises. Productive industry yields a margin of net 
product over cost, counting cost in terms of man power and 
material resources; and under the established rule of self-help 
and free bargaining as it works out in corporation finance, this 
margin of net product has come to rest upon productive industry 
as an overhead charge payable to anonymous outsiders who own the 
corporation securities. 
    There need be no question of the equity of this arrangement, 
as between the men at work in the industries and the 
beneficiaries to whom the overhead charge is payable. At least 
there is no intention here to question the equity of it, or to 
defend the arrangement against any question that may be brought. 
It is also to be remarked that the whole arrangement has this 
appearance of gratuitous handicap and hardship only when it is 
looked at from the crude ground level of tangible performance. 
When seen in the dry light of the old and honest principles of 
self-help and equal opportunity, as understood by the substantial 
and well-meaning citizens, it all casts no shadow of iniquity or 
inexpediency. 
    So, without prejudice to any ulterior question which may be 
harbored by one and another, the question which is here had in 
mind is quite simply as to the production of this disposable 
margin of net product over human cost. And to pass muster today, 
any attempted answer will be required to meet that exacting and 
often inconvenient insistence on palpable fact which is of the 
essence of the new order of knowledge and belief. It is necessary 
to reach an understanding of these things in terms of tangible 
performance, in such terms as are germane to that new order of 
knowledge and belief out of which the perplexity arises, rather 
than in those terms of equitable imputation that lie at the root 
of the certified economic doctrines and of corporation finance. 
    These relevant facts are neither particularly obscure nor 
particularly elusive; only, they have had little attention in the 
argument of economists and politicians. Still less in the 
speculations of the captains of finance. The partition of incomes 
has always been more easily understood by these 
practically-minded persons, and it is also a more engrossing 
subject of argumentation than the production of goods. This would 
be particularly true for these economists and politicians, who 
are imbued with that legalistic spirit which pervades the modern 
point of view and all its votaries. 
    But it is known to all, even to the most safely guarded 
persons who do not come in contact with industry or production, 
or even with the products of the staple industries, that industry 
at large will always turn out something in the way of a net 
margin of product over human cost, -- over human effort and 
necessary consumption. It holds true as far back as the records 
have anything to say. It is evidently a question of the 
productivity of the industrial arts. Men at work turn out a net 
product because they know how and are interested in doing it; and 
their output is limited by the industrial methods which they have 
the use of. But the output is limited in such a way that it 
always exceeds the cost by more or less, barring accident. By and 
large, throughout past time the industrial arts have been gaining 
in efficiency, and the ordinary margin of net product over cost 
has consequently gone on widening. This is much of the meaning of 
"an advance in the industrial arts." 
    In an earlier time, by law and custom, the net margin of 
product habitually went to a master class, so-called, as the 
"earnings" or the due emoluments of their mastery over those 
industrious classes who carried forward and gave effect to the 
state of the industrial arts as known in their time. By virtue of 
their mastery and its incorporation in the institutions of the 
time, they had an equitable, and effectual, vested interest in 
the net product of the community's industry; and by virtue of the 
same settled principles of law and custom it was for them to see 
to the due consumption of any such net product above cost. In 
later times, and particularly in modern times and in the 
civilised countries, those immemorial principles of privilege 
equitably vested in the master class have fallen into discredit 
as being not sufficiently grounded in fact; so that mastery and 
servitude are disallowed and have disappeared from the range of 
legitimate institutions. The enlightened principles of self-help 
and personal equality do not tolerate these things. However, they 
do tolerate free income from investments. Indeed, the most 
consistent and most reputable votaries of the modern point of 
view commonly subsist on such income. 
    Ever since these enlightened principles of the modern point 
of view were first installed in the eighteenth century as the 
self-evident rule of reason in civilised life, the industrial 
arts have also continued to gain in productive efficiency, at an 
ever-accelerated rate of gain; so that today the industrial 
methods of the machine era are highly productive, beyond any 
earlier state of the industrial arts or anything that is known 
outside the range of this new order of industry. The output of 
this industrial system yields a wider margin of net product over 
cost than has ever been obtainable by any other or earlier known 
method of work. It consequently affords ground for an uncommonly 
substantial vested interest in this disposable net margin. 
    But the industrial system of the new order will work at the 
high rate of efficiency of which it is capable, only under 
suitable conditions. It is a comprehensive system of 
interdependent working parts, organised on a large scale and with 
an exacting articulation of parts, -- works, mills, railways, 
shipping, groups and lines of industrial establishments, all 
working together on a somewhat delicately balanced plan of mutual 
give and take. No one member or section of this system is a 
self-sufficient industrial enterprise, even if it is true that no 
one member is strictly dependent on any other one. Indeed, no one 
member or section, group or line of industrial establishments, in 
this industrial universe of the new order, is a productive factor 
at all, except as it fits into and duly gives and takes its share 
in the work of the system as a whole. Such exceptions to this 
rule of interlocking processes as may appear on first 
examination, are likely to prove exceptions in appearance only. 
They are chiefly the backward trades and occupations which have 
not had the benefit of the Industrial Revolution and do not 
belong under the new, mechanistic order of industry; or they are 
trades, occupations and works devoted to the consumption of goods 
or to the maintenance of the rules governing the distribution and 
consumption of wealth, as, for instance, banking, menial service, 
police service and the apparatus of the law, the learned 
professions and the fine arts. 
    It is also of the essence of this industrial system and its 
technology that it necessarily involves the industrial community 
as a whole, its working population and its material resources; 
and the measure of its successful operation is determined by the 
effectual team-work of its constituent parts. And the industrial 
system of the new order is drawn on a large scale and rests on a 
comprehensive specialisation of processes and standardisation of 
output; so that the "community" which is required for the 
necessary team-work is necessarily a large community; larger than 
the total population and resources that would have served the 
like purpose under any earlier state of the industrial arts, at 
the same time that the needed coordination of processes is also 
wider and more delicately balanced than ever before. Indeed, the 
"industrial community" of the new order is always and necessarily 
larger than any existing national unit. The ramification of give 
and take under the new industrial system invariably overlaps the 
national frontiers, among all those peoples who occupy what would 
be called an "advanced" place in industry. The system, and 
therefore the industrial community engaged in team-work under 
this system, is drawn on cosmopolitan or international lines, 
both in respect of the body of technological knowledge which is 
turned to account and in respect of the range and volume of 
materials necessary to be used according to this new order in 
productive industry. 
    Evidently the total output of product turned out under this 
industrial system, the "annual production," to use Adam Smith's 
phrase, or the "annual dividend," to use a phrase taken from 
later usage, -- this total output is the output of the total 
community working together as a balanced organisation of 
industrial forces engaged in a moving equilibrium of production. 
No part or fraction of the community is a productive factor in 
its own right and taken by itself, since no work can be done by 
any segment of the community in isolation from the rest; no one 
plant or works would be a producer in the absence of all the 
rest. The total product is the product of the total community's 
work; or rather it is the product of the work of that fraction of 
the people who are employed in productive work, which is not 
quite the same thing, since there is much work spent on the 
consumption of goods, and on ways and means for such consumption, 
as well as on their production. 
    Indeed, it is by no means certain that there is not more 
time, strain and ingenuity spent on the consumption of goods than 
on their production. Apart from sports, menial service, 
fashionable dress and equipage, pet animals and mandatory social 
amenities, there would also have to be included under the ways 
and means of consumption virtually all that goes into 
salesmanship and advertising. Virtually all of these things have 
to do with the organised consumption of goods; and virtually all 
are therefore to be written off as waste motion, so far as 
regards their effect on the net productive efficiency of the 
industrial community, or of the industrial system whose tissues 
are consumed in enterprise of that kind. The amount which is to 
be written off as consumptive waste in this way is approximately 
the same as the net margin of product over cost; and according to 
the enlightened principles of self-help and equal opportunity, as 
these principles work out under the new order of industry, it is 
for the investors to take care of this consumptive waste and to 
see that no unconsumed residue is left over to cumber the market 
and produce a glut. 
    Evidently, too, the amount of the annual production depends 
on the state of the industrial arts which the working population 
has the use of for the time being; which is in the main a matter 
of technological knowledge and popular education. So that the 
question of productivity and net productivity may be stated in 
general terms to the following effect: The possible or potential 
productive capacity of any given community, having the disposal 
of a given complement of man power and material resources, is a 
matter of the state of the industrial arts, the technological 
knowledge, which the community has the use of. This sets the 
limit, determines the "maximum" production of which the community 
is capable. The actual production in such a community will then 
be determined by the extent to which the available technological 
efficiency is turned to account; which is regulated in part by 
the intelligence, or "education," of the working population, and 
in greater part by market conditions which decide how large a 
product it will be profitable for the business men to turn out. 
The net product is the amount by which this actual production 
exceeds its own cost, as counted in terms of subsistence, and 
including the cost of the necessary mechanical equipment; this 
net product will then approximately coincide with the annual 
keep, the cost of maintenance and replacement, of the investors 
or owners of capitalised property who are not engaged in 
productive industry; and who are on this account sometimes spoken 
of as the "kept classes," Indeed, it would seem that the number 
and average cost per capita of the kept classes, communibus 
annis, affords something of a rough measure of the net product 
habitually derived from the community's annual production. 
    The state of the industrial arts, therefore, is the 
indispensable conditioning circumstance which determines the 
productive capacity of any given community; and this is true in a 
peculiar degree under this new order of industry, in which the 
industrial arts have reached an unexampled development. The same 
decisive factor may also be described as "the community's joint 
stock of technological knowledge." This common stock of 
technological knowledge decides what will be the ordinary ways 
and means of industry, and so it decides what will be the 
character and volume of the output of product which a given man 
power is capable of turning out. Evidently no man power and no 
working population can turn out any annual product without the 
use of something in the way of technological knowledge, that is 
to say some state of the industrial arts. The working community 
is a productive factor only by virtue of, and only up to the 
limit set by, the state of the industrial arts which it has the 
use of. The contrast of industrial Japan or of industrial Germany 
before the middle of the nineteenth century and after the close 
of the century will serve for illustration; that is to say before 
and after those peoples had come in for the use of the technology 
of the machine era. The disposable excess of the yearly product 
over cost is a matter of the efficiency of the available state of 
technological knowledge, and of the measure in which the working 
population is put in a position to make use of it. These, of 
course, are obvious facts, which it should scarcely be necessary 
to recite, except that they are habitually overlooked, perhaps 
because they are obvious. 
    The Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth century was a 
revolution in the state of the industrial arts, of course; it was 
a mutation of character in the common stock of technological 
knowledge held and used by the industrial population of the 
civilised countries from that time forward. The shift from the 
older to the new order of industry was of such a nature as to 
call for the use of an extensive equipment of mechanical 
apparatus, progressively more and more extensive as the change to 
the machine technology went on; and at the same time the 
disposable margin of product above cost also progressively went 
on increasing with each further increase of the community's joint 
stock of technological knowledge. 
    This body of technological knowledge, the state of the 
industrial arts, of course has always continued to be held as a 
joint stock. Indeed this joint stock of technology is the 
substance of the community's civilisation on the industrial side, 
and therefore it constitutes the substantial core of that 
civilisation. Like any other phase or element of the cultural 
heritage, it is a joint possession of the community, so far as 
concerns its custody, exercise, increase and transmission; but it 
has turned out, under the peculiar circumstances that condition 
the use of this technology among these civilised peoples, that 
its ownership or usufruct has come to be effectually vested in a 
relatively small number of persons. Unforeseen and undesigned, 
the mechanical circumstances of the new order in industry have 
reversed the practical effects of the common law in respect of 
self-help, equal opportunity and free bargaining. The mechanics 
of the case has worked out this result by cutting away the ground 
on which those principles were based at the time of their 
acceptance and installation. 
    The machine technology requires for its working a large and 
specialised mechanical apparatus, an ever increasingly large and 
increasingly elaborate material equipment. So also it requires a 
large and diversified supply of material resources, both in raw 
materials and in the way of motive power. It is only on condition 
that these requirements are met in some passable fashion that 
this industrial system will work at all, and it is only as these 
requirements are freely met that the machine industry will work 
at a high efficiency. At the same time the settled principles of 
law and usage and public policy handed down from the eighteenth 
century have in effect decided, and continue to decide, that all 
material wealth is, rightly, to be held in private ownership, and 
is to be made use of only subject to the unhampered discretion of 
the legally rightful owner. Meantime the highly productive state 
of the industrial arts embodied in the technological knowledge of 
the new order can be turned to account only by use of this 
material equipment and these natural resources which continue to 
be held in private ownership. From which it follows that these 
material means of industry, and the state of the industrial arts 
which these material means are to serve, can be turned to 
productive use only so far and on such conditions as the rightful 
owners of the material equipment and resources may choose to 
impose; which enables the owners of this indispensable material 
wealth, in effect, to take over the use of these industrial arts 
for their own sole profit. So that the usufruct of the 
community's technological knowledge has come to vest in the 
owners of such material wealth as is held in sufficiently large 
blocks for the purpose. 
    Therefore, by award of the settled principles of equity and 
self-help embodied in the modern point of view, as stabilised in 
the eighteenth century, the owners of the community's material 
resources -- that is to say the investors in industrial business 
-- have in effect become "seized and possessed of" the 
community's joint stock of technological knowledge and 
efficiency. Not that this accumulated knowledge of industrial 
forces and processes has passed into the intellectual keeping of 
the investors and been assimilated into their mentality, even to 
the extent of a reasonably scanty modicum. It remains true, of 
course, that the investors, owners, kept classes, or whatever 
designation is preferred, are quite exceptionally ignorant of all 
that mechanics of industry whose usufruct is vested in them; they 
are, in effect, fully occupied with other things, and their 
knowledge of industry ordinarily does not, and need not, extend 
to any rudiments of technology or industrial process. It is not 
as intelligent persons, but only as owners of material ways and 
means, as vested interests, that they come into the case. The 
exceptions to this rule are only sufficiently numerous to call 
attention to themselves as exceptions. 
    As an intellectual achievement and as a working force the 
state of the industrial arts continues, of course, to be held 
jointly in and by the community at large; but equitable title to 
its usufruct has, in effect, passed to the owners of the 
indispensable material means of industry. Though not hitherto by 
formal specification and legal provision, their assets include, 
in effect, the state of the industrial arts as well as the 
mechanical appliances and the materials without which these 
industrial arts are of no effect. It is true, a little something, 
and indeed more than a little, has been done toward the due legal 
recognition of the investor's usufruct of the community's 
technological efficiency, in the recognition of vested interests 
and intangible assets as articles of private property defensible 
at law. But on the whole, and until a relatively recent date, the 
investors' tenure of this usufruct has been allowed to rest 
informally on their control of the community's material assets. 
Still, the outlook now appears to be that something further may 
presently be done toward a more secure and unambiguous tenure of 
this usufruct, by suitable legal decisions bearing on the 
inviolability of vested interests and intangible assets. The 
outcome is, in effect, that these owners have equitably become 
the sole legitimate beneficiaries of the possible margin of 
product above cost. 
    These are also simple facts and patent, and should seem 
sufficiently obvious without argument. They have also been 
explained at some length elsewhere. But this recital of what 
should already be commonplace information seems necessary here 
for the sake of a more perspicuous continuity in the present 
argument. To many persons, perhaps to the greater proportion of 
those unpropertied persons that are often spoken of collectively 
as "the common man," the state of things which has just been 
outlined may seem untoward. And further reflection on the 
character and prospective consequences of this arrangement is 
likely to add something more to the common man's apprehension of 
hardship and insecurity to come. Therefore it may be well to 
recall that this state of things has been brought to pass not by 
the failure of those principles of equity and self-help that lie 
at the root of it all, but rather by the eminently unyielding 
stability and sufficiency of these principles under new 
conditions. It is not due to any inherent weakness or shiftiness 
in these principles of law and custom; which have faithfully 
remained the same as ever, and which all men admit were good and 
sound at the period of their installation. But it is beginning to 
appear now, after the event, that the inclusion of unrestricted 
ownership among those rights and perquisites which were allowed 
to stand over when the transition was made to the modern point of 
view is likely to prove inexpedient in the further course of 
growth and change. 
    Unrestricted ownership of property, with inheritance, free 
contract, and self-help, is believed to have been highly 
expedient as well as eminently equitable under the circumstances 
which conditioned civilised life at the period when the civilised 
world made up its mind to that effect. And the discrepancy which 
has come in evidence in this later time is traceable to the fact 
that other things have not remained the same. The odious outcome 
has been made by disturbing causes, not by these enlightened 
principles of honest living. Security and unlimited discretion in 
the rights of ownership were once rightly made much of as a 
simple and obvious safeguard of self-direction and self-help for 
the common man; whereas, in the event, under a new order of 
circumstances, it all promises to be nothing better than a means 
of assured defeat and vexation for the common man. 
 
Chapter 4 
 
Free Income 
 
    Industry of the modern sort -- mechanical, specialised, 
standardised, drawn on a large scale -- is highly productive. 
When this industrial system of the new order is not hindered by 
outside control it will yield a very large net return of output 
over cost, -- counting cost in terms of man power and necessary 
consumption; so large, indeed, that the cost of what is 
necessarily consumed in productive work, in the way of materials, 
mechanical appliances, and subsistence of the workmen, is 
inconsiderable by comparison. The same thing may be described by 
saying that the necessary consumption of subsistence and 
industrial plant amounts to but an inconsiderable deduction from 
the gross output of industry at any time. So inordinately 
productive is this familiar new order of industry that in 
ordinary times it is forever in danger of running into excesses 
and turning out an output in excess of what the market -- that is 
to say the business situation -- will tolerate. There is constant 
danger of "overproduction," So that there is commonly a large 
volume of man power unemployed and an appreciable proportion of 
the industrial plant lying idle or half idle. It is quite 
unusual, perhaps altogether out of the question, to let all or 
nearly all the available plant and man power run at full capacity 
even for a limited time. 
    It is, of course, impossible to say how large the net 
aggregate product over cost would be -- counting the product in 
percentages of the necessary cost -- in case this industrial 
system were allowed to work at full capacity and with free use of 
all the available technological knowledge. There is no safe 
ground for an estimate, for such a thing has never been tried, 
and no near approach to such a state of things is to be looked 
for under the existing circumstances of ownership and control. 
Even under the most favorable conditions of brisk times the 
business situation will not permit it. There will at least always 
be an indefinitely large allowance to be reckoned for work and 
substance expended on salesmanship, advertising, and competitive 
management designed to increase sales. This line of expenditures 
is a necessary part of businesslike management, although it 
contributes nothing to the output of goods, and in that sense it 
is to be counted as a necessary deduction from the net productive 
capacity of the industrial system as it runs. It would also be 
extremely difficult to make allowance for this deduction, since 
much of it is not recognised as such by the men in charge and 
does not appear on their books under any special descriptive 
heading. In one way and another, and for divers and various 
reasons, the net production of goods serviceable for human use 
falls considerably short of the gross output, and the gross 
output is always short of the productive capacity of the 
available plant and man power. 
    Still, taken as it goes, with whatever handicap of these 
various kinds is to be allowed for, it remains patently true that 
the net product greatly exceeds the cost. So much so that 
whatever is required for the replacement of the material 
equipment consumed in production, plus "reasonable returns" on 
this equipment, commonly amounts to no more than a fraction of 
the total output. The resulting margin of excess product over 
cost plus reasonable returns on the material equipment is due to 
the high productive efficiency of the current state of the 
industrial arts and is the source of that free income which gives 
rise to intangible assets. The distinction between tangible 
assets and intangible is not a hard and fast one, of course, but 
the difference is sufficiently broad and sufficiently well 
understood for use in the present connection, so long as no pains 
is taken to confuse these terms with needless technical verbiage. 
    To avoid debate and digression, it may be remarked that 
"reasonable returns" is also here used in the ordinary sense of 
the expression, without further definition, as being sufficiently 
understood and precise enough for the argument. The play of 
motives and transactions by which a rough common measure of 
reasonable returns has been arrived at is taken for granted. A 
detailed examination of all that matter would involve an extended 
digression, and nothing would be gained for the argument. 
According to the traditional view, which was handed on from the 
period before the coming of corporation finance, and which still 
stands over as an article of common belief in the certified 
economic theories, "capital" represents the material equipment, 
valued at its cost, together with funds in hand required as a 
"working capital" to provide materials and a labor force. On this 
view, corporation securities are taken to cover ownership of the 
plant and the needed working capital; and there has been a 
slow-dying prejudice against admitting that anything less 
tangible than these items should properly be included in the 
corporate capitalisation and made a basis on which to issue 
corporate securities. Hence that stubborn popular prejudice 
against "watered stock" which corporation finance had to contend 
with all through the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
"Watered stock" is now virtually a forgotten issue. Corporation 
finance has disposed of the quarrel by discontinuing the relevant 
facts. 
    There is still a recognised distinction between tangible 
assets and intangible; but it has come to be recognised in 
corporation practice that the only reasonable basis of 
capitalisation for any assets, tangible or intangible, is the 
earning-capacity which they represent. And the amount of capital 
is a question of capitalisation of the available assets. So that, 
if the material equipment, e.g., is duly capitalised on its 
earning-capacity, any question as to its being "watered" is no 
longer worth pursuing; since stock can be said to be "watered" 
only by comparison with the cost of the assets which it covers, 
not in relation to its earning-capacity. The latter point is 
taken care of by the stock quotations of the market. On the other 
hand, intangible assets neither have now nor ever have had any 
other basis than capitalisation of earning capacity, and any 
question of "water" in their case is consequently quite idle. 
Intangible assets will not hold water. 
    Corporation finance is one of the outgrowths of the New 
Order. And one of the effects wrought by corporation finance is a 
blurring of the distinction between tangible assets and 
intangible; inasmuch as both are now habitually determined by a 
capitalisation of earning-capacity, rather than by their 
ascertained cost, and it is difficult, if not impossible, to draw 
a hard and fast line between that part of a concern's 
earning-capacity which is properly to be assigned to its plant 
and that which is due to its control of the market. Still, an 
intelligible distinction is maintained in common usage, between 
tangible assets and intangible, even if the distinction is 
somewhat uncertain in detail; and such a distinction is 
convenient, so long as too sharp a contrast between the two is 
not insisted on. 
    The earning-capacity of the tangible assets is presumed to 
represent the productive capacity of the plant, considered as a 
mechanical apparatus engaged in an industrial process for the 
production of goods or services; it is presumed to rest on the 
market value of the mechanical output of the plant. The plant is 
a productive factor because and in so far as it turns to 
practical account the state of the industrial arts now in use, -- 
the community's joint stock of technological knowledge. So soon, 
or so far, as the plant and its management falls short of meeting 
the ordinary requirements of this current state of the industrial 
arts, and fails to make use of such technological knowledge as is 
commonly employed, the whole works ceases by that much to be a 
productive factor. The productive efficiency, and the productive 
value, of any given item of industrial equipment is measured by 
its effective use of the technological knowledge current in the 
community for the time being. So also, the productive value of 
any given body of natural resources land, raw materials, motive 
power -- is strictly dependent on the degree in which it fits 
into the industrial system as it runs. 
    This dependence of productive value on conformity to and use 
of the state of the industrial arts is constantly shown in the 
case of land and similar natural resources, by the fluctuation of 
rental values. Land and other resources will be more valuable the 
more suitable they are for present and prospective use. The like 
is true for the mechanical equipment, perhaps in a more 
pronounced degree. Industrial plant, e.g., is always liable to 
depreciation by obsolescence in case the state of the industrial 
arts changes in such a way that the method of work embodied in 
the particular article of equipment is displaced by new and more 
suitable methods, more suitable under the altered circumstances. 
In such a case, which is of very frequent occurrence under the 
new order of industry, any given plant, machine, or similar 
contrivance may lose all its value as a means of production. And 
so also, on the other hand, a given plant, as, for instance, a 
given railway system or dock, may acquire additional productive 
value through changes in the industrial system which make it more 
suitable for present use. 
    Evidently the chief, or at least the indispensable, element 
of productive efficiency in any item of industrial equipment or 
resources is the use which it makes of the available 
technological knowledge; and evidently, too, its earning-capacity 
as a productive factor depends strictly on the same fact, -- the 
usufruct of the state of the industrial arts. And all the while 
the state of the industrial arts, which the industrial equipment 
so turns to account for the benefit of its owner, continues to be 
a joint stock of industrial knowledge and proficiency 
accumulated, held, exercised, increased and transmitted by the 
community at large; and all the while the owner of the equipment 
is some person who has contributed no more than his per-capita 
quota to this state of the industrial arts out of which his 
earnings arise. Indeed the chances are that the owner has 
contributed less than his per-capita quota, if anything, to that 
common fund of knowledge on the product of which he draws by 
virtue of his ownership, because he is likely to be fully 
occupied with other things, -- such things as lucrative business 
transactions, e.g., or the decent consumption of superfluities. 
    And at this point the difference between tangible assets and 
intangible comes in sight, or at least the ground of the habitual 
distinction between the two. Tangible assets, it appears, are 
such assets as represent the earning-capacity of any mechanically 
productive property; whereas intangible assets represent assured 
income which can not be assigned to any specific material factor 
as its productive source. Intangible assets are the capitalised 
value of income not otherwise accounted for. Such income arises 
out of business relations rather than out of industry; it is 
derived from advantages of salesmanship, rather than from 
productive work; it represents no contribution to the output of 
goods and services, but only an effectual claim to a share in the 
"annual dividend," -- on grounds which appear to be legally 
honest, but which can not be stated in terms of mechanical cause 
and effect, or of productive efficiency, or indeed in any terms 
that involve notions of physical dimensions or of mechanical 
action. 
    When the theoreticians explain and justify these returns that 
go to adroit salesmanship, or "managerial ability," as it is also 
called, it invariably turns but that the grounds assigned for it 
are of the nature of figures of speech -- metaphor or analogy. 
Not that these standard theoretical explanations are to be set 
aside as faulty, inadequate or incomplete; their great volume and 
sincerity forbids that. It is rather that they are to be accepted 
as a faithful account of an insubstantial fact in insubstantial 
terms. And they are probably as good an account of the equitable 
distribution of free income as the principles of the modern point 
of view will tolerate. 
    But while intangible assets represent income which accrues 
out of certain immaterial relations between their owners and the 
industrial system, and while this income is accordingly not a 
return for mechanically productive work done, it still remains 
true, of course, that such income is drawn from the annual 
product of industry, and that its productive source is therefore 
the same as that of the returns on tangible assets. The material 
source of both is the same; and it is only that the basis on 
which the income is claimed is not the same for both. It is not a 
difference in respect of the ways and means by which they are 
created, but only in respect of the ways and means by which these 
two classes of income are intercepted and secured by the 
beneficiaries to whom they accrue. The returns on tangible assets 
are assumed to be a return for the productive use of the plant; 
returns on intangible assets are a return for the exercise of 
certain immaterial relations involved in the ownership and 
control of industry and trade. 
 
    Best known by name among intangible assets is the ancient 
rubric of "good-will," technically so called; which has stood 
over from before the coming of the new order in business 
enterprise. This has long been considered the original type-form 
of intangible assets as a class. By ancient usage the term 
denotes a customary preferential advantage in trade; it is not 
designed to describe a body of benevolent sentiments. Good-will 
has long been known, discussed and allowed for as a legitimate, 
ordinary and valuable immaterial possession of men engaged in 
mercantile enterprise of all kinds. It has been held to be a 
product of exemplary courtesy and fair dealing with customers, 
due to turning out goods or services of an invariably sound 
quality and honest measure, and indeed due to the conspicuous 
practice of the ordinary Christian virtues, but chiefly to common 
honesty. Similarly valuable, and of a similarly immaterial 
nature, is the possession of a trade-secret, a trade-mark, a 
patent-right, a franchise, any statutory monopoly, or a monopoly 
secured by effectually cornering the supply or the market for any 
given line of goods or services. From any one of these a 
profitable advantage may be derived, and they have therefore a 
market value. They afford their possessor a preferential gain, as 
against his competitors or as against the general body of 
customers which the state of the industrial arts and the 
organisation of business throws in his way. After the analogy of 
good-will, it has been usual to trace any such special run of 
free income to the profitable use of a special advantage in the 
market, which is then appraised as a valuable means of gain and 
comes to figure as an asset of its possessor. But all this goes 
to explain how these benefits go to these beneficiaries; it does 
not account for the fact that there is produced a net output of 
product available for free distribution to these persons. 
    These supernumerary and preferential gains, "excess profits," 
or whatever words may best describe this class of free income, 
may be well deserved by these beneficiaries, or they may not. The 
income in question is, in any case, not created by the good 
deserts of the beneficiaries, however meritorious their conduct 
may be. Honesty may conceivably be the best policy in mercantile 
pursuits, and it may also greatly serve the convenience of any 
community in which an honest merchant is found; yet honest 
dealing, strictly speaking, is an agency of conservation rather 
than of creation. A trade-secret may also be profitable to the 
concern which has the use of it, and the special process which it 
covers may be especially productive; but the same article of 
technological knowledge would doubtless contribute more to the 
total productivity of industry if it were shared freely by the 
industrial community at large. Such technological knowledge is an 
agency of production, but it is the monopoly of it that is 
profitable to its possessor as a special source of gain. The like 
applies to patent-rights, of course. Whereas monopolies of the 
usual kind, which control any given line of industry by charter, 
conspiracy, or combination of ownership, derive their special 
gains from their ability to restrain trade, limit the output of 
goods or services, and so "maintain prices." 
    Intangible assets of this familiar kind are very common among 
the business concerns of the new order, particularly among the 
larger and more prosperous of them, and they afford a rough 
measure of the ability of these concerns profitably to restrict 
production. The very large aggregate value of such assets 
indicates how imperative it is for the conduct of industrial 
business under the new order to restrict output within reasonable 
limits, and at the same time how profitable it is to be able to 
prevent the excessively high productive capacity of modern 
industry from outrunning the needs of profitable business. For 
the prosperity of business it is necessary to keep the output 
within reasonable limits; that is to say, within such limits as 
will serve to maintain reasonably profitable prices; that is to 
say, such prices as will yield the largest obtainable net return 
to the concerns engaged in the business. In this connection, and 
under the existing conditions of investment and credit, 
"reasonable returns" means the same thing as "the largest 
practicable net returns." It all foots up to an application of 
the familiar principle of "charging what the traffic will bear"; 
for in the matter of profitable business there is no reasonable 
limit short of the maximum. In business, the best price is always 
good enough; but, so also, nothing short of the best price is 
good enough. Buy cheap and sell dear. 
    Intangibles of this kind, which represent a "conscientious 
withdrawal of efficiency," an effectual control of the rate or 
volume of output, are altogether the most common of immaterial 
assets, and they make up altogether the largest class of 
intangibles and the most considerable body of immaterial wealth 
owned. Land values are of much the same nature as these corporate 
assets which represent capitalised restriction of output, in that 
the land values, too, rest mostly on the owner's ability to 
withhold his property from productive use, and so to drive a 
profitable bargain. Rent is also a case of charging what the 
traffic will bear; and rental values should properly be classed 
with these intangible assets of the larger corporations, which 
are due to their effectual control of the rate and volume of 
production. And apart from the rental values of land, which are 
also in the nature of monopoly values, it is doubtful if the 
total material wealth in any of the civilised countries will 
nearly equal the total amount of this immaterial wealth that is 
owned by the country's business men and the investors for whom 
they do business. Which evidently comes to much the same as 
saying that something more than one-half of the net product of 
the country's industry goes to those persons in whom the existing 
state of law and custom vests a plenary power to hinder 
production. 
    It is doubtful if the total of this immaterial wealth exceeds 
the total material wealth in the advanced industrial countries; 
although it is at least highly probable that such is the case, 
particularly in the richer and more enlightened of these 
countries; as, e. g., in America or the United Kingdom, where the 
principles of self-help and free bargain have consistently had 
the benefit of a liberal -- that is a broad -- construction and 
an unbending application. The evidence in the case is not to be 
had in such unambiguous shape as to carry conviction, for the 
distinction between tangible assets and intangible is not 
consistently maintained or made a matter of record. So, e.g., it 
is not unusual to find that corporation bonds -- railroad or 
industrial -- which secure their owner a free income and are 
carried as an overhead charge by the corporation, are at the same 
time a lien on the corporation's real property; which in turn is 
likely to be of less value than the corporation's total 
liabilities. Evidently the case is sufficiently confusing, 
considered as a problem in the economic theory of capital, but it 
offers no particular difficulty when considered as a proposition 
in corporation finance. 
    There is another curious question that will also have to be 
left as a moot question, in the absence of more specific 
information than that which is yet available; more a question of 
idle curiosity, perhaps, than of substantial consequence. How 
nearly is it likely that the total gains which accrue to these 
prosperous business concerns and their investors from their 
conscientious withdrawal of efficiency will equal the total loss 
suffered by the community as a whole from the incidental 
reduction of the output? Net production is kept down in order to 
get a profitable price for the output; but it is not certain 
whether the net production has to be lowered by as much or more 
than the resulting increased gain which this businesslike 
strategy brings to the businesslike strategists. The strategic 
curtailment of net production below productive capacity is net 
loss to the community as a whole, including both the business men 
and their customers; the gains which go to these business 
concerns in this way are net loss to the community as a whole, 
exclusive of the business concerns and their investors. The 
resulting question is, therefore, not whether the rest of the 
community loses as much as the business men gain, -- that goes 
without saying, since the gains of the business men in the case 
are paid over to them by the rest of the community in the 
enhanced (or maintained) price of the products, but rather it is 
a question whether the rest of the community, the common man, 
loses twice as much as the business concerns and their investors 
gain. 
    The whole case has some analogy with the phenomena of 
blackmail, ransom, and any similar enterprise that aims to get 
something for nothing; although it is carefully to be noted that 
its analogy with these illegitimate forms of gainful enterprise 
must, of course, not be taken to cast any shadow of suspicion on 
the legitimacy of all the businesslike sabotage that underlies 
this immaterial corporate capital and its earning-capacity. In 
the case of blackmail, ransom, and such like illegal traffic in 
extortion, it is known that the net loss suffered by the loser 
and the gainer together exceeds the net gain which accrues to the 
beneficiary, by as much as the cost of enforcement plus the 
incidental inconvenience to both parties to the transaction. At 
the same time, the beneficiary's subsequent employment and 
consumption of his "ill-gotten gains," as they are sometimes 
called, whether he consumes them in riotous living or in the 
further pursuit of the same profitable line of traffic, -- all 
this, it is believed, does not in any degree benefit the rest of 
the community. As seen in the perspective of the common good, 
such enterprise in extortion is believed to be quite wastefully 
disserviceable. 
    Now, this analogy may be taken for what it is worth; 
"Analogies do not run on all-fours." But when seen in the same 
perspective, the question of loss and gain involved in the case 
of these intangible assets and their earning-capacity falls into 
something like this shape: Does the total net loss suffered by 
the community at large, exclusive of the owners of these 
intangibles, exceed two-hundred percent of the returns which go 
to these owners? or, Do these intangibles cost the community more 
than twice what they are worth to the owners? -- the loss to the 
community being represented by the sum of the overhead burden 
carried on account of these intangibles plus the necessary 
curtailment of production involved in maintaining profitable 
prices. The overhead burden is paid out of the net annual 
production, after the net annual production has been reduced by 
so much as may be necessary to "maintain prices at a reasonably 
profitable figure." 
    A few years ago any ordinarily observant person would 
doubtless have answered this question in the negative, probably 
without hesitation. So also, any ordinarily intelligent votary of 
the established order, as, e.g., a corporation lawyer, a 
commercial trade journal, or a trade-union official, would 
doubtless, at that period, have talked down such a question out 
of hand, as being fantastically preposterous. That would have 
been before the war experience began to throw light into the dark 
places of business enterprise as conducted under the new order of 
industry. Today (October, 1918) -- it is to be admitted with such 
emotion as may come to hand -- this question is one which can be 
entertained quite seriously, in the light of experience. In the 
recent past, as matters have stood up to the outbreak of the war, 
the ordinary rate of production in the essential industries under 
businesslike management has habitually and by deliberate 
contrivance fallen greatly short of productive capacity. This is 
an article of information which the experience of the war has 
shifted from the rubric of "Interesting if True" to that of 
"Common Notoriety." 
    The question as to how much this "incapacity by advisement" 
has commonly amounted to may be attempted somewhat after this 
fashion. Today, under compulsion of patriotic devotion, fear, 
shame and bitter need, and under the unprecedentedly shrewd 
surveillance of public officers bent on maximum production, the 
great essential industries controlled by the vested interests 
may, one with another, be considered to approach -- perhaps even 
conceivably to exceed -- a fifty-percent efficiency; as counted 
on the basis of what should ordinarily be accomplished by use of 
an equally costly equipment having the disposal of an equally 
large and efficient labor force and equally good natural 
resources, in case the organisation were designed and managed 
with an eye single to turning out a serviceable product, instead 
of, as usual, being managed with an eye single to private gain in 
terms of price. 
    To the spokesmen of "business as usual" this rating of 
current production under the pressure of war needs may seem 
extravagantly low; whereas, to the experts in industrial 
engineering, who are in the habit of arguing in terms of material 
cost and mechanical output, it will seem extravagantly high. 
Publicly, and concessively, this latter class will speak of a 25 
percent efficiency; in private and confidentially they appear 
disposed to say that the rating should be nearer to 10 percent 
than 25. To avoid any appearance of an ungenerous bias, then, 
present actual production in these essential industries may be 
placed at something approaching 50 percent of what should be 
their normal productive capacity in the absence of a businesslike 
control looking to "reasonable profits." It is necessary at this 
point to call to mind that the state of the industrial arts under 
the new order is highly productive, -- beyond example. 
    This state of the case, that production in the essential 
industries presumably does not exceed 50 percent of the normal 
productive capacity, even when driven under the jealous eye of 
public officers vested with power to act, is presumably due in 
great part to the fact that these officers, too, are capable 
business men; that their past training and present bent is such 
as has been given them by long, exacting and successful 
experience in the businesslike management of industry; that their 
horizon and perspective in all that concerns industry are limited 
by the frame of mind that is native to the countinghouse. They, 
too, have learned how to think of industry and its administration 
in terms of profit on investment, and, indeed, in no other terms; 
that being as near as their daily work has allowed them to take 
stock of the ways and means of industry. So that they are still 
guided, in some considerable part, by considerations of what is 
decent, equitable and prudent in the sight of conservative 
business men; and this bias necessarily goes with them in their 
dealings with those ubiquitous, intricate and systematic 
dislocations of the industrial system which have been found 
profitable in the management of industry on a footing of 
competitive sabotage. They still find it reasonable to avoid any 
derangement of those vested interests that live on this margin of 
intangible assets that represents capitalised withdrawal of 
efficiency. 
    In so characterising the situation there is, of course, no 
inclination to impute blame to these businesslike officials who 
are patriotically giving their best abilities and endeavors to 
this work of enforcing an increased production in the essential 
industries and diverting needed labor and materials from the 
channels of waste; nor is it intended to cast aspersions on the 
good faith or the honorable motives of those grave captains of 
industry whom the officials find it so difficult to divert from 
the business man's straight and narrow path of charging what the 
traffic will bear. "They are all honorable men," But like other 
men they are creatures of habit; and their habit of mind is the 
outcome of experience in that class of large, responsible and 
remunerative business affairs that lie somewhat remote from the 
domain of technology, from that field where the mechanistic logic 
of the industrial arts has something to say. It is only that the 
situation as here spoken of rests on settled usage, and that the 
usage is such as the businesslike frame of mind is suited to; at 
the same time that this businesslike usage, of fixed charges, 
vested interests and reasonable profits, does not fully comport 
with the free swing of the industrial arts as they run under the 
new order of technology. Nor is there much chance of getting away 
from this situation of "incapacity by advisement," even under 
pressure of patriotic devotion, fear, shame and need, inasmuch as 
the effectual public opinion has learned the same bias and will 
scarcely entrust the conduct of its serious interests to any 
other than business men and business methods. 
    To return to the argument. It may be conceded that production 
in the essential industries, under pressure of the war needs, 
rises to something like a 50 percent efficiency. At the same time 
it is presumably well within the mark to say that this current 
output in these essential industries will amount to something 
like twice their ordinary output in time of peace and business as 
usual, One-half of 50 percent is 25 percent; and so one comes in 
sight of the provisional conclusion that under ordinary 
conditions of businesslike management the habitual net production 
is fairly to be rated at something like one-fourth of the 
industrial community's productive capacity; presumably under that 
figure rather than over. 
    In the absence of all reflection this crude estimate may seem 
recklessly hasty, perhaps it may even be thought scandalously 
unflattering to our substantial citizens who have the keeping of 
the community's material welfare; but a degree of observation and 
reflection will quickly ease any feeling of annoyance on that 
score. So, e.g., if the account as presented above does not 
appear to foot up to as much as the conclusion would seem to 
require, further account may be taken of that side-line of 
business enterprise that spends work and materials in an effort 
to increase the work to be done, and to increase the cost per 
unit of the increased work; all for the benefit of the earnings 
of the concern for whose profit it is arranged. It may be called 
to mind that there still are half-a-dozen railway passenger 
stations in such a town as Chicago, especially designed to work 
at cross purposes and hinder the traffic of competing railway 
corporations; that on the basis of this ingeniously contrived 
retardation of traffic there has been erected a highly prosperous 
monopoly in the transfer of baggage and passengers, employing a 
large equipment and labor force and costing the traveling public 
some millions of useless outlay yearly; with nothing better to 
show for it than delay, confusion, wear and tear, casualties and 
wrangles, twenty-four hours a day; and that this arrangement is, 
quite profitably, duplicated throughout the country as often and 
on as large a scale as there are towns in which to install it. So 
again, there is an exemplary weekly periodical of the most widely 
reputable and most profitable class, with a circulation of more 
than two million, which habitually carries some 60 to 80 large 
pages of competitive advertising matter, at a time when the most 
exacting economy of work and materials is a matter of urgent and 
acknowledged public need; with nothing better to show for it than 
an increased cost of all the goods advertised, most of which are 
superfluities. This, too, is only a typical case, duplicated by 
the thousand, as nearly as the businesslike management of the 
other magazines and newspapers can achieve the same result. These 
are familiar instances of business as usual under the new order 
of industry. They are neither extreme nor extraordinary. Indeed 
the whole business community is run through with enterprise of 
this kind so thoroughly that this may fairly be said to be the 
warp of the fabric. In effect, of course, it is an enterprise in 
subreption; but in point of moral sentiment and conscious motive 
it is nothing of the kind. 
    All these intricate arrangements for doing those things that 
we ought not to have done and leaving undone those things that we 
ought to have done are by no means maliciously intended. They are 
only the ways and means of diverting a sufficient share of the 
annual product to the benefit of the legitimate beneficiaries, 
the kept classes. But this apparatus and procedure for capturing 
and dividing this share of the community's annual dividend is 
costly -- one is tempted to say unduly costly. It foots up to, 
perhaps, something like one-half of the work done, and it is 
occupied with taking over something like one-half of the output 
produced by the remaining one-half of the year's work. And yet, 
as a business proposition it seems sound enough, inasmuch as the 
income which it brings to the beneficiaries will presumably foot 
up to something like one-half of the country's annual production. 
    There is nothing gained by finding fault with any of this 
businesslike enterprise that is bent on getting something for 
nothing, at any cost. After all, it is safe and sane business, 
sound and legitimate, and carried on blamelessly within the rules 
of the game, One may also dutifully believe that there is really 
no harm done, or at least that it might have been worse. It is 
reassuring to note that at least hitherto the burden of this 
overhead charge of 50 percent plus has not broken the back of the 
industrial community. It also serves to bring under a strong 
light the fact that the state of the industrial arts as it runs 
under the new order is highly productive, inordinately 
productive. And, finally, there should be some gain of serenity 
in realising how singularly consistent has been the run of 
economic law through the ages, and recalling, once more the 
reflection which John Stuart Mill arrived at some half-a-century 
ago, that, "Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical 
inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil of any human 
being." 
 
Chapter 5 
 
The Vested Interests 
 
    There are certain saving clauses in common use among persons 
who speak for that well-known order of pecuniary rights and 
obligations which the modern point of view assumes as "the 
natural state of man." Among them are these: "Given the state of 
the industrial arts"; "Other things remaining the same"; "In the 
long run"; "In the absence of disturbing causes," It has been the 
praiseworthy endeavor of the votaries of this established law and 
custom to hold fast the good old plan on a strategic line of 
interpretation resting on these provisos. There have been 
painstaking elucidations of what is fundamental and intrinsic in 
the way of human institutions, of what essentially ought to be, 
and of what must eventually come to pass in the natural course of 
time and change as it is believed to run along under the guidance 
of those indefeasible principles that make up the modern point of 
view. And the disquieting incursions of the New Order have been 
disallowed as not being of the essence of Nature's contract with 
mankind, within the constituent principles of the modern point of 
view stabilised in the eighteenth century. 
    Now, as has already been remarked in an earlier passage, the 
state of the industrial arts has at no time continued unchanged 
during the modern era; consequently other things have never 
remained the same; and in the long run the outcome has always 
been shaped by the disturbing causes. All this reflects no 
discredit on the economists and publicists who so have sketched 
out the natural run of the present and future in the dry light of 
the eighteenth-century principles, since their reservations have 
not been observed. The arguments have been as good as the 
premises on which they proceed, and the premises have once been 
good enough to command unquestioning assent; although that is now 
some time ago. The fault appears to lie in the unexampled shifty 
behavior of the latter-day facts. Yet however shifty, these 
facts, too, are as stubborn as others of their kind. 
 
    The system of free competition, self-help, equal opportunity 
and free bargaining which is contemplated by the modern point of 
view, assumes an industrial situation in which the work and 
trading of any given individual or group can go on freely by 
itself, without materially helping or hindering the equally 
untrammeled working of the rest. It has, of course, always been 
recognised that the country's industry makes up something of a 
connected system; so that there would necessarily be some degree 
of mutual adjustment and accommodation among the many 
self-sufficient working units which together make up the 
industrial community; but these working units have been conceived 
to be so nearly independent of one another that the slight 
measure of running adjustment needed could be sufficiently taken 
care of by free competition in the market. This assumption has, 
of course, never been altogether sound at any stage in the 
industrial advance; but it has at least been within speaking 
distance of facts so late as the eighteenth century. It was a 
possible method of keeping the balance in the industrial system 
before the coming of the machine industry. Quite evidently it 
commended itself to the enlightened common sense of that time as 
a sufficiently workable ideal. So much so that it then appeared 
to be the most practical solution of the industrial and social 
difficulties which beset that generation. It is fairly to be 
presumed that the plan would still be workable in some fashion 
today if the conditions which then prevailed had continued 
unchanged through the intervening one hundred and fifty years, if 
other things had remained the same. All that was, in effect, 
before the coming of the machine technology and the later growth 
of population. 
    But as it runs today, according to the new industrial order 
set afoot by the machine technology, the carrying-on of the 
community's industry is not well taken care of by the loose 
corrective control which is exercised by a competitive market. 
That method is too slow, at the best, and too disjointed. The 
industrial system is now a wide-reaching organisation of 
mechanical processes which work together on a comprehensive 
interlocking plan of give and take, in which no one section, 
group, or individual unit is free to work out its own industrial 
salvation except in active copartnership with the rest; and the 
whole of which runs on as a moving equilibrium of forces in 
action. This system of interlocking processes and mutually 
dependent working units is a more or less delicately balanced 
affair. Evidently the system has to be taken as a whole, and 
evidently it will work at its full productive capacity only on 
condition that the coordination of its interlocking processes be 
maintained at a faultless equilibrium, and only when its 
constituent working units are allowed to run full and smooth. But 
a moderate derangement will not put it out of commission. It will 
work at a lower efficiency, and continue running, in spite of a 
very considerable amount of dislocation; as is habitually the 
case today. 
    At the same time any reasonably good working efficiency of 
the industrial system is conditioned on a reasonably good 
coordination of these working forces; such as will allow each and 
several of the working units to carry on at the fullest working 
capacity that will comport with the unhampered working of the 
system as a balanced whole. But evidently, too, any dislocation, 
derangement or retardation of the work at any critical point -- 
which comes near saying at any point -- in this balanced system 
of work will cause a disproportionately large derangement of the 
whole. The working units of the industrial system are no longer 
independent of one another under the new order. 
    It is, perhaps, necessary to add that the industrial system 
has not yet reached anything like the last degree of development 
along this line; it is at least not yet a perfected automatic 
mechanism. But it should also be added that with each successive 
advance into the new order of industry created by the machine 
technology, and at a continually accelerated rate of advance, the 
processes of industry are being more thoroughly standardised, the 
working units of the system as a whole demand a more undeviating 
maintenance of its moving equilibrium, a more exacting mechanical 
correlation of industrial operations and equipment. And it seems 
reasonable to expect that things are due to move forward along 
this line still farther in the calculable future, rather than the 
reverse. 
    This state of things would reasonably suggest that the 
control of the industrial system had best be entrusted to men 
skilled in these matters of technology. The industrial system 
does its work in terms of mechanical efficiency, not in terms of 
price. It should accordingly seem reasonable to expect that its 
control would be entrusted to men experienced in the ways and 
means of technology, men who are in the habit of thinking about 
these matters in such terms as are intelligible to the engineers. 
The material welfare of the community is bound up with the due 
working of this industrial system, which depends on the expert 
knowledge, insight, and disinterested judgment with which it is 
administered. It should accordingly have seemed expedient to 
entrust its administration to the industrial engineers, rather 
than to the captains of finance. The former have to do with 
productive efficiency, the latter with the higgling of the 
market. 
    However, by historical necessity the discretionary control in 
all that concerns this highly technological system of industry 
has come to vest in those persons who are highly skilled in the 
higgling of the market, the masters of financial intrigue. And so 
great is the stability of that system of law and custom by grace 
of which these persons claim this power, that any disallowance of 
their plenary control over the material fortunes of the community 
is scarcely within reason. All the while the progressive shifting 
of ground in the direction of a more thoroughly mechanistic 
organisation of industry goes on and works out into a more and 
more searching standardisation of works and methods and a more 
exacting correlation of industries, in an ever increasingly large 
and increasingly sensitive industrial system. All the while the 
whole of it grows less and less manageable by business methods; 
and with every successive move the control exercised by the 
business men in charge grows wider, more arbitrary, and more 
incompatible with the common good. 
    Business affairs, in the narrow sense of the expression, have 
in time necessarily come in for an increasing share of the 
attention of those who exercise the control. The businesslike 
manager's attention is continually more taken up with "the 
financial end" of the concern's interests; so that by enforced 
neglect he is necessarily leaving more of the details of shop 
management and supervision of the works to subordinates, largely 
to subordinates who are presumed to have some knowledge of 
technological matters and no immediate interest in the run of the 
market. They are in fact persons who are presumed to have this 
knowledge by the business men who have none of it. But the larger 
and final discretion, which affects the working of the industrial 
system as a whole, or the orderly management of any considerable 
group of industries within the general system,- all that is still 
under the immediate control of the businesslike managers, each of 
whom works for his own concern's gain without much afterthought. 
The final discretion still rests with the businesslike 
directorate of each concern -- the owner or the board -- even in 
all questions of physical organisation and technical management; 
although this businesslike control of the details of production 
necessarily comes to little else than acceptance, rejection, or 
revision of measures proposed by the men immediately in charge of 
the works; together with a constant check on the rate and volume 
of output, with a view to the market. 
    In very great part the directorate's control of the industry 
has practically taken the shape of a veto on such measures of 
production as are not approved by the directorate for 
businesslike reasons, that is to say for purposes of private 
gain. Business is a pursuit of profits, and profits are to be had 
from profitable sales, and profitable sales can be made only if 
prices are maintained at a profitable level, and prices can be 
maintained only if the volume of marketable output is kept within 
reasonable limits; so that the paramount consideration in such 
business as has to do with the staple industries is a reasonable 
limitation of the output. "Reasonable" means "what the traffic 
will bear"; that is to say, "what will yield the largest net 
return." 
    Hence in the larger mechanical industries, which set the pace 
for the rest and which are organised on a standardised and more 
or less automatic plan, the current oversight of production by 
their businesslike directorate does not effectually extend much 
beyond the regulation of the output with a view to what the 
traffic will bear; and in this connection there is very little 
that the business men in charge can do except to keep the output 
short of productive capacity by so much as the state of the 
market seems to require; it does not lie within their competence 
to increase the output beyond that point, or to increase the 
productive capacity of their works, except by way of giving the 
technical men permission to go ahead and do it. 
    The business man's place in the economy of nature is to "make 
money," not to produce goods. The production of goods is a 
mechanical process, incidental to the making of money; whereas 
the making of money is a pecuniary operation, carried on by 
bargain and sale, not by mechanical appliances and powers. The 
business men make use of the mechanical appliances and powers of 
the industrial system, but they make a pecuniary use of them. And 
in point of fact the less use a business man can make of the 
mechanical appliances and powers under his charge, and the 
smaller a product he can contrive to turn out for a given return 
in terms of price, the better it suits his purpose. The highest 
achievement in business is the nearest approach to getting 
something for nothing. What any given business concern gains must 
come out of the total output of productive industry, of course; 
and to that extent any given business concern has an interest in 
the continued production of goods. But the less any given 
business concern can contrive to give for what it gets, the more 
profitable its own traffic will be. Business success means 
"getting the best of the bargain." 
    The common good, so far as it is a question of material 
welfare, is evidently best served by an unhampered working of the 
industrial system at its full capacity, without interruption or 
dislocation. But it is equally evident that the owner or manager 
of any given concern or section of this industrial system may be 
in a position to gain something for himself at the cost of the 
rest by obstructing, retarding or dislocating this working system 
at some critical point in such a way as will enable him to get 
the best of the bargain in his dealings with the rest. This 
appears constantly in the altogether usual, and altogether 
legitimate, practice of holding out for a better price. So also 
in the scarcely less usual, and no less legitimate, practice of 
withholding needed ground or right of way, or needed materials or 
information, from a business rival. Indeed it has been rumored 
that one of the usual incentives which drew the patriotic 
one-dollar-a-year men from their usual occupations to the service 
of their country was the chance of controlling information by 
means of which to "put it over" their business rivals. All these 
things are usual and a matter of course, because business 
management under the conditions created by the new order of 
industry is in great part made up of these things. Sabotage of 
this kind is indispensable to any large success in industrial 
business. 
    But it is also evident that the private gain which the 
business concerns come in for by this management entails a loss 
on the rest of the community, and that the loss suffered by the 
rest of the community is necessarily larger than the total gains 
which these manoeuvres bring to the business concerns; inasmuch 
as the friction, obstruction and retardation of the moving 
equilibrium of production involved in this business-like sabotage 
necessarily entails a disproportionate curtailment of output. 
    However, it is well to call to mind that the community will 
still be able to get along, perhaps even to get along very 
tolerably, in spite of a very appreciable volume of sabotage of 
this kind; even though it does reduce the net productive capacity 
to a fraction of what it would be in the absence of all this 
interference and retardation; for the current state of the 
industrial arts is highly productive. So much so that in spite of 
all this deliberate waste and confusion that is set afoot in this 
way for private gain, there still is left over an absolutely 
large residue of net production over cost. The community still 
has something to go on. The available margin of free income -- 
that is to say, the margin of production over cost -- is still 
wide; so that it allows a large latitude for playing fast and 
loose with the community's livelihood. 
    Now, these businesslike manoeuvres of deviation and delay are 
by no means to be denounced as being iniquitous or unfair, 
although they may have an unfortunate effect on the conditions of 
life for the common man. That is his misfortune, which law and 
custom count on his bearing with becoming fortitude. These are 
the ordinary and approved means of carrying on business according 
to the liberal principles of free bargain and self-help as 
established in the eighteenth century; and they are in the main 
still looked on as a meritorious exercise of thrift and sagacity 
-- duly so looked on, it is to be presumed. At least such is the 
prevailing view among the substantial citizens, who are in a 
position to speak from first-hand knowledge. It is only that the 
exercise of these homely virtues on the large scale on which 
business is now conducted, and when dealing with the 
wide-reaching articulations of the industrial system under the 
new order of technology, -- under these uncalled-for 
circumstances the unguarded exercise of these virtues entails 
business disturbances which are necessarily large, and which 
bring on mischievous consequences in industry which are 
disproportionately larger still. 
    It is also true, the businesslike managers of industrial 
enterprise have also other things to do, besides holding the 
marketable supply of goods and services down to such an amount as 
is expected to bring the most profitable prices, or diverting 
credulous customers from one seller to another by competitive 
advertising. But it should also be noted that there is next to no 
business enterprise, if any, whose chief end is not profitable 
sales, or profitable bargains which mean the same thing as 
profitable sales. They are therefore engaged unremittingly in one 
or another of the approved lines of competitive management with a 
view to profitable traffic for themselves, and to creating an 
advantage for themselves in the market. It is a poor-spirited 
concern that does not constantly aim to create for itself such a 
position of advantage as will give it something of a vested 
interest in the traffic. Such a concern is scarcely fit to 
survive; nor is it likely to. 
    It is not that business enterprise is wholly taken up with 
such like manoeuvres of restraint, obstruction and competitive 
selling. This is only part of the business men's everyday work, 
although it is not a minor part. In any competitive business 
community this line of duties will take up a large share of the 
business men's attention and will engage their best and most 
businesslike abilities. More particularly in the management of 
the greater industrial enterprises of the present day, the larger 
as well as the more lucrative part of the duties of those who 
direct affairs appears commonly to be of this nature. That such 
should be the case lies in the nature of things under the 
circumstances which now prevail. It would not be far out of the 
way to say that any occupations in which this rule does not apply 
are occupations which have not, or have not yet, come into line 
as members in good standing in that new order of business 
enterprise which is based on the machine industry governed by the 
liberal principles of the eighteenth century. 
    "Our people, moreover, do not wait to be coached and led. 
They know their own business, are quick and resourceful at every 
readjustment, definite in purpose, and self-reliant in action... 
The American business man is of quick initiative. The ordinary 
and normal processes of private initiative will not, however, 
provide immediate employment for all of the men of our returning 
armies," Such is the esteem in which American business men are 
held by American popular opinion and such is also the view which 
American business men are inclined to take of their own place and 
value in the community. There need be no quarrel with it. But it 
will be in place to call attention to the statement that "The 
ordinary and normal processes of private initiative will not, 
however, provide immediate employment for all the men." It should 
be added, as is plain to all men, that these ordinary and normal 
processes of private initiative never do provide employment for 
all the men available. In fact, unemployment is an ordinary and 
normal phenomenon. So that even in the present emergency, when 
the peoples of Christendom are suffering privation together for 
want of goods needed for immediate use, the ordinary and normal 
processes of private initiative are not to be depended on to 
employ all the available man power for productive industry. The 
reason is well known to all men; so well known as to be uniformly 
taken for granted as a circumstance which is beyond human remedy. 
It is the simple and obvious fact that the ordinary and normal 
processes of private initiative are the same thing as "business 
as usual," which controls industry with a view to private gain in 
terms of price; and the largest private, gain in terms of price 
can not be had by employing all the available man power and 
speeding up the industries to their highest productivity, even 
when all the peoples of Christendom are suffering privation 
together for want of the ordinary necessaries of life. Private 
initiative means business enterprise, not industry. 
    But all the same, the profits of business come out of the 
product of industry; and industry is controlled, accelerated and 
slowed down with a view to business profits; and one outcome of 
this arrangement so far, in America, has been the complacent 
estimate of this business enterprise formulated in the passage 
quoted above. The result of a businesslike management of industry 
for private gain in America has on the whole been a fairly high 
level of prosperity. For this there are two main reasons: (a) the 
exceptionally great natural resources of the country; and (b) the 
continued growth and spread of population, (a) Business 
enterprise, that is to say private ownership, has taken over 
these resources, by a process of legalised seizure, and has used 
them up as rapidly as may be, with a view to private gain; all of 
which has gone to make private business profitable to that 
extent, although it has impoverished the underlying community by 
using up its natural resources, (b) The continued growth and 
spread of population, by natural increase and by immigration, has 
furnished the business men of this country a continually 
expanding market for goods; both for goods to be used in 
production and transportation and for finished articles of 
consumption. Hence the American business men have been in the 
fortunate position of not having to curtail the output of 
industry harshly and persistently at all points. It is, in 
effect, for this continued growth of their market, caused by the 
growth of population, that the business men claim credit when 
they "point with pride" to the resourcefulness and quick 
initiative with which they have "developed the country," To their 
credit be it said, they have on the whole not hindered the 
country's prosperity beyond what the traffic would bear; and the 
peculiar situation of this country hitherto has been such that 
the traffic of business would bear a nearly uninterrupted 
expansion of industry at perhaps something like one-half of its 
possible rate of expansion. To their own gain, and to the relief 
of the underlying community, they have been enabled profitably to 
let the country's industry run on a moderately high level of 
efficiency,with more or less, but always a very appreciable 
amount, of unemployment, idle plant, and waste of resources. 
    All that industry which comes in under the dominant machine 
technology -- that is to say all that fairly belongs in the new 
order of industry -- is now governed by business men for business 
ends, in what is to be done and what is to be left undone. And 
wherever business enterprise has taken over the direction of 
things the management is directed in part to the production of a 
marketable supply, and in part to arranging for a profitable sale 
of the supply; and the strategy available for this latter, and 
indispensable, work lies almost wholly within the lines of 
competitive management already spoken of. In case these 
manoeuvres of businesslike deviation and defeat are successful 
and fall into an orderly system whose operation may be continued 
at will, or in so far as this management creates an assured 
strategic advantage for any given business concern, the result is 
a vested interest. This may then eventually be capitalised in due 
form, as a body of intangible assets. As such it goes to augment 
the business community's accumulated wealth. And the country is 
statistically richer per capita. 
    A vested interest is a marketable right to get something for 
nothing. This does not mean that the vested interests cost 
nothing. They may even come high. Particularly may their cost 
seem high if the cost to the community is taken into account, as 
well as the expenditure incurred by their owners for their 
production and up-keep. Vested interests are immaterial wealth, 
intangible assets. As regards their nature and origin, they are 
the outgrowth of three main lines of businesslike management: (a) 
Limitation of supply, with a view to profitable sales; (b) 
Obstruction of traffic, with a view to profitable sales; and (c) 
Meretricious publicity, with a view to profitable sales. It will 
be remarked that these are matters of business, in the strict 
sense. They are devices of salesmanship, not of workmanship; they 
are ways and means of driving a bargain, not ways and means of 
producing goods or services. The residue which stands over as a 
product of these endeavors is in the nature of an intangible 
asset, an article of immaterial wealth; not an increase of the 
tangible equipment or the material resources in hand. The 
enterprising owners of the concern may be richer by that much, 
and so perhaps may the business community as a whole -- though 
that is a precariously dubious point -- but the community at 
large is no better off in any material respect. 
    This account, of course, assumes that all this business is 
conducted strictly within the lines of commercial honesty. It 
would only be tedious and misleading to follow up and take 
account of that scattering recourse to force or fraud that will 
never wholly be got rid of in the pursuit of gain, whether by way 
of business traffic or by more direct methods. Still, it may well 
be in place to recall that the code of commercial honesty applies 
only between the parties to a bargain, and takes no account of 
the interests of any third party, except by express injunction of 
the, law, still less does it imply any degree of regard for the 
common good. Commercial honesty, of course, is the honesty of 
self-help, or caveat emptor, which is Latin for the same thing. 
    In the ordinary course of management some considerable amount 
of means and effort is spent in the pursuit of profitable sales 
and in creating or acquiring an advantage in their further 
pursuit. The enduring result, if any, is a body of intangible 
assets in the nature of what is called good-will. The ordinary 
expenditure incurred for this purpose is so considerable, in 
fact, that the "selling cost" will not infrequently be far and 
away the larger part of those costs that are to be covered by the 
price of advertised goods or advertised traffic. This necessary 
consumption of work and means with a view to increase sales and 
to create a prospective increase of profits is to be counted as 
net waste, of course; in the sense that it contributes nothing to 
the total output of serviceable goods, present or prospective. 
The net aggregate result is to lay equipment idle, hinder 
traffic, and induce credulous persons now and again to change 
their mind about what things they will buy. 
    Roughly, any business concern which so comes in for an 
habitual run of free income comes to have a vested right in this 
"income stream," and this preferred standing of the concern in 
this respect is recognised by calling such a concern a "vested 
interest," or a "special interest," Free income of this kind, not 
otherwise accounted for, may be capitalised if it promises to 
continue, and it can then be entered on the books as an item of 
immaterial wealth, a prospective source of gain. So long as it 
has not been embodied in a marketable legal instrument, any such 
item of intangible assets will be nothing more than a method of 
notation, a book-keeper's expedient. But it can readily be 
covered with some form of corporation security, as, e.g., 
preferred stock or bonds, and it then becomes an asset in due 
standing and a vested interest endowed with legal tenure. 
    Ordinarily any reasonably uniform and permanent run of free 
income of this kind will be covered by an issue of corporate 
securities with a fixed rate of interest or dividends; whereupon 
the free income in question becomes a fixed overhead charge on 
the concern's business, to be carried as an item of ordinary and 
unavoidable outlay and included in the necessary cost of 
production of the concern's output of goods or services. But 
whether it is covered by an issue of vendible securities or 
carried in a less formal manner as a source of income not 
otherwise accounted for, such a vested right to get something for 
nothing will rightly be valued and defended against infraction 
from outside as a proprietary right, an item of immaterial but 
very substantial wealth. 
    There is nothing illegitimate or doubtful about this 
incorporation of unearned income into the ordinary costs of 
production on which "reasonable profits" are computed. "The law 
allows it and the court awards it." To indicate how utterly 
congruous it all is with the new order of business enterprise it 
may be called to mind that not only do the captains of 
corporation finance habitually handle the matter in that way, but 
the same view is accepted by those public authorities who are 
called in to review and regulate the traffic of the business 
concerns governed by these captains of finance. The later 
findings are apparently unequivocal, to the effect that when once 
a run of free income has been capitalised and docketed as an 
asset it becomes a legitimate overhead charge, and it is then 
justly to be counted among necessary costs and covered by the 
price which consumers should reasonably pay for the concern's 
offering of goods or services. 
    Such a finding has come to be a fairly well settled matter of 
course both among the officials and among the law-abiding 
investors, so far as regards those intangible assets that are 
covered by vendible securities carrying a fixed rate; and the 
logic of this finding is doubtless sound according to the 
principles of the modern point of view, which were put into 
stable form before the coming of corporation finance. There may 
still be a doubt or a question whether valuable perquisites of 
the same nature, which continue to be held loosely as an informal 
vested interest, as, e.g., merchantable good-will, are similarly 
entitled to the benefit of the common law which secures any owner 
in the usufruct of his property. To such effect have commonly 
been the findings of courts and boards of inquiry, of Public 
Utility Commissions, of such bodies as the Interstate Commerce 
Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and latterly of divers 
recently installed agencies for the control of prices and output 
in behalf of the public interest; so, for instance, right lately, 
certain decisions and recommendations of the War Labor Board. 
    Any person with a taste for curiosities of human behavior 
might well pursue this question of capitalised free income into 
its further convolutions, and might find reasonable entertainment 
in so doing. The topic also has merits as a subject for economic 
theory. But for the present argument it may suffice to note that 
this free income and the business-like contrivances by which it 
is made secure and legitimate are of the essence of this new 
order of business enterprise; that the abiding incentive to such 
enterprise lies in this unearned income; and that the intangible 
assets which are framed to cover this line of "earnings," 
therefore, constitute the substantial core of corporate capital 
under the new order. In passing, it may also be noted that there 
is room for a division of sentiment as regards this disposal of 
the community's net production, and that peremptory questions of 
class interest and public policy touching these matters may 
presently be due to come to a hearing. 
 
    To some, this manner of presenting the case may seem 
unfamiliar, and it may therefore be to the purpose to restate the 
upshot of this account in the briefest fashion: Capital -- at 
least under the new order of business enterprise -- is 
capitalised prospective gain. From this arises one of the 
singularities of the current situation in business and its 
control of industry; viz., that the total face value, or even the 
total market value of the vendible securities which cover any 
given block of industrial equipment and material resources, and 
which give title to its ownership, always and greatly exceeds the 
total market value of the equipment and resources to which the 
securities give title of ownership, and to which alone in the 
last resort they do give title. The margin by which the 
capitalised value of the going concern exceeds the value of its 
material properties is commonly quite wide. Only in the case of 
small and feeble corporations, or such concerns as are balancing 
along the edge of bankruptcy, does this margin of intangible 
values narrow down and tend to disappear. Any industrial business 
concern which does not enjoy such a margin of capitalised free 
earning-capacity has fallen short of ordinary business success 
and is possessed of no vested interest. 
    This margin of free income which is capitalised in the value 
of the going concern comes out of the net product of industry 
over cost. It is secured by successful bargaining and an 
advantageous position in the market; which involves some 
derangement and retardation of the industrial system, -- so much 
so as greatly to reduce the net margin of production over cost. 
Approximately the whole of this remaining margin of free income 
goes to the business men in charge, or to the business concerns 
for whom this management is carried on. In case the free income 
which is gained in this way promises to continue, it presently 
becomes a vested right. It may then be formally capitalised as an 
immaterial asset having a recognised earning-capacity equal to 
this prospective free income. That is to say, the outcome is a 
capitalised claim to get something for nothing; which constitutes 
a vested interest. The total gains which hereby accrue to the 
owners of these vested rights amount to something less than the 
total loss suffered by the community at large through that delay 
of production and derangement of industry that is involved in the 
due exercise of these rights. In other words, and as seen from 
the other side, this free income which the community allows its 
kept classes in the way of returns on these vested rights and 
intangible assets is the price which the community is paying to 
the owners of this imponderable wealth for material damage 
greatly exceeding that amount. But it should be kept in mind and 
should be duly credited to the good intentions of these 
businesslike managers, that the ulterior object sought by all 
this management is not the 100 per cent of mischief to the 
community but only the 10 per cent of private gain for themselves 
and their clients, 
 
    So far as they bear immediately on the argument at this point 
the main facts are substantially as set forth. But to avoid any 
appearance of undue novelty, as well as to avoid the appearance 
of neglecting relevant facts, something more is to be said in the 
same connection. It is particularly to be noted that credit for 
certain material benefits should be given to this same business 
enterprise whose chief aim and effect is the creation of these 
vested rights to unearned income. It will be apparent to anyone 
who is at all familiar with the situation, that much of the 
intangible assets included in the corporate capital of this 
country, e.g., does not represent derangement which is actually 
inflicted on the industrial system from day to day, but rather 
the price of delivery from derangement which the businesslike 
managers of industry have taken measures to discontinue and 
disallow. 
    A concrete illustration will show what is intended. For some 
time past, and very noticeably during the past quarter-century, 
the ownership of the large industrial concerns has constantly 
been drawing together into larger and larger aggregations, with a 
more centralised control. The case of the steel industry is 
typical. For a considerable period, beginning in the early 
nineties, there went on a process of combination and 
recombination of corporations in this industry, resulting in 
larger and larger aggregations of corporate ownership. Commonly, 
though perhaps not invariably, some of the unprofitable 
duplication and work at cross purposes that was necessarily 
involved in the earlier parcelment of ownership was got rid of in 
this way, gradually with each successive move in this 
concentration of ownership and control. Perhaps also invariably 
there was a substantial saving made in the aggregate volume of 
business dealings that would necessarily be involved in carrying 
on the industry. Under the management of many concerns each 
intent on its own pecuniary interest, the details of business 
transactions would be voluminous and intricate, in the way of 
contracts, orders, running accounts, working arrangements, as 
well as the necessary financial operations, properly so called. 
Much of this would be obviated by taking over the ownership of 
these concerns into the hands of a centralised control; and there 
would be a consequent lessening of that delay and uncertainty 
that always is to be counted on wherever the industrial 
operations have to wait on the completion of various business 
arrangements, as they habitually do. There is circumstantial 
evidence that very material gains in economy and expedition 
commonly resulted from these successive moves of consolidation in 
the steel business. And this discontinuance of businesslike delay 
and calculated maladjustment was at each successive move brought 
to a secure footing and capitalised in an increased issue of 
negotiable corporation securities. 
    It will also be recalled that, as a matter of routine, each 
successive consolidation of ownership involved a recapitalization 
of the concerns so brought together under a common head, and that 
commonly if not invariably the resulting recapitalisation would 
be larger than the aggregate earlier capital of the underlying 
corporations. Even where, as sometimes has happened, there was no 
increase made in the nominal capitalisation, there would still 
result an effectual increase; in that the market value of the 
securities outstanding would be larger after the operation than 
the value of the aggregate capital of the underlying corporations 
had been before. There has commonly been some gain in aggregate 
capitalisation, and the resulting increased capitalisation has 
also commonly proved to be valid. The market value of the larger 
and more stable capitalisation has presently proved to be larger 
and more stable than the capitalisation of the same properties 
under the earlier rgime of divided ownership and control. What 
has so been added to the aggregate capitalisation has in the main 
been the relative absence of work at cross purposes, which has 
resulted from the consolidation of ownership; and it is to be 
accounted a typical instance of intangible assets. The new and 
larger capitalisation has commonly made good; and this is 
particularly true for those later, larger and more conclusive 
recombinations of corporate ownership with which the so-called 
era of trust-making in the steel business came to a provisional 
conclusion. The U.S. Steel Corporation has vindicated the wisdom 
of an unreserved advance on lines of consolidation and 
recapitalisation in the financing of the large and technical 
industries. 
    For reasons well understood by those who are acquainted with 
these things, no one can offer a confident estimate, or even a 
particularly intelligent opinion, as to the aggregate amount of 
overhead burden and intangible assets which has been written into 
the corporate capital of the steel business in the course of a 
few years of consolidation. For reasons of depreciation, disuse, 
replacement, extension, renewal, changes in market conditions and 
in technical requirements, the case is too intricate to admit 
anything like a clear-cut identification of the immaterial items 
included in the capitalisation. But there is no chance to doubt 
that in the aggregate these immaterial items foot up to a very 
formidable proportion of the total capital. 
    And what is true for the steel business in this respect will 
doubtless apply even more unreservedly in transportation, or in 
such a case as the oil business. The latter may be taken as a 
typical case, differing from steel in some of the circumstances 
which condition its business organisation, but comparable with 
steel in respect of the necessity for a centralised control. In 
the oil business a rough classification of assets would take some 
such shape as this: (a) Monopolisation of natural resources, (b) 
Control of markets by limitation of the supply, (c) Plant. Of 
these three, the last named, the material equipment, would 
unquestionably be found to be altogether the slightest and least 
valuable. What is not doubtful, in the steel business or in any 
of the other industrial enterprises that run on a similar scale 
and a similar level of technology, is that the owners of the 
corporate capital have come in for a very substantial body of 
intangible assets of this kind, and that these assets of 
capitalised free income will foot up to several times the total 
value of the material assets which underlie them. 
    It is evident that the businesslike management of industry 
under these conditions need not involve derangement and cross 
purposes at every turn. It should always be likely that the 
business men in charge will find it to their profit to combine 
forces, eliminate wasteful traffic, allow a reasonably free and 
economical working of the country's productive powers within the 
limits of a profitable price, and so come in for a larger total 
of free income to be divided amicably among themselves on a 
concerted plan. This can be done by means of a combination of 
ownership, such as the corporations of the present time. But 
there is a difficulty of principle involved in this use of 
incorporation as a method of combining forces. Such a 
consolidation of ownership and control on a large scale appears 
to be, in effect, a combination of forces against the rest of the 
community or in contravention of the principles of free 
competition. In effect it foots up to the same thing as a 
combination in restraint of trade; in form it is a concentration 
of ownership. Combination of owners in restraint of trade is 
obnoxious to the liberal principles of free bargaining and 
self-help; consolidation of ownership by purchase or 
incorporation appears to be a reasonable exercise of the right of 
free bargaining and self-help. There is accordingly some chance 
of a difference of opinion at this point and some risk of playing 
fast and loose with these liberal principles that disallow 
conspiracy in restraint of trade. This difficulty of principle 
has been sought to be got over by believing that a combination of 
ownership in restraint of trade does not amount to a conspiracy 
in restraint of trade, within the purport of these liberal 
principles. There is a great and pressing need of such a 
construction of these principles, which would greatly facilitate 
the work of corporation finance; but it is to be admitted that 
some slight cloud still rests on this manner of disposing of 
ownership. It involves abdication or delegation of that 
discretionary exercise of property rights which has been held to 
be of the essence of ownership. 
    The new state of things brought about by such a consolidation 
is capitalised as a permanent source of free income. And if it 
proves to be a sound business proposition the new capitalisation 
will measure the increase of income which goes to its promoter or 
to the corporation in whose name the move has been made; and if 
the work is well and neatly done, no one else will get any gain 
from it or be in any way benefited by the arrangement. It is a 
business proposition, not a fanciful project of public utility. 
The capitalised value of such a coalition of ownership is not 
measured by any heightened production or any retrenchment of 
waste that may come in its train, nor need the new move bring any 
saving or any addition to the community's net productive 
resources in any respect. Indeed, it happens not infrequently 
that such a waste-conserving coalition of ownership leads 
directly to a restriction of output, according to the familiar 
run of monopoly rule. So frequently will restriction, enhanced 
prices, unemployment, and hardship follow in such a case, that it 
has come to be an article of popular knowledge and belief that 
this is the logical aim and outcome of any successful manoeuvre 
of the kind. 
    So also, though its output of marketable goods or services 
may be got on easier terms, the new and larger business concern 
which results from the coalition need be no more open-handed or 
humane in its dealings with its workmen. There will, in fact, be 
some provocation to the contrary. A more powerful corporation is 
in a position to make its own terms with greater freedom, which 
it then is for the workmen to take or leave, but ordinarily to 
take; for the universal rule of businesslike management -- to 
charge what the traffic will bear -- continues to hold unbroken 
for any business concern, irrespective of its size or its 
facilities. As has already been noted in an earlier passage, 
charging what the traffic will bear is the same as charging what 
will yield the largest net profit. 
 
    There stand over two main questions touching the nature and 
uses of these vested interests: -- Why do not these powerful 
business concerns exercise their autocratic powers to drive the 
industrial system at its full productive capacity, seeing that 
they are in a position to claim any increase of net production 
over cost? and, What use is made of the free income which goes to 
them as the perquisite of their vested interest? The answer to 
the former question is to be found in the fact that the great 
business concerns as well as the smaller ones are all bound by 
the limitations of the price system, which holds them to the 
pursuit of a profitable price, not to the pursuit of gain in 
terms of material goods. Their vested rights are for the most 
part carried as an overhead charge in terms of price and have to 
be met in those terms, which will not allow an increase of net 
production regardless of price. The latter question will find its 
answer in the well-known formula of the economists, that "human 
wants are indefinitely extensible," particularly as regards the 
consumption of superfluities. The free income which is 
capitalised in the intangible assets of the vested interests goes 
to support the well-to-do investors, who are for this reason 
called the kept classes, and whose keep consists in an 
indefinitely extensible consumption of superfluities. 
 
Chapter 6 
 
The Divine Right of Nations 
 
    This sinister fact is patent, that the great war has arisen 
out of a fateful entanglement of national pretensions. And it is 
a fact scarcely less patent that this fateful status quo ante 
arose out of the ordinary run of that system of law and custom 
which has governed human intercourse among civilised nations in 
our time. The underlying principles of this system of law and 
custom have continued to govern human intercourse under a new 
order of material circumstances which has come into effect since 
these principles were first installed. These enlightened 
principles that go to make up the modern point of view as regards 
law and morals are of the eighteenth century, whereas the new 
order in industry is of the twentieth, and between these two 
dates lies an interval of unexampled change in the material 
conditions of life. 
    To all this it will be said, of course, that warfare is not a 
new invention, and that the national ambitions and animosities 
out of which wars have always arisen are of older date than the 
modern point of view and the machine industry; but it will also 
not be denied that the great war which is now coming to a 
provisional close is the largest and most atrocious epoch of 
warfare known to history, and that it has, in point of fact, 
arisen out of this status quo which has been created by these 
enlightened principles of the modern point of view in working out 
their consequences on the ground of the new order of industry.  
 
    The great war arose within that group of nations which have 
the full use of the industrial arts, which conduct their business 
and control their industries on the lines of these enlightened 
principles of the eighteenth century, and whose national 
ambitions and policies are guided by the preconceptions of 
national self-determination and self-assertion which these modern 
civilised peoples have habitually found to be good and valid. The 
group of belligerents has included primarily the great industrial 
nations, and the outcome of the war is being decided by the 
industrial superiority of the advanced industrial peoples. A host 
of slightly backward peoples -- backward in the industrial 
respect -- have been drawn into this contest of the great powers, 
but these have taken part only as interested outliers and as 
auxiliaries to be drawn on at the discretion of the chief 
belligerents. It has been a contest of technological superiority 
and industrial resources, and in the end the decision of it rests 
with the greater aggregation of industrial forces. Frightfulness 
and warlike abandon and all the beastly devices of the heathen 
have proved to be unavailing against the great industrial powers; 
partly because these things do not enduringly serve the 
technological needs of the contest, partly because they have run 
counter to that massive drift of sentiment which animates the 
great industrial peoples. 
    The center of the warlike disturbance has been the same as 
the center of growth and diffusion of the new order of industry. 
And in both respects, both as regards participation in the war 
and as regards their share in the new order of industry, it is 
not a question of geographical nearness to a geographical center, 
but of industrial affiliation and technological maturity. The 
center of disturbance and participation is a center in the 
technological respect; and in the end the battle goes to those 
few great industrial peoples who are nearest, technologically 
speaking, to the apex of growth of the new order. These need be 
superior in no other respect; the contest is decided on the 
merits of the industrial arts. And in this connection it may be 
in place to call to mind again that the state of the industrial 
arts is always a joint stock of knowledge and proficiency held, 
exercised, augmented and carried forward by the industrial 
community at large as a going concern. What the war has 
vindicated, hitherto, is the great efficiency of the mechanical 
industry. 
    But the ambitions and animosities which precipitated this 
contest, and which now stand ready to bring on a renewal of it in 
due time, are not of the industrial order, and eminently not of 
the new order of technology. They have been more nearly bound up 
with those principles of self-help that have stood over from the 
recent past, from the time before the new order of industry came 
into bearing. And there is a curious parallel between the 
consequences worked out by these principles in the economic 
system within each of these nations, on the one hand, and in the 
concert of nations, on the other hand. Within the nation the 
enlightened principles of self-help and free contract have given 
rise to vested interests which control the industrial system for 
their own use and thereby come in for a legal right to the 
community's net output of product over cost. Each of these vested 
interests habitually aims to take over as much as it can of the 
lucrative traffic that goes on and to get as much as it can out 
of the traffic, at the cost of the rest of the community. After 
the same analogy, and by sanction of the same liberal principles, 
the civilised nations, each and several, are vested with an 
inalienable right of "self-determination"; which being 
interpreted means the self-aggrandisement of each and several at 
the cost of the rest, by a reasonable use of force and fraud. And 
there has been, on the whole, no sense of shame or of moral 
obliquity attaching to the use of so much force and fraud as the 
traffic would bear, in this national enterprise of 
self-aggrandisement. Such has been use and wont among the 
civilised nations. 
    Meantime the new order of industry has come into bearing, 
with the result that any disturbance which is set afoot by any 
one of these self-determining nations in pursuing its own ends is 
sure to derange the conditions of life for all the others, just 
so far as these others are bound up in the same comprehensive 
organization of trade and industry. Full and free 
self-determination runs counter to the rule of Live and let live. 
After the same fashion the businesslike manoeuvres of the vested 
interests within the nations, each managing its own affairs with 
an eye single to its own advantage, deranges the ordinary 
conditions of life for the common man, and violates the rule of 
Live and let live by that much. Self-determination, full and 
free, necessarily encroaches on the conditions of life for all 
the others. 
    So, just now there is talk of disallowing or abridging the 
inalienable right of free nations by so much as is imperatively 
demanded for reasonably secure conditions of life among these 
civilised peoples, and especially so far as is required for the 
orderly pursuit of profitable business by the many vested 
interests domiciled in these civilised countries. The project has 
much in common with the measures which have been entertained for 
the restraint of any insufferably extortionate vested interests 
within the national frontiers. 
    In both cases alike, both in the proposed regulation of 
businesslike excesses at home and in the proposed league of 
pacific nations, the projected measures of sobriety and tolerance 
appear to be an infraction of that inalienable right of 
self-direction that makes up the substantial core of law and 
custom according to the modern point of view. There is much alarm 
felt by the demagogues at the danger which is said to threaten 
the national "sovereignty"; just as the vested interests are 
volubly apprehensive of the "sacred rights of property." And in 
both cases alike the projected measure of sobriety, tolerance and 
incidental infraction are designed to go no farther than is 
unequivocally demanded by the imperative needs of continued life 
on earth; leaving the benefit of the doubt always on the side of 
the insufferable vested interests or the mischievous national 
ambitions, as the case may be; and leaving the impression that it 
all is a concessive surrender of principles under compulsion of 
circumstances that will not wait. There is also in both cases 
alike a well-assured likelihood that the tentative revision of 
vested interests and of national pretensions is to be no more 
than an incompetent remedial precaution, a makeshift shelter from 
the wrath to come. 
    It is evident that in both cases alike we have to do with an 
incursion of ideas and considerations that are alien to the 
established liberal principles of human intercourse; but it is 
also evident that these ideas and considerations have the 
sanction of that new order of things that runs in terms of 
tangible performance and enforces its requisitions with cruel and 
unusual punishments. It is these punishments that are to be 
evaded or suspended, and immunity is sought by diplomatic 
measures of formality and delay rather than by tangible 
performance. In such a case the keepers of the established order 
will always look to evasion and entertain a hope of avoiding 
casualties and holding the line by the use of a cleverly designed 
masquerade. 
    It is the express purpose of the projected league of pacific 
nations to keep the sovereign rights of national 
self-determination intact for all comers; it is to be a league of 
nations, not a league of peoples. But it should be sufficiently 
obvious, whether it is avowed or not, that these sovereign rights 
can be maintained by these means only in a mutilated form. Within 
the framework of any such league or common understanding the 
nations, each and several, can continue to exercise these rights 
only on the basis of a mutual agreement to give up so much of 
their national pretensions as are patently incompatible with the 
common good. It involves a concessive surrender of the sovereign 
right of self-aggrandisement, and perhaps also an extension of 
the rule of Live and let live to cover minor nationalities within 
the national frontiers; a mutual agreement to play fair under the 
new rules that are to govern the conduct of national enterprise. 
Any injunction to play fair is an infraction of national 
sovereignty. Hitherto no liberal statesman has been so audacious 
as to "imagine the king's death" and lay profane hands on the 
divine right of nations to seek their own advantage at the cost 
of the rest by such means as the rule of reason shall decide to 
be permissible. It is only that licence is to be hedged about, 
and all insufferable superfluity of naughtiness is provisionally 
to be disallowed. There is this evident resemblance and kinship 
between the vested interests of business and the sovereign rights 
of nations, but it does not amount to identity. 
    There is always something more to the national sovereignty 
and the national pretensions; although these precautionary 
measures that are now under advisement as touches the legitimate 
bounds of both do run on singularly similar lines and are of a 
similarly tentative and equivocal nature. In the prudent measures 
by which statesmen have set themselves to curb the excesses of 
the greater vested interests within the nation their aim has 
quite consistently been to guard the free income of the lesser 
vested interests against the unseasonable rapacity of the greater 
ones; all the while that the underlying community has come into 
the case only as a fair field of business enterprise at large, 
within which there is to be maintained a reasonable degree of 
equal opportunity among these interests, big and little, in whom, 
one with another, vests the effectual usufruct of the underlying 
community. 
    It may be necessary to remark, by way of parenthesis, that 
while this description of these corrective measures may seem to 
hint at a fault, that is by no means its purpose. The fault may 
be there, of course, but if so it has no bearing on the argument 
at this point. It should also be remarked in the same connection 
that this description of facts does not overlook the 
well-conceived verbal reservations and preambles with which 
cautious statesmen habitually surround the common good in the 
face of any unseasonable rapacity on the part of the greater 
vested interests; it is only that the run of the facts has been 
quite patently to the effect so indicated. In the same connection 
it may also not be out of place to recall that a vested interest 
is a prescriptive right to get something for nothing; in which 
again the kinship and resemblance between vested interests in 
business and the sovereign rights of nations comes into view. 
    So, on the other hand, the great war has brought into a 
strong light the obvious fact that, given the existing state of 
the industrial arts, any unseasonable rapacity on the part of the 
great Powers in exercising their inalienable right of national 
self-determination will effectually suppress the similarly 
inalienable right of self-determination in any minor nationality 
that gets in the way. All of which is obnoxious to the liberal 
principle of self-help or to that of equal opportunity. 
Unhappily, these two guiding principles of the modern point of 
view self-help and equal opportunity -- have proved to be 
incompatible with one another under the circumstances of the new 
order of things. So there has come into view this project of a 
league, by which it is proposed to play fast and loose with the 
inalienable right of national self-help by setting up some sort 
of a collusive arrangement between the Powers, a conspiracy in 
restraint of national intrigue, looking to a reasonable 
disallowance of force and fraud in the pursuit of national 
ambitions. 
    Under the material circumstances of the new order those 
correctives that were once counted on to keep the run of things 
within the margin of tolerance have ceased to be a sufficient 
safeguard. By use and wont, in the Liberal scheme of statecraft 
as well as in the scheme of freely competitive business, implicit 
faith has hitherto been given to the remedial effect of punitive 
competition and the punitive correction of excesses by law and 
custom. It has been a system of adjustment by punitive 
afterthought. All of which may once have been well enough in its 
time, so long as the rate and scale of the movement of things 
were slow enough and small enough to be effectually overtaken and 
set to rights by afterthought. The modern -- eighteenth-century 
-- point of view presumes an order of things which is amenable to 
remedial adjustment after the event. But the new order of 
industry, and that sweeping equilibrium of material forces that 
embodies the new order, is not amenable to afterthought. Where 
human life and human fortunes are exposed to the swing of the 
machine system, or to the onset of national ambitions that are 
served by the machine industry, it is safety first or none. 
However, ripe statesmen and over-ripe captains of finance have so 
secure a grasp of first principles that they are still able to 
believe quite sincerely in the good old plan of remedial 
afterthought, and it still commands the affectionate service of 
the jurists and the diplomatic corps. Meantime the far-reaching, 
swift-moving, wide-sweeping machine technology has been drawn 
into the service of national pretensions, as well as of the 
vested interests that find shelter under the national 
pretensions, and both the remedial diplomats and the 
self-determination of nations are on the way to become a tale 
that was told.  
 
    The divine right of nations appears to be a blurred 
after-image of the divine rights of kings. It rests on ground 
more archaic and less open to scrutiny than the Natural Right of 
self-direction as it applies in the case of individual persons. 
It is a highly prized national asset, in the nature of an 
imponderable; and, very much as is true of the divine right of 
kings, any spoken doubt of its paramount validity comes near 
being a sin against the Holy Ghost. It can not safely be 
scrutinised or defined in matter-of-fact words. As is true of the 
divine right of kings, so also as regards the divine right of 
nations, it is extremely difficult to show that it serves the 
common good in any material way, in any way that can be 
formulated or verified in terms of tangible performance. 
Evidently it does not come in under that mechanistic conception 
that rules the scheme of knowledge and belief wherever and so far 
as material science and the machine technology have reshaped 
men's habits of thought. Indeed, it is not a technological 
conception, late or early. It is not statable in terms of 
mechanical efficiency, or even in terms of price. Hence it is 
spoken of, often and eloquently, as being "beyond price." It is 
more nearly akin to magic and religion. It should perhaps best be 
conceived as an end in itself, or a thing-in-itself -- again in 
close analogy with the divine right of kings. But there is no 
question of its substantial reality and its paramount efficacy 
for good and ill. 
    The divine -- that is to say inscrutable and irresponsible -- 
right of kings reached its best estate and put on divinity in the 
stirring times of the Era of State-making; when the princes and 
prelates "tore each other in the slime." It was of a proprietary 
nature, a vested interest, something in the nature of intangible 
assets which embodied the usufruct of the realm, including its 
population and resources, and which could be turned to account in 
the pursuit of princely or dynastic advantages at home and 
abroad. This divine right of princes was disallowed among the 
more civilised peoples on the transition to modern ways of 
thinking, and the sovereign rights of the prince were then taken 
over -- at least in form and principle -- by the people at large, 
and they have continued to be held by them as some sort of 
imponderable "community property," -- at least in point of form 
and profession. The vested interest of the prince or the dynasty 
in the usufruct of the underlying community is thereby presumed 
to have become a collective interest vested in the people of the 
nations and giving them a "right of user" in their own persons, 
knowledge, skill and resources. 
    The mantle of princely sovereignty has fallen on the common 
man -- formally and according to the letter of the legal 
instruments. In practical effect, as "democratic sovereignty" it 
has been converted into a cloak to cover the nakedness of a 
government which does business for the kept classes. In practical 
effect, the shift from the dynastic politics of the era of 
state-making to the Liberal policies based on the enlightened 
principles of the eighteenth century has been a shift from the 
pursuit of princely dominion to an imperialistic enterprise for 
the protection and furtherance of those vested interests that are 
domiciled within the national frontiers. That such has been the 
practical outcome is due to the fact that these enlightened 
principles of the eighteenth century comprise as their chief 
article the "natural" right of ownership. The later course of 
events has decided that the ownership of property in sufficiently 
large blocks will control the country's industrial system and 
thereby take over the disposal of the community's net output of 
product over cost; on which the vested interests live and on 
which, therefore, the kept classes feed. Hence the chief concern 
of those gentlemanly national governments that have displaced the 
dynastic states is always and consistently the maintenance of the 
rights of ownership and investment. 
    However, these pecuniary interests of investment and free 
income are not all that is covered by the mantle of democratic 
sovereignty. Nor will it hold true that the common man has no 
share in the legacy of sovereignty and national enterprise which 
the enlightened democratic commonwealth has taken over from the 
departed dynastic rgime. The divine right of the prince included 
certain imponderables, as well as the usufruct of the material 
resources of the realm. There were the princely dignity and 
honor, which were no less substantial an object of value and 
ambition and were no less tenaciously held by the princes of the 
dynastic rgime than the revenues and material "sinews of war" on 
which the prestige and honor rested. And the common man of the 
democratic commonwealth has at least come in for a ratable share 
in these imponderables of prestige and honor that so are 
comprised under the divine right of the nation. He has an 
undivided interest in the glamour of national achievement, and he 
can swell with just pride in contemplating the triumphs of his 
gentlemanly government over the vested interests domiciled in any 
foreign land, or with just indignation at any diplomatic setback 
suffered by the vested interests domiciled in his own. 
    There is also a more tangible, though more petty, advantage 
gained for the common man in having formally taken over the 
sovereignty from the dead hand of the dynastic prince. The common 
man being now vested with the divine right of national 
sovereignty, held in undivided community ownership, it is 
ceremonially necessary for the gentlemanly stewards of the kept 
classes to consult the wishes of this their sovereign on any 
matters of policy that can not wholly be carried through in a 
diplomatic corner and under cover of night and cloud. He, 
collectively, holds an eventual power of veto. And this power of 
veto has in practice been found to be something of a safeguard 
against any universal and enduring increase of hardship at the 
hands of the gentlemen-investors to whom the conduct of the 
nation's affairs has been "entrusted;" a very modest safeguard, 
it is true, but always of some eventual consequence. There is the 
difference that in the democratic commonwealth the common man has 
to be managed rather than driven, -- except for minor groups of 
common men who live on the lower-common levels, and except for 
recurrent periods of legislative hysteria and judiciary 
blind-staggers. And it is pleasanter to be managed than to be 
driven. Chicane is a more humane art than corporal punishment. 
Imperial England is, after all, a milder-mannered stepmother than 
Imperial Germany. 
    And always the common man comes in for his ratable share in 
the glamour of national achievement, in war and peace; and this 
imponderable gain of the spirit is also something. The value of 
these collective imponderables of national prestige and 
collective honor is not to be made light of. These count for very 
much in the drift and set of national sentiment, and moral issues 
of national moment are wont to arise out of them. Indeed, they 
constitute the chief incentive which holds the common man to an 
unrepining constancy in the service of the "national interests," 
So that, while the tangible shell of material gain appears to 
have fallen to the democratic community's kept classes, yet the 
"psychic income" that springs from national enterprise, the 
spiritual kernel of national elation they share with the common 
man on an equitable footing of community interest. 
    The vested rights of the nation are of the essence of that 
order of things which enjoys the unqualified sanction of the 
modern point of view, Like any other vested interest, these 
rights are conceived in other terms than those which are native 
to the new order of material science and technology. They are of 
an older and more spiritual order, so far as regards the 
principles of knowledge and belief on which they rest. But 
whatever may be their remoter pedigree, they have the sanction of 
that body of principles that is called the modern point of view, 
and they belong in the scheme of things handed on by the Liberal 
movement of the eighteenth and nineteenth century. Apart from the 
imponderable values which fall under the head of national 
prestige, these vested rights of the nation can be defined as an 
extension to the commonwealth of the same natural rights of 
self-direction and personal security -- free contract and 
self-help -- that are secured to the individual citizen under the 
common law. 
    Yet, while the national policies of the democratic 
commonwealths are managed by Liberal statesmen in behalf of the 
vested interests, they still run on the ancient lines of dynastic 
statecraft, as worked out by the statesmen of the ancient rgime; 
and the common man is still passably content to see the traffic 
run along on those lines. The things which are considered 
desirable to be done in the way of national enterprise, as well 
as the sufficient reasons for doing them, still have much of the 
medieval color. National pretensions, enterprise, rivalry, 
intrigue and dissensions among the democratic commonwealths are 
still such as would have been intelligible to Macchiavelli, 
Frederick the Great, Metternich, Bismarck, or the Elder Statesmen 
of Japan. Diplomatic intercourse still runs in the same terms of 
systematised prevarication, and still turns about the same 
schedule of national pretensions that contented the medieval 
spirit of these masters of dynastic intrigue. As a matter of 
course and of common sense the nations still conceive themselves 
to be rivals, whose national interests are incompatible, and 
whose divine right it is to gain something at one another's cost, 
after the fashion of rival bandits or business concerns. They 
still seek dominion and still conceive themselves to have 
extra-territorial interests of a proprietary sort. They still 
hold and still seek vested rights in colonial possessions and in 
extra-territorial priorities and concessions of divers and 
dubious kinds. There still are conferences, stipulations and 
guarantees between the Powers, touching the "Open Door" in China, 
or the equitable partition of Africa, which read like a chapter 
on Honor among Thieves. 
    All this run of national pretensions, wrangles, dominion, 
aggrandisement, chicane, and ill-will, is nothing more than the 
old familiar trading stock of the diplomatic brokers who do 
business in dynastic force and fraud -- also called Realpolitik. 
The democratic nations have taken over in bulk the whole job-lot 
of vested interests and divine rights that once made the monarch 
of the old order an unfailing source of outrage and desolation. 
In the hands of those "Elder Statesmen" who once did business 
under the signature of the dynasty, the traffic in statecraft 
yielded nothing better than a mess of superfluous affliction; and 
there is no reason to apprehend that a continuation of the same 
traffic under the management of the younger statesmen who now do 
business in the name of the democratic commonwealth is likely to 
bring anything more comfortable, even though the legal 
instruments in the case may carry the rubber-stamp O. K. of the 
common man. The same items will foot up to the same sum; and in 
either case the net gain is always something appreciably less 
than nothing. 
    These national interests are part of the medieval system of 
ends, ways and means, as it stood, complete and useless, at that 
juncture when the democratic commonwealth took over the divine 
rights of the crown. It should not be extremely difficult to 
understand why they have stood over, or why they still command 
the dutiful approval of the common man. It is a case of aimless 
survival, on the whole, due partly to the inertia of habit and 
tradition, partly to the solicitous advocacy of these assumed 
national interests by those classes -- the trading and 
office-holding classes -- who stand to gain something by the 
pursuit of them at the cost of the rest. By tenacious tradition 
out of the barbarian past these peoples have continued to be 
rival nations living in a state of habitual enmity and distrust, 
for no better reason than that they have not taken thought and 
changed their mind. 
    After some slackening of national animosities and some 
disposition to neglect national pretensions during the earlier 
decades of the great era of Liberalism, the democratic nations 
have been gradually shifting back to a more truculent attitude 
and a more crafty and more rapacious management in all 
international relations. This aggressive chauvinistic policy has 
been called Imperialism. The movement has visibly kept pace, more 
or less closely, with the increasing range and volume of commerce 
and foreign investments during the same period. And to further 
this business enterprise there has been an ever increasing resort 
to military power. It is reasonably believed that traders and 
investors in foreign parts are able to derive a larger profit 
from their business when they have the backing of a powerful and 
aggressive national government; particularly in their dealings 
with helpless and backward peoples, and more particularly if 
their own national government is sufficiently unscrupulous and 
overbearing, -- which may confidently be counted on so long as 
these governments continue to be administered by the gentlemanly 
delegates of the vested interests and the kept classes. 
    As regards the intrinsic value which is popularly attached to 
the imponderable national possessions, in the way of honor and 
prestige, there is little to be said, beyond the stale reflection 
that there is no disputing about tastes. It all is at least a 
profitable illusion, for the use of those who are in a position 
to profit by it. Such as the crown and the officeholders. But the 
people of the civilised nations believe themselves to have also a 
material interest of some sort in enlarging the national 
dominions and in extending the foreign trade of their business 
men and safe-guarding the foreign claims of their vested 
interests. And the Americans, like many others, harbor the 
singular delusion that they can derive a collective benefit from 
obstructing the country's trade at the national frontiers by 
means of a tariff barrier, and so defeating their own industry by 
that much. It is a survival out of the barbarian past, out of the 
time when the dynastic politicians were occupied with isolating 
the nation and making it self-sufficient, as an engine of warlike 
enterprise for the pursuit of dynastic ambitions and the greater 
discomfort of their neighbors. In an increasing degree as the new 
order of industry has come into bearing, any such policy of 
industrial isolation and self-sufficiency has become more 
difficult and more injurious; for a free range and unhindered 
specialisation is of the essence of the new industrial order. 
    The experience of the war has shown conclusively that no one 
country can hereafter supply its own needs either in raw 
materials or in finished goods. Both the winning and the losing 
side have shown that. The new industrial order necessarily 
overlaps the national frontiers, even in the case of a nation 
possessed of so extensive and varied natural resources as 
America. So that in spite of all the singularly ingenious 
obstruction of the American tariff the Americans still continue 
to draw on foreign sources for most or all of their tea, coffee, 
sugar, tropical and semi-tropical fruits, vegetable oils, 
vegetable gums and pigments, cordage fibers, silks, rubber, and a 
bewildering multitude of minor articles of daily use. Even so 
peculiarly American an industry as chewing-gum is wholly 
dependent on foreign raw material, and quite unavoidably so. The 
most that can be accomplished by any tariff under these 
circumstances is more or less obstruction. Isolation and 
self-sufficiency are already far out of the question. 
    But there are certain vested interests which find their 
profit in maintaining a tariff barrier as a means of keeping the 
price up and keeping the supply down; and the common man still 
faithfully believes that the profits which these vested interests 
derive in this way from increasing the cost of his livelihood and 
decreasing the net productivity of his industry will benefit him 
in some mysterious way. He is persuaded that high prices and a 
scant supply of goods at a high labor cost is a desirable state 
of things. This is incredible, but there is no denying the fact. 
He knows, of course, that the profits of business go to the 
business men, the vested interests, and to no one else; but he is 
still beset with the picturesque hallucination that any unearned 
income which goes to those vested interests whose central office 
is in New Jersey is paid to himself in some underhand way, while 
the gains of those vested interests that are domiciled in Canada 
are obviously a grievous net loss to him. The tariff moves in a 
mysterious way, its wonders to perform. 
    To all adult persons of sound mind, and not unduly clouded 
with the superstitions of the price system, it is an obvious 
matter of fact that any protective tariff is an obstruction to 
industry and a means of impoverishment, just so far as it is 
effective. The arguments to the contrary invariably turn out to 
be pettifogger's special pleading for some vested interest or for 
a warlike national policy, and these arguments convince only 
those persons who are able to believe that a part is greater than 
the whole. It also lies in the nature of protective tariffs that 
they always cost the nation disproportionately much more than 
they are worth to those vested interests which profit by them. In 
this respect they are like any other method of businesslike 
sabotage. Their aim, and presumably their effect, is to keep the 
price up by keeping the supply down, to hinder competitors and 
retard production. As in other instances of businesslike 
sabotage, therefore, the net margin of advantage to those who 
profit by it is greatly less than what it costs the community. 
    Yet it is to be noted that the Americans have prospered, on 
the whole, under protective tariffs which have been as 
ingeniously and comprehensively foolish as could well be 
contrived. There is even some color of reason in the contentions 
of the protectionists that the more reasonable tariffs have 
commonly been more depressing to industry than the most imbecile 
of them. All of which should be disquieting to the advocates of 
free trade. The defect of the free-trade argument, and the 
disappointment of free-trade policies, lies in overlooking the 
fact that in the absence of an obstructive tariff substantially 
the same amount of obstruction has to be accomplished by other 
means, if business is to prosper. And business prosperity is the 
only manner of prosperity known or provided for among the 
civilised nations. It is the only manner of prosperity on which 
the divine right of the nation gives it a claim. A protective 
tariff is only an alternative method of businesslike sabotage. If 
and so far as this method of keeping the supply of goods within 
salutary bounds is not resorted to, other means of accomplishing 
the same result must be employed. For so long as investment 
continues to control industry the welfare of the community is 
bound up with the prosperity of its business; and business can 
not be carried on without reasonably profitable prices; and 
reasonably profitable prices can not be maintained without a 
salutary limitation of the supply; which means slowing down 
production to such a rate and volume as the traffic will bear. 
    A protective tariff is only one means of crippling the 
country's industrial forces, for the good of business. In its 
absence all that matter will be taken care of by other means. The 
tariff may perhaps be a little the most flagrant method of 
sabotage by which the vested interests are enabled to do a 
reasonably profitable business; but there is nothing more than a 
difference of degree, and not a large difference at that. So long 
as industry is managed with a view to a profitable price it is 
quite indispensable to guard against an excessive rate and volume 
of output. In the absence of all businesslike sabotage the 
productive capacity of the industrial system would very shortly 
pass all reasonable bounds, prices would decline disastrously and 
overhead charges would not be covered, fixed charges on 
corporation securities and other credit instruments could not be 
met, and the whole structure of business enterprise would 
collapse, as it occasionally has done in times of 
"over-production." There is no doing business without a fair 
price, since the net price over cost is the motive of business. A 
protective tariff is, in effect, an auxiliary safeguard against 
overproduction. Incidentally the fact that its imposition does 
not result in insufferable hardship serves also to show that the 
new order of industry is highly productive, quite inordinately 
productive in fact. And it is a divine right of the nation to use 
its discretion and offset this inordinate efficiency of its 
common stock of knowledge by adroitly crippling its own commerce 
and the commerce of its neighbors, for the benefit of those 
vested interests that are domiciled within the national 
frontiers. 
    But the divine right of national self-direction also covers 
much else of the same description, besides the privilege of 
setting up a tariff in restraint of trade. There are many 
channels of such discrimination, of divers kinds, but always it 
will be found that these channels are channels of sabotage and 
that they serve the advantage of some group of vested interests 
which do business under the shelter of the national pretensions. 
There are foreign investments and concessions to be procured and 
safeguarded for the nation's business men by moral suasion backed 
with warlike force, and the common man pays the cost; there is 
discrimination to be exercised and perhaps subsidies and credits 
to be accorded those of the nation's business men who derive a 
profit from shipping, for the discomfiture of alien competitors, 
and the common man pays the cost; there are colonies to be 
procured and administered at the public expense for the private 
gain of certain traders, concessionaires and administrative 
office-holders, and the common man pays the cost. Back of it all 
is the nation's divine right to carry arms, to support a 
competitive military and naval establishment, which has ceased, 
under the new order, to have any other material use than to 
enforce or defend the businesslike right of particular vested 
interests to get something for nothing in some particular place 
and in some particular way, and the common man pays the cost and 
swells with pride. 
 
Chapter 7 
 
Live and Let Live 
 
    The Nation's inalienable right of self-direction and 
self-help is of the same nature and derivation as the like 
inalienable right of self-help vested in an irresponsible king by 
the grace of God. In both cases alike it is a divine right, in 
the sense that it is irresponsible and will not bear scrutiny, 
being an arbitrary right of self-help at the cost of any whom it 
may concern. There is the further parallel that in both cases 
alike the ordinary exercise of these rights confers no material 
benefit on the underlying community. In practical effect the 
exercise of such divine rights, whether by a sovereign monarch or 
by the officials of a sovereign nation, works damage and 
discomfort to one and another, within the national frontiers or 
beyond them, with nothing better to show for it than some 
relatively slight gain in prestige or in wealth for some 
relatively small group of privileged persons or vested interests. 
And the gain of those who profit by this means is always got at 
the cost of the common man at home and abroad. These inalienable 
rights are an abundant source of grievances to be redressed at 
the cost of the common man. 
    It has long been a stale commonplace that the quarrels of 
competitive kings in pursuit of their divine rights have brought 
nothing but damage and discomfort to the underlying peoples whose 
material wealth and man power have been made use of for national 
enterprise of this kind. And it is no less evident, though 
perhaps less notorious, that the pursuit of national advantages 
by competitive nations by use of the same material wealth and man 
power unavoidably brings nothing better than the same net output 
of damage and discomfort to all the peoples concerned. There is 
of course the reservation that in the one case the kings and 
their accomplices and pensioners have come in for some gain in 
prestige and in perquisites, while in the case of the competitive 
nations certain vested interests and certain groups of the kept 
classes stand to gain something in the way of perquisites and 
free income; but always and in the nature of the case the total 
gain is less than the cost; and always the gain goes to the kept 
classes and the cost falls on the common man. So much is 
notorious, particularly so far as it is a question of material 
gain and loss. So far as it is an immaterial question of jealousy 
and prestige, the line of division runs between nations, but as 
regards material gain and loss it is always a division between 
the kept classes and the common man; and always the common man 
has more to lose than the kept classes stand to gain. 
    The war is now concluded, provisionally, and peace is in 
prospect for the immediate future, also provisionally. As is true 
between individuals, so also among the nations, peace means the 
same thing as Live and Let Live, which also means the same thing 
as a world made safe for democracy. And the rule of Live and Let 
Live means the discontinuance of animosity and discrimination 
between the nations. Therefore it involves the disallowance of 
such incompatible national pretensions as are likely to afford 
ground for international grievances, -- which comes near 
involving the disallowance of all those claims and perquisites 
that habitually go in under the captions of "national 
self-determination" and "national integrity," as these phrases 
are employed in diplomatic intercourse. At the same time it 
involves the disallowance of all those class pretensions and 
vested interests that make for dissension within the nation. 
Ill-will is not a practicable basis of peace, whether within the 
nation or between the nations. So much is plain matter of course. 
What may be the chances of peace and war, at home and abroad, in 
the light of these blunt and obvious principles taken in 
conjunction with the diplomatic negotiations now going forward at 
home and abroad, -- all that is sufficiently perplexing. 
    At home in America for the transient time being, the war 
administration has under pressure of necessity somewhat loosened 
the strangle-hold of the vested interests on the country's 
industry; and in so doing it has shocked the safe and sane 
business men into a state of indignant trepidation and has at the 
same time doubled the country's industrial output. But all that 
has avowedly been only for the transient time being, "for the 
period of the war," as a distasteful concession to demands that 
would not wait. So that the country now faces a return to the 
precarious conditions of a provisional peace on the lines of the 
status quo ante. Already the vested interests are again 
tightening their hold and are busily arranging for a return to 
business as usual; which means working at cross-purposes as 
usual, waste of work and materials as usual, restriction of 
output as usual, unemployment as usual, labor quarrels as usual, 
competitive selling as usual, mendacious advertising as usual, 
waste of superfluities as usual by the kept classes, and 
privation as usual for the common man. All of which may 
conceivably be put up with by this people "lest a worse evil 
befall," All this runs blamelessly in under the rule of Live and 
Let Live as interpreted in the light of those enlightened 
principles of self-help that have come down from the eighteenth 
century and that go to make up the established scheme of law and 
order, although it does not meet the needs of the same rule as it 
would be enforced by the exigencies of the new order in industry. 
    Meanwhile, abroad, the gentlemen of the old school who direct 
the affairs of the nations are laying down the lines on which 
peace is to be established and maintained, with a painstaking 
regard for all those national pretensions and discriminations 
that have always made for international embroilment, and with an 
equally painstaking disregard for all those exigencies of the new 
order that call for a de facto observance of the rule of Live and 
Let Live. It is notorious beyond need of specification that the 
new order in industry, even more insistently than any industrial 
situation that has gone before, calls for a wide and free 
intercourse in trade and industry, regardless of national 
frontiers and national jealousies. In this connection a national 
frontier, as it is commonly made use of in current statecraft, is 
a line of demarkation for working at cross-purposes, for mutual 
obstruction and distrust, it is only necessary to recall that the 
erection of a new national frontier across any community which 
has previously enjoyed the privilege of free intercourse 
unburdened with customs frontiers will be felt to be a grievous 
burden; and that the erection of such a line of demarkation for 
other diplomatic work at mutual cross-purposes is likewise an 
unmistakable nuisance. 
    Yet, in the peace negotiations now going forward the 
gentlemen of the old school to whom the affairs of the nations 
have been "entrusted" -- by shrewd management on their own part 
-- continue to safeguard all this apparatus of mutual defeat and 
distrust, -- and indeed this is the chief or sole object of their 
solicitude, as it also is the chief or sole object of those 
vested interests for whose benefit the diplomatic gentlemen of 
the old school continue to manage the affairs of the nations.  
    The state of the case is plainly to be seen in the proposals 
of those nationalities that are now coming forward with a new 
claim to national self-determination, invariably any examination 
of the bill of particulars set up by the spokesmen of these 
proposed new national establishments will show that the material 
point of it all is an endeavor to set up a national apparatus for 
working at mutual cross-purposes with their neighbors, to add 
something to the waste and confusion caused by the national 
discriminations already in force, to violate the rule of Live and 
Let Live at some new point and by some further apparatus of 
discomfort. 
    There are nationalities that get along well enough, to all 
appearance, without being "nations" in that militant and 
obstructive fashion that is aimed at in these projected creations 
of the diplomatic nation-makers. Such are the Welsh and the 
Scotch, for instance. But it is not the object-lesson of Welsh or 
Scottish experience that guides the new projects. The 
nationalities which are now escaping from a rapacious imperialism 
of the old order are being organized and managed by the safe and 
sane gentlemen of the old school, who have got their notions of 
safety and sanity from the diplomatic intrigue of that outworn 
imperialism out of which these oppressed nationalities aim to 
escape. And these gentlemen of the old school are making no move 
in the direction of tolerance and good will -- as how should they 
when all their conceptions of what is right and expedient are the 
diplomatic preconceptions of the old regime. They, being 
gentlemen of the old school, will have none of that amicable and 
unassuming nationality which contents the Welsh and the Scotch 
who have tried out this matter and have in the end come to hold 
fast only so much of their national pretensions as will do no 
material harm. What is aimed at is not a disallowance of bootless 
national jealousies, but only a shift from an intolerable 
imperialism on a large scale to an ersatz-imperialism drawn on a 
smaller scale, conducted on the same general lines of competitive 
diplomacy and serving interests of the same general kind -- 
vested interests of business or of privilege.  
    The projected new nations are not patterned on the Welsh or 
the Scottish model, but for all that there is nothing novel in 
their design; and how should there be when they are the offspring 
of the imagination of these safe and sane gentlemen of the old 
school fertilised with the ancient conceptions of imperialistic 
diplomacy and national prestige? In effect it is all drawn to the 
scale and pattern already made notorious by the Balkan states. It 
should also be safe to presume that the place and value of these 
newly emerging nations in the comity of peoples under the 
prospective rgime of provisional peace will be something not 
notably different from what the Balkan states have habitually 
placed on view; which may be deprecated by many well-meaning 
persons, but which is scarcely to be undone by well-wishing. The 
chances of war and politics have thrown the fortunes of these 
projected new nations into the hands of these politic gentlemen 
of the old school, and by force of inveterate habit these very 
practical persons are unable to conceive that anything else than 
a Balkan state is fit to take the place of that imperial rule 
that has now fallen into decay. So Balkan-state national 
establishments appear to be the best there is in prospect in the 
new world of safe democracy. 
    So true is this, that even in those instances, such as the 
Finns and other fragments of the Russian imperial dominions, 
where a newly emerging nation has set out to go on its way 
without taking pains to safeguard the grievances of the old 
order, -- even in these instances that should seem to concern no 
one but themselves, the gentlemen of the old school who guard the 
political institutions of the old order in the world at large 
find it impossible to keep their Wands off and to let these 
adventurous pilgrims of hope go about their own business in their 
own way. Self-determination proves to be insufferable if it 
partakes of the new order rather than of the old, at least so 
long as the safe and sane gentlemen of the old school can hinder 
it by any means at their command. It is felt that the vested 
interests which underlie the gentlemen of the old school would 
not be sufficiently secure in the keeping of these unshorn and 
unshaven pilgrims of hope, and the doubt may be well taken. So 
that, within the intellectual horizon of the practical statesmen, 
the only safe, sane, and profitable manner of national 
establishment and national policy for these newcomers is 
something after the familiar fashion of the Balkan states; and it 
may also be admitted quite broadly that these newly arriving 
peoples commonly are content to seek their national fortunes 
along precisely these Balkan state lines; although the Finns and 
their like are perhaps to be counted as an unruly exception to 
the rule. 
    These Balkan states, whose spirit, aims, and ways are so 
admirable in the eyes of the gentlemanly keepers of the old 
political and economic order, are simply a case of imperialism in 
the raw. They are all and several still in the pickpocket stage 
of dynastic state-making, comparable with the state of Prussia 
before Frederick the Great Pickpocket came to the throne. And 
now, with much sage counsel from the safe and sane statesmen of 
the status quo ante. Czechs. Slovaks. Slovenes, Ruthenians, 
Ukrainians, Croats, Poles and Polaks are breathlessly elbowing 
their way into line with these minuscular Michiavellians. Quite 
unchastened by their age-long experience in adversity they are 
all alike clamoring for national establishments stocked up with 
all the time-tried contrivances for discomfort and defeat. With 
one hand they are making frantic gestures of distress for an 
"outlet to the sea" by means of which to escape insufferable 
obstruction of their overseas trade by their nationally minded 
neighbors, while with the other hand they are feverishly at work 
to contrive a customs frontier of their own, together with other 
standard devices for obstructing their neighbors' trade and their 
own, so soon as they shall have any trade to obstruct. Such is 
the force of habit and tradition. In other words, these peoples 
are aiming to become self-determining nations in good standing. 
    And all the while it is plain to all men that a national 
"outlet to the sea" has no meaning in time of pence and in the 
absence of national governments working at cross-purposes. Which 
comes near to saying that the sole material object of these new 
projects in nation-making is to work at cross-purposes with their 
neighbors across the new-found national frontiers. So also it is 
plain that this mutual working at cross-purposes between the 
nations hinders the keeping of the peace, even when it is all 
mitigated with all the approved apparatus of diplomatic 
make-believe, compromise, and intrigue. Just as it is plain that 
the peace is not to be kept by use of armaments, but all the 
while national armaments are also included as an indispensable 
adjunct of national life, in all the projects of these new 
nations of the Balkan pattern. The right to carry arms is an 
inalienable right of national self-determination and an 
indispensable means of self-help, as understood by these 
nation-makers of the old school. So also it is plain that 
national pretensions in the field of foreign trade and 
investment, and all the diversified expedients for furthering and 
protecting the profitable enterprise of the vested interests in 
foreign parts, run consistently at cross-purposes with the 
keeping of the peace. 
    And all the while the rule of Live and Let Live, as it works 
out within the framework of the new industrial order, will not 
tolerate these things. But the rule of Live and Let Live, which 
embodies the world's hope of peace on earth and a practicable 
modicum of good will among men, is not of the essence of that 
time-worn statesmanship which is now busily making the world safe 
for the vested interests. Neglect and disallowance of those 
things that make for embroilment does not enter into the counsels 
of the nation-makers or of those stupendous figures of veiled 
statecraft that now move in the background and are shaping the 
destinies of these and other nations with a view to the status 
quo ante.  
 
    All these peoples that now hope to be nations have long been 
nationalities. A nation is an organisation for collective offence 
and defence, in peace and war, -- essentially based on hate and 
fear of other nations; a nationality is a cultural group, bound 
together by home-bred affinities of language, tradition, use and 
wont, and commonly also by a supposed community race, -- 
essentially based on sympathies and sentiments of 
self-complacency within itself. The Welsh and the Scotch are 
nationalities, more or less well defined, although they are not 
nations in the ordinary meaning of the word; so also are the 
Irish, with a difference, and such others as the Finns and the 
Armenians. The American republic is a nation, but not a 
nationality in any full measure. The Welsh and the Scotch have 
learned the wisdom of Live and Let Live, within the peace of the 
Empire, and they are not moving to break bounds and set up a 
national integrity after the Balkan pattern. 
    The case of the Irish is peculiar; at least so they say. 
They, that is to say the Irish by sentiment rather than by 
domicile, the Irish people as contrasted with the vested 
interests of Ulster, of the landlords, of the Church, and of the 
bureaucracy,these Irish have long been a nationality and are now 
mobilising all their force to set up a Balkan state, autonomous 
and defensible, within the formal bounds of the Empire or 
without. Their case is peculiar and instructive. It throws a 
light on the margin of tolerance, of what the traffic will bear, 
beyond which an increased pressure on a subject population will 
bring no added profit to the vested interests for whose benefit 
the pressure is brought to bear. It is a case of the Common Man 
hard ridden in due legal form by the vested interests of the 
Island, and of the neighboring island, which are duly backed by 
an alien and biased bureaucracy aided and abetted by the priestly 
pickpockets of the poor. So caught in this way between the devil 
and the deep sea, it is small wonder if they have chosen in the 
end to follow counsels of desperation and are moving to throw 
their lot into the deep sea of national self-help and 
international intrigue. They have reached the point where they 
have ceased to say: "It might have been worse." The case of the 
Finns, Jews, and Armenians is not greatly different in general 
effect. 
    It is easy to fall into a state of perturbation about the 
evil case of the submerged, exploited, and oppressed minor 
nationalities; and it is not unusual to jump to the conclusion 
that national self-determination will surely mend their evil 
case. National self-determination and national integrity are 
words to conjure with, and there is no denying that very 
substantial results have been known to follow from such 
conjuring. But self-determination is not a sovereign remedy, 
particularly not as regards the material conditions of life for 
the common man, for that somewhat more than nine-tenths of the 
population who always finally have to bear the cost of any 
national establishment. It has been tried, and the point is left 
in doubt. So the case of Belgium or of Serbia during the past 
four years has been scarcely less evil than that of the Armenians 
or the Poles. Belgium and Serbia were nations, in due form, very 
much after the pattern aimed at in the new projected nations 
already spoken of, whereas the Armenians and the Poles have been 
subject minor nationalities. Belgium. Serbia, and Poland have 
been subject to the ravages of an imperial power which claims 
rank as a civilised people, whereas the Armenians have been 
manhandled by the Turks. So, again, the Irish are a subject minor 
nationality, whereas the Roumanians are a nation in due form. In 
fact the Roumanians are just such a balkan state as the Irish 
aspire to become. But no doubt the common man is appreciably 
worse off in his material circumstances in Roumania than in 
Ireland. Japan, too, is not only a self-determining nation with a 
full charge of national integrity, but it is a Great Power; yet 
the common man -- the somewhat more than nine-tenths of the 
population -- is doubtless worse off in point of hard usage and 
privation in Japan than in Ireland. 
    In further illustration of this doubt and perplexity with 
regard to the material value of national self-determination, the 
case of the three Scandinavian countries may be worth citing. 
They are all and several self-determining nations, in that 
Pickwickian sense in which any country which is not a Great Power 
may be self-determining in the twentieth century. But they differ 
in size, population, wealth, power, and political consequence. In 
these respects the sequence runs: Sweden, Denmark. Norway, the 
latter being the smallest, poorest, least self-determining, and 
in point of self-determining nationalism altogether the most 
spectacularly foolish of the lot. But so far as concerns the 
material conditions of life for the common man, they are 
unmistakably the most favorable, or the most nearly tolerable, in 
Norway, and the least so in Sweden. The upshot of evidence from 
these, and from other instances that might be cited, is to leave 
the point in doubt. It is not evident that the common man has 
anything to gain by national self-determination, so far as 
regards his material conditions of life; nor does it appear, on 
the evidence of these instances, that he has much to lose by that 
means. 
    These Scandinavians differ from the Balkan states in that 
they perforce have no imperialistic ambitions. There may of 
course be a question on this head so far as concerns the frame of 
mind of the royal establishment in the greater one of the 
Scandinavian kingdoms; there is not much that is worth saying 
about that matter, and the less that is said, the less annoyance. 
It is a matter of no significance, anyway. The Scandinavians are 
in effect not imperialistic, perforce. Which means that in their 
international relations they formally adhere to the rule of Live 
and Let Live. Not so in their domestic policy, however. They have 
all endowed themselves with all the encumbrances of national 
pretensions and discrimination which their circumstances will 
admit. Apart from a court and church which foot up to nothing 
more comfortable than a gratuitous bill of expense, they are also 
content to carry the burden of a national armament, a protective 
tariff, a national consular service, and a diplomatic service 
which takes care of a moderately burdensome series of treaty 
agreements governing the trade relations of the Scandinavian 
business community; all designed for the benefit of the vested 
interests and the kept classes of the nation, and all at the cost 
of the common man. 
    The case of these relatively free, relatively unassuming, and 
relatively equitable national establishments is also instructive. 
They come as near the rule of Live and Let Live as any national 
establishment well can and still remain a national establishment 
actuated by notions of competitive self-help. But all the while 
the national administration runs along, with nothing better to 
show to any impartial scrutiny than a considerable fiscal burden 
and a moderate volume of hindrance to the country's industry, 
together with some incidental benefit to the vested interests and 
the kept classes at the cost of the underlying community. These 
Scandinavians occupy a peculiar position in the industrial world. 
They are each and several too small to make up anything like a 
self-contained industrial community, even under the most 
unreserved pressure of national exclusiveness. Their industries 
necessarily are part and parcel of the industrial system at 
large, with which they are bound in relations of give and take at 
every point. Yet they are content to carry a customs tariff of 
fairly grotesque dimensions and a national consular service of 
more grotesque dimensions still. This situation is heightened by 
their relatively sterile soil, their somewhat special and narrow 
range of natural resources, and their high latitude, which 
precludes any home growth of many of the indispensable materials 
of industry under the new order. Yet they are content to carry 
their customs tariff, their special commercial treaties, and 
their consular service -- for the benefit of their vested 
interests. 
    It should seem that this elaborate superfluity of national 
outlay and obstruction should work great hardship to the 
underlying community whose industry is called on to carry this 
burden of lag, leak, and friction. And doubtless the burden is 
sufficiently real. It amounts, of course, to the nation's working 
at cross-purposes with itself, for the benefit of those special 
interests that stand to gain a little something by it all. But in 
this as in other works of sabotage there are compensating 
effects, and these should not be overlooked; particularly since 
the case is fairly typical of what commonly happens. The waste 
and sabotage of the national establishment and its obstructive 
policy works no intolerable hardship, because it all runs its 
course and eats its fill within that margin of sabotage and 
wasteful consumption that would have to be taken care of by some 
other agency in the absence of this one. That is to say, 
something like the same volume of sabotage and waste is 
indispensable to the prosperity of business under the conditions 
of the new order, so long as business and industry are managed 
under the conditions imposed by the price system. By one means or 
another prices must be maintained at a profitable level for 
reasons of business; therefore the output must be restricted to a 
reasonable rate and volume, and wasteful consumption must be 
provided for, on pain of a failing market. And all this may as 
well be taken care of by use of a princely court, an otiose 
church, a picturesque army, a well-fed diplomatic and consular 
service, and a customs frontier. In the absence of all this 
national apparatus of sabotage substantially the same results 
would have to be got at by the less seemly means of a furtive 
conspiracy in restraint of trade among the vested interests. 
There is always something to be said for the national integrity. 
    The case of these Scandinavian nations, taken in connection 
and comparison with what is to be seen elsewhere, appears to say 
that a national establishment which has no pretensions to power 
and no imperialistic ambitions is preferable, in point of economy 
and peaceable behavior, to an establishment which carries these 
attributes of self-determination and self-help. The more nearly 
the national integrity and self-determination approaches to make 
believe the less mischief is it likely to work at home and the 
more nearly will it be compatible with the rule of Live and Let 
Live in dealing with its neighbors. And the further implication 
is plain without argument, that the most beneficent change that 
can conceivably overtake any national establishment would be to 
let it fall into "innocuous desuetude." Apparently, the less of 
it the better, with no apparent limit short of the vanishing 
point. 
    Such appears to be the object-lesson enforced by recent and 
current events, in so far as concerns the material fortunes of 
the underlying community at large as well as the keeping of the 
peace. But it does not therefore follow that all men and classes 
will have the same interest in so neutralising the nation's 
powers and disallowing the national pretensions. The existing 
nations are not of a homogeneous make-up within themselves -- 
perhaps less so in proportion as they have progressively come 
under the rule of the new order in industry and in business. 
There is an increasingly evident cleavage of interest between 
industry and business, or between production and ownership, or 
between tangible performance and free income, -- one phrase may 
serve as well as another, and neither is quite satisfactory to 
mark the contrast of interest between the common man on the one 
hand and the vested interests and kept classes on the other hand. 
But it should be sufficiently plain that the national 
establishment and its control of affairs has a value for the 
vested interests different from what it has for the underlying 
community. 
    Quite plainly the new order in industry has no use or place 
for national discrimination or national pretensions of any kind; 
and quite plainly such a phrase as "national integrity" has no 
shadow of meaning for this new industrial order which overruns 
national frontiers and overcomes national discrimination as best 
it can, in all directions and all the time. For industry as 
carried on under the new order, the overcoming of national 
discrimination is part of the ordinary day's work. But it is 
otherwise with the new order of business enterprise, -- 
large-scale, corporate, resting on intangible assets, and turning 
on free income which flows from managerial sabotage. The business 
community has urgent need of an efficient national establishment 
both at home and abroad. A settled government, duly equipped with 
national pretensions, and with legal and military power to 
maintain the sacredness of contracts at home and to enforce the 
claims of its business men abroad, -- such an establishment is 
invaluable for the conduct of business, though its industrial 
value may not unusually be less than nothing. 
    Industry is a matter of tangible performance in the way of 
producing goods and services. And in this connection it is well 
to recall that a vested interest is a prescriptive right to get 
something for nothing. Now, any project of reconstruction, the 
scope and method of which are governed by considerations of 
tangible performance, is likely to allow only a subsidiary 
consideration or something less to the legitimate claims of the 
vested interests, whether they are vested interests of business 
or of privilege. It is more than probable that in such a case 
national pretensions in the way of preferential concessions in 
commerce and investment will be allowed to fall into neglect, so 
far as to lose all value to any vested interest whose fortunes 
they touch. These things have no effect in the way of net 
tangible performance. They only afford ground for preferential 
pecuniary rights, always at the cost of someone else; but they 
are of the essence of things in that pecuniary order within which 
the vested interests of business live and move. So also such a 
matter-of-fact project of reconstruction will be likely 
materially to revise outstanding credit obligations, including 
corporation securities, or perhaps even bluntly to disallow 
claims of this character to free income on the part of 
beneficiaries who can show no claim on grounds of current 
tangible performance. All of which is inimical to the best good 
of the vested interests and the kept classes. 
    Reconstruction which partakes of this character in any 
sensible degree will necessarily be viewed with the liveliest 
apprehension by the gentlemanly statesmen of the old school, by 
the kept classes, and by the captains of finance. It will be 
deplored as a subversion of the economic order, a destruction of 
the country's wealth, a disorganisation of industry, and a sure 
way to poverty, bloodshed, and pestilence. In point of fact, of 
course, what such a project may be counted on to subvert is that 
dominion of ownership by which the vested interests control and 
retard the rate and volume of production. The destruction of 
wealth, in such a case will touch, directly, only the value of 
the securities, not the material objects to which these 
securities have given title of ownership; it would be a 
disallowance of ownership, not a destruction of useful goods. Nor 
need any disorganisation or disability of productive industry 
follow from such a move; indeed, the apprehended cancelment of 
the claims to income covered by negotiable securities would by 
that much cancel the fixed overhead charges resting on industrial 
enterprise, and so further production by that much. But for those 
persons and classes whose keep is drawn from prescriptive rights 
of ownership or of privilege the consequences of such a shifting 
of ground from vested interest to tangible performance would 
doubtless be deplorable. In short, "Bolshevism is a menace"; and 
the wayfaring man out of Armenia will be likely to ask: A menace 
to whom? 
 
Chapter 8 
 
The Vested Interests and the Common Man 
 
    In the eighteenth century certain principles of enlightened 
common sense were thrown into formal shape and adopted by the 
civilised peoples of that time to govern the system of law and 
order, use and wont, under which they chose to live. So far as 
concerns economic relations the principles which so became 
incorporated into the system of civilised law and custom at that 
time were the principles of equal opportunity, 
self-determination, and self-help. Chief among the specific 
rights by which this civilised scheme of equal opportunity and 
self-help were to be safeguarded were the rights of free contract 
and security of property. These make up the substantial core of 
that system of principles which is called the modern point of 
view, in so far as concerns trade, industry, investment, credit 
obligations, and whatever else may properly be spoken of as 
economic institutions. And these still stand over today, 
paramount among the inalienable rights of all free citizens in 
all free countries; they are the groundwork of the economic 
system as it runs today, and this existing system can undergo no 
material change of character so long as these paramount rights of 
civilised men continue to be inalienable. Any move to set these 
rights aside would be subversive of the modern economic order; 
whereas no revision or alteration of established rights and 
usages will amount to a revolutionary move, so long as it does 
not disallow these paramount economic rights. 
    When the constituent principles of the modern point of view 
were accepted and the modern scheme of civilised life was 
therewith endorsed by the civilised peoples, in the eighteenth 
century, these rights of self-direction and self-help were 
counted on as the particular and sufficient safeguard of equity 
and industry in any civilised country. They were counted on to 
establish equality among men in all their economic relations and 
to maintain the industrial system at the highest practicable 
degree of productive efficiency. They were counted on to give 
enduring effect to the rule of Live and Let Live. And such is 
still the value ascribed to these rights in the esteem of modern 
men. The maintenance of law and order still means primarily and 
chiefly the maintenance of these rights of ownership and 
pecuniary obligation. 
    But things have changed since that time in such a way that 
the rule of Live and Let Live is no longer completely safeguarded 
by maintaining these rights in the shape given them in the 
eighteenth century, -- or at least there are large sections of 
the people in these civilised countries who are beginning to 
think so, which is just as good for practical purposes. Things 
have changed in such a way since that time, that the ownership of 
property in large holdings now controls the nation's industry, 
and therefore it controls the conditions of life for those who 
are or wish to be engaged in industry; at the same time that the 
same ownership of large wealth controls the markets and thereby 
controls the conditions of life for those who have to resort to 
the markets to sell or to buy. In other words, it has come to 
pass with the change of circumstances that the rule of Live and 
Let Live now waits on the discretion of the owners of large 
wealth. In fact, those thoughtful men in the eighteenth century 
who made so much of these constituent principles of the modern 
point of view did not contemplate anything like the system of 
large wealth, large-scale industry, and large-scale commerce and 
credit which prevails today. They did not foresee the new order 
in industry and business, and the system of rights and 
obligations which they installed, therefore, made no provision 
for the new order of things that has come on since their time. 
    The new order has brought the machine industry, corporation 
finance, big business, and the world market, Under this new order 
in business and industry, business controls industry. Invested 
wealth in large holdings controls the country's industrial 
system, directly by ownership of the plant, as in the mechanical 
industries, or indirectly through the market, as in farming. So 
that the population of these civilised countries now falls into 
two main classes: those who own wealth invested in large holdings 
and who thereby control the conditions of life for the rest; and 
those who do not own wealth in sufficiently large holdings, and 
whose conditions of life are therefore controlled by these 
others. It is a division, not between those who have something 
and those who have nothing -- as many socialists would be 
inclined to describe it -- but between those who own wealth 
enough to make it count, and those who do not. 
    And all the while the scale on which the control of industry 
and the market is exercised goes on increasing; from which it 
follows that what was large enough for assured independence 
yesterday is no longer large enough for tomorrow. Seen from 
another direction, it is at the same time a division between 
those who live on free income and those who live by work, -- a 
division between the kept classes and the underlying community 
from which their keep is drawn. It is sometimes spoken of in this 
bearing -- particularly by certain socialists -- as a division 
between those who do no useful work and those who do; but this 
would be a hasty generalisation, since not a few of those persons 
who have no assured free income also do no work that is of 
material use, as e.g., menial servants. But the gravest 
significance of this cleavage that so runs through the population 
of the advanced industrial countries lies in the fact that it is 
a division between the vested interests and the common man. It is 
a division between those who control the conditions of work and 
the rate and volume of output and to whom the net output of 
industry goes as free income, on the one hand, and those others 
who have the work to do and to whom a livelihood is allowed by 
these persons in control, on the other hand. In point of numbers 
it is a very uneven division, of course. 
    A vested interest is a legitimate right to get something for 
nothing, usually a prescriptive right to an income which is 
secured by controlling the traffic at one point or another. The 
owners of such a prescriptive right are also spoken of as a 
vested interest. Such persons make up what are called the kept 
classes. But the kept classes also comprise many persons who are 
entitled to a free income on other grounds than their ownership 
and control of industry or the market, as, e.g., landlords and 
other persons classed as "gentry," the clergy, the Crown -- where 
there is a Crown -- and its agents, civil and military. 
Contrasted with these classes who make up the vested interests, 
and who derive an income from the established order of ownership 
and privilege, is the common man. He is common in the respect 
that he is not vested with such a prescriptive right to get 
something for nothing. And he is called common because such is 
the common lot of men under the new order of business and 
industry; and such will continue (increasingly) to be the common 
lot so long as the enlightened principles of secure ownership and 
self-help handed down from the eighteenth century continue to 
rule human affairs by help of the new order of industry. 
    The kept classes, whose free income is secured to them by the 
legitimate rights of the vested interests, are less numerous than 
the common man -- less numerous by some ninety-five per cent or 
thereabouts -- and less serviceable to the community at large in 
perhaps the same proportion, so far as regards any conceivable 
use for any material purpose. In this sense they are uncommon. 
But it is not usual to speak of the kept classes as the uncommon 
classes, inasmuch they personally differ from the common run of 
mankind in no sensible respect. It is more usual to speak of them 
as "the better classes," because they are in better circumstances 
and are better able to do as they like. Their place in the 
economic scheme of the civilised world is to consume the net 
product of the country's industry over cost, and so prevent a 
glut of the market.  
 
    But this broad distinction between the kept classes and their 
vested interests on the one side and the common man on the other 
side is by no means hard and fast. There are many doubtful cases, 
and a shifting across the line occurs now and again, but the 
broad distinction is not doubtful for all that. The great 
distinguishing mark of the common man is that he is helpless 
within the rules of the game as it is played in the twentieth 
century under the enlightened principles of the eighteenth 
century. 
    There are all degrees of this helplessness that characterises 
the common lot. So much so that certain classes, professions, and 
occupations -- such as the clergy, the military, the courts, 
police, and legal profession -- are perhaps to be classed as 
belonging primarily with the vested interests, although they can 
scarcely be counted as vested interests in their own right, but 
rather as outlying and subsidiary vested interests whose tenure 
is conditioned on their serving the purposes of those principal 
and self-directing vested interests whose tenure rests 
immediately on large holdings of invested wealth. The income 
which goes to these subsidiary or dependent vested interests is 
of the nature of free income, in so far that it is drawn from the 
yearly product of the underlying community; but in another sense 
it is scarcely to be counted as "free" income, in that its 
continuance depends on the good will of those controlling vested 
interests whose power rests on the ownership of large invested 
wealth. Still it will be found that on any test vote these 
subsidiary or auxiliary vested interests uniformly range 
themselves with their superiors in the same class, rather than 
with the common man. By sentiment and habitual outlook they 
belong with the kept classes, in that they are staunch defenders 
of that established order of law and custom which secures the 
great vested interests in power and insures the free income of 
the kept classes. In any twofold division of the population these 
are therefore, on the whole, to be ranged on the side of the old 
order, the vested interests, and the kept classes, both in 
sentiment and as regards the circumstances which condition their 
life and comfort. 
    Beyond these, whose life-interests are, after all, closely 
bound up with the kept classes, there are other vested interests 
of a more doubtful and perplexing kind; classes and occupations 
which would seem to belong with the common lot, but which range 
themselves at least provisionally with the vested interests and 
can scarcely be denied standing as such. Such, as an illustrative 
instance, is the A. F. of L. Not that the constituency of the A. 
F. of L. can be said to live on free income, and is therefore to 
be counted in with the kept classes -- the only reservation on 
that head would conceivably be the corps of officials in the A. 
F. of L., who dominate the policies of that organisation and 
exercise a prescriptive right to dispose of its forces, at the 
same time that they habitually come in for an income drawn from 
the underlying organisation. The rank and file assuredly are not 
of the kept classes, nor do they visibly come in for a free 
income. Yet they stand on the defensive in maintaining a vested 
interest in the prerogatives and perquisites of their 
organisation. They are apparently moved by a feeling that so long 
as the established arrangements are maintained they will come in 
for a little something over and above what would come to them if 
they were to make common cause with the undistinguished common 
lot. In other words, they have a vested interest in a narrow 
margin of preference over and above what goes to the common man. 
But this narrow margin of net gain over the common lot, this 
vested right to get a narrow margin of something for nothing, has 
hitherto been sufficient to shape their sentiments and outlook in 
such a way as, in effect, to keep them loyal to the large 
business interests with whom they negotiate for this narrow 
margin of preference. As is true of the vested interests in 
business, so in the case of the A. F. of L., the ordinary ways 
and means of enforcing their claim to a little something over and 
above is the use of a reasonable sabotage, in the way of 
restriction, retardation, and unemployment. Yet the constituency 
of the A. F. of L., taken man for man, is not readily to be 
distinguished from the common sort so far as regards their 
conditions of life. The spirit of vested interest which animates 
them may, in fact, be nothing more to the point than an aimless 
survival. 
    Farther along the same line, larger and even more perplexing, 
is the case of the American farmers, who also are in the habit of 
ranging themselves, on the whole, with the vested interests 
rather than with the common man. By sentiment and outlook the 
farmers are, commonly, steady votaries of that established order 
which enables the vested interests to do a "big business" at 
their expense. Such is the tradition which still binds the 
farmers, however unequivocally their material circumstances under 
the new order of business and industry might seem to drive the 
other way. In the ordinary case the American farmer is now as 
helpless to control his own conditions of life as the commonest 
of the common run. He is caught between the vested interests who 
buy cheap and the vested interests who sell dear, and it is for 
him to take or leave what is offered, -- but ordinarily to take 
it, on pain of "getting left." 
    There is still afloat among the rural population a slow-dying 
tradition of the "Independent Farmer," who is reputed once upon a 
time to have lived his own life and done his own work as good him 
seemed, and who was content to let the world wag. But all that 
has gone by now as completely as the other things that are told 
in tales which begin with "Once upon a time." It has gone by into 
the same waste of regrets with the like independence which the 
country-town retailer is believed to have enjoyed once upon a 
time. But the country-town retailer, too, still stands stiffly on 
the vested rights of the trade and of the town; he is by 
sentiment and habitual outlook a business man who guides, or 
would like to guide, his enterprise by the principle of charging 
what the traffic will bear, of buying cheap and selling dear. He 
still manages to sell dear, but he does not commonly buy cheap, 
except what he buys of the farmer, for the massive vested 
interests in the background now decide for him, in the main, how 
much his traffic will bear. He is not placed so very differently 
from the farmer in this respect, except that, being a middleman, 
he can in some appreciable degree shift the burden to a third 
party. The third party in the case is the farmer; the massive 
vested interests who move in the background of the market do not 
lend themselves to that purpose. 
    Except for the increasing number of tenant farmers, the 
American farmers of the large agricultural sections still are 
owners who cultivate their own ground. They are owners of 
property, who might be said to have an investment in their own 
farms, and therefore they fancy that they have a vested interest 
in the farm and its earning-capacity. They have carried over out 
of the past and its old order of things a delusion to the effect 
that they have something to lose. It is quite a natural and 
rather an engaging delusion, since, barring incumbrances, they 
are seized of a good and valid title at law, to a very tangible 
and useful form of property. And by due provision of law and 
custom they are quite free to use or abuse their holdings in the 
land, to buy and sell it and its produce altogether at their own 
pleasure. It is small wonder if the farmers, with the genial 
traditions of the day before yesterday still running full and 
free in their sophisticated brains, are given to consider 
themselves typical holders of a legitimate vested interest of a 
very substantial kind. In all of which they count without their 
host; their host, under the new order of business, being those 
massive vested interests that move obscurely in the background of 
the market, and whose rule of life it is to buy cheap and sell 
dear. 
    In the ordinary case the farmers of the great American 
farming regions are owners of the land and improvements, except 
for an increasing proportion of tenant farmers. But it is the 
farmer-owner that is commonly had in mind in speaking of the 
American farmers as a class. Barring incumbrances, these 
farmer-owners have a good and valid title to their land and 
improvements; but their title remains good only so long as the 
run of the market for what they need and for what they have to 
sell does not take such a turn that the title will pass by 
process of liquidation into other hands, as may always happen. 
And the run of the market which conditions the farmer's work and 
livelihood has now come to depend on the highly impersonal 
manoeuvres of those massive interests that move in the background 
and find a profit in buying cheap and selling dear. In point of 
law and custom there is, of course, nothing to hinder the 
American farmer from considering himself to be possessed of a 
vested interest in his farm and its working, if that pleases his 
fancy. The circumstances which decide what he may do with his 
farm and its equipment, however, are prescribed for him quite 
deliberately and quite narrowly by those other vested interests 
in the background, which are massive enough to regulate the 
course of things in business and industry at large. He is caught 
in the system, and he does not govern the set and motions of the 
system. So that the question of his effectual standing as a 
vested interest becomes a question of fact, not of preference and 
genial tradition. 
    A vested interest is a legitimate right to get something for 
nothing. The American farmer -- say, the ordinary farmer of the 
grain-growing Middle West -- can be said to be possessed of such 
a vested interest if he habitually and securely gets something in 
the way of free income above cost, counting as cost the ordinary 
rate of wages for work done on the farm plus ordinary returns on 
the replacement value of the means of production which he 
employs. Now it is notorious that, except for quite exceptional 
cases, there are no intangible assets in farming; and intangible 
assets are the chief and ordinary indication of free income, that 
is to say, of getting something for nothing. Any concern that can 
claim no intangible assets, in the way of valuable good-will, 
monopoly rights, or outstanding corporation securities, has no 
substantial claim to be rated as a vested interest. What 
constitutes a valid claim to standing as a vested interest is the 
assured customary ability to get something more in the way of 
income than a full equivalent for tangible performance in the way 
of productive work. 
    The returns which these farmers are in the habit of getting 
from their own work and from the work of their household and 
hired help do not ordinarily include anything that can be called 
free or unearned income, -- unless one should go so far as to 
declare that income reckoned at ordinary rates on the tangible 
assets engaged in this industry is to be classed as unearned 
income, which is not the usual meaning of the expression. It may 
be that popular opinion on these matters will take such a turn 
some time that men will come to consider that income which is 
derived from the use of land and equipment is rightly to be 
counted as unearned income, because it does not correspond to any 
tangible performance in the way of productive work on the part of 
the person to whom it goes. But for the present that is not the 
popular sense of the matter, and that is not the meaning of the 
words in popular usage. For the present, at least, reasonable 
returns on the replacement value of tangible assets are not 
considered to be unearned income. 
    It is true, the habits of thought engendered by the machine 
system in industry and by the mechanically standardised 
organisation of daily life under this new order, as well as by 
the material sciences, are of such a character as would incline 
the common man to rate all men and things in terms of tangible 
performance rather than in terms of legal title and ancient 
usage. And it may well come to pass, in time, that men will 
consider any income unearned which exceeds a fair return for 
tangible performance in the way of productive work on the part of 
the person to whom the income goes. The mechanistic logic of the 
new order of industry drives in that direction, and it may well 
be that the frame of mind engendered by this training in 
matter-of-fact ways of thinking will presently so shape popular 
sentiment that all income from property, simply on the basis of 
ownership, will be disallowed, whether the property is tangible 
or intangible. All that is a speculative question running into 
the future. It is to be recognised and taken account of that the 
immutable principles of law and equity, in matters of ownership 
and income as well as in other connections, are products of 
habit, and that habits are always liable to change in response to 
altered circumstances, and the drift of circumstances is now 
apparently setting in that direction. But popular sentiment has 
not yet reached that degree of emancipation from those good old 
principles of self-help and secure ownership that go to make up 
the modern (eighteenth-century) point of view in law and custom. 
The equity of income derived from the use of tangible property 
may presently become a moot question; but it is not so today, 
outside of certain classes in the population whom the law and the 
courts are endeavoring to discourage. It is the business of the 
law and the courts to discourage any change of insight or 
opinion. 
    It appears, therefore, that his conditions of life should 
throw the American farmer in with the common man who has 
substantially nothing to lose, beyond what the vested interests 
of business can always take over at their own discretion and in 
their own good time. In point of material fact he has ceased to 
be a self-directing agent; and self-help has for him come 
substantially to be a make-believe; although, of course, in point 
of legal formality he still continues to enjoy all the ancient 
rights and immunities of secure ownership and self-help. Yet it 
is no less patent a fact of current history that the American 
farmer continues, on the whole, to stand fast by those principles 
of self-help and free bargaining which enable the vested 
interests to play fast and loose with him and all his works. Such 
is the force of habit and tradition. 
    The reason, or at least the preconception, by force of which 
the American farmers have been led, in effect, to side with the 
vested interests rather than with the common man, comes of the 
fact that the farmers are not only farmers but also owners of 
speculative real estate. And it is as speculators in land-values 
that they find themselves on the side of unearned income. As 
land-owners they aim and confidently hope to get something for 
nothing in the unearned increase of land-values. But all the 
while they overlook the fact that the future increase of 
land-values, on which they pin their hopes, is already discounted 
in the present price of the land,- except for exceptional and 
fortuitous cases. As is known to all persons who are at all 
informed on this topic, farmland holdings in the typical American 
farming regions are over-capitalised, in the sense that the 
current market value of these farm-lands is considerably greater 
than the capitalised value of the income to be derived from their 
current use as farmlands. This excess value of the farmlands is a 
speculative value due to discounting the future increased value 
which these lands are expected to gain with the further growth of 
population and with increasing facilities for marketing the farm 
products of the locality. It is therefore as a land speculator 
holding his land for a rise, not as a husbandman cultivating the 
soil for a livelihood, that the prairie farmer, e.g., comes in 
for an excess value and an over-capitalisation of his holdings. 
All of which has much in common with the intangible assets of the 
vested interests, and all of which persuades the prairie farmer 
that he is of a class apart from the common man who has nothing 
to lose. 
    But he can come in for this unearned gain only by the 
eventual sale of his holdings, not in their cur rent use as a 
means of production in farming. As a business man doing a 
speculative business in farmlands the American farmer, in a small 
way, runs true to form and so is entitled to a modest place among 
that class of substantial citizens who, get something for nothing 
by cornering the supply and "sitting tight." And all the while 
the massive interests that move obscurely in the background of 
the market are increasingly in a position, in their own good 
time, to disallow the farmer just so much of this still-born gain 
as they may dispassionately consider to be convenient for their 
own ends. And so the farmer-speculator of the prairie continues 
to stand fast by the principles of equity which entitle these 
vested interests to play fast and loose with him and all his 
works. 
    The facts of the case stand somewhat different as regards the 
American farmer's gains from his work as a husbandman, or from 
the use which he makes of his land and stock in farming. His 
returns from his work are notably scant. So much so that it is 
still an open question whether, taken one with another, the 
American farmer's assets in land and other equipment enable him, 
one year with another, to earn more than what would count as 
ordinary wages for the labor which these assets enable him to put 
into his product. But it is beyond question that the common run 
of those American farmers who "work their own land" get at the 
best a very modest return for the use of their land and stock, -- 
so scant, indeed, that if usage admitted such an expression, it 
would be fair to say that the farmer, considered as a going 
concern, should be credited with an appreciable item of "negative 
intangible assets," such as habitually to reduce the net average 
return on his total active assets appreciably below the ordinary 
rate of discount. His case, in other words, is the reverse of the 
typical business concern of the larger sort, which comes in for a 
net excess over ordinary rates of discount on its tangible 
assets, and which is thereby enabled to write into its accounts a 
certain amount of intangible assets, and so come into line as a 
vested interest. The farmer, too, is caught in the net of the new 
order; but his occupation does not belong to that new order of 
business enterprise in which earning-capacity habitually outruns 
the capitalised value of the underlying physical property.  
 
    Evidently the cleavage due to be brought on by the new order 
in business and industry, between the vested interests and the 
common man, has not vet fallen into clear lines, at least not in 
America. The common man does not know himself as such, at least 
not yet, and the sections of the population which go to make up 
the common lot as contrasted with the vested interests have not 
yet learned to make common cause. The American tradition stands 
in the way. This tradition says that the people of the republic 
are made up of ungraded masterless men who enjoy all the rights 
and immunities of self-direction, self-help, free bargaining, and 
equal opportunity, quite after the fashion that was sketched into 
the great constituent documents of the eighteenth century. 
    Much doubt and some discontent is afoot. It is becoming 
increasingly evident that the facts of everyday life under the 
new order do not fall in with the inherited principles of law and 
custom; but the farmers, farm laborers, factory hands, mine 
workmen, lumber hands, and retail tradesmen have not come to 
anything like a realisation of that new order of economic life 
which throws them in together on one side of a line of division, 
on the other side of which stand the vested interests and the 
kept classes. They have not yet come to realise that all of them 
together have nothing to lose except such things as the vested 
interests can quite legally and legitimately deprive them of, 
with full sanction of law and custom as it runs, so soon and so 
far as it shall suit the convenience of the vested interests to 
make such a move. These people of the variegated mass have no 
safeguard, in fact, against the control of their conditions of 
life exercised by those massive interests that move obscurely in 
the background of the market, except such considerations of 
expediency as may govern the manoeuvres of those massive ones who 
so move obscurely in the background. That is to say, the 
conditions of life for the variegated mass are determined by what 
the traffic will bear, according to the calculations of self-help 
which guide the vested interests, all the while that the farmers, 
workmen, consumers, the common lot, are still animated with the 
fancy that they have themselves something to say in these 
premises. 
    It is otherwise with the vested interests, on the whole. They 
take a more perspicuous view of their own case and of the 
predicament of the common man, the party of the second part. 
Whereas the variegated mass that makes up the common lot have not 
hitherto deliberately taken sides together or defined their own 
attitude toward the established system of law and order and its 
continuance, and so are neither in the right nor in the wrong as 
regards this matter, the vested interests and the kept classes, 
on the other hand, have reached insight and definition of what 
they need, want, and are entitled to. They have deliberated and 
chosen their part in the division, partly by interest and partly 
by ingrained habitual bent, no doubt, -- and they are always in 
the right. They owe their position and the blessings that come of 
it -- free income and social prerogative -- to the continued 
enforcement of these eighteenth-century principles of law and 
order under conditions created by the twentieth-century state of 
the industrial arts. Therefore, it is incumbent on them, in point 
of expediency, to stand strongly for the established order of 
inalienable eighteenth-century rights; and they are at the same 
time in the right, in point of law and morals, in so doing, since 
what is right in law and morals is always a question of settled 
habit, and settled habit is always a legacy out of the past. To 
take their own part, therefore, the vested interests and the kept 
classes have nothing more perplexing to do than simply to follow 
the leadings of their settled code in all questions of law and 
order and thereby to fall neatly in with the leading of their own 
pecuniary advantage, and always and on both counts to keep their 
poise as safe and sound citizens intelligently abiding by the 
good old principles of right and honest living which safeguard 
their vested rights. 
    The common man is not so fortunate. He cannot effectually 
take his own part in this difficult conjuncture of circumstances 
without getting on the wrong side of the established run of law 
and morals, Unless he is content to go on as the party of the 
second part in a traffic that is controlled by the massive 
interests on the footing of what they consider that the traffic 
will bear, he will find himself in the wrong and may even come in 
for the comfortless attention of the courts. Whereas if he makes 
his peace with the established run of law and custom, and so 
continues to be rated as a good man and true, he will find that 
his livelihood falls into a dubious and increasingly precarious 
case. It is not for nothing that he is a common man. 
    So caught in a quandary, it is small wonder if the common man 
is somewhat irresponsible and unsteady in his aims and conduct, 
so far as touches industrial affairs. A pious regard for the 
received code of right and honest living holds him to a 
submissive quietism, a make-believe of self-help and fair 
dealings; whereas the material and pecuniary circumstances that 
condition his livelihood under this new order drive him to fall 
back on the underlying rule of Live and Let Live, and to revise 
the established code of law and custom to such purpose that this 
underlying rule of life shall be brought into bearing in point of 
fact as well as in point of legal formality. And the training to 
which the hard matter-of-fact logic of the machine industry and 
the mechanical organisation of life now subjects him, constantly 
bends him to a matter-of-fact outlook, to a rating of men and 
things in terms of tangible performance, and to an ever slighter 
respect for the traditional principles that have come down from 
the eighteenth century. The common man is constantly and 
increasingly exposed to the risk of becoming an undesirable 
citizen in the eyes of the votaries of law and order. In other 
words, vested rights to free income are no longer felt to be 
secure in case the common man should take over the direction of 
affairs. 
    Such a vested right to free income, that is to say this 
legitimate right of the kept classes to their keep at the cost of 
the underlying community, does not fall in with the lines of that 
mechanistic outlook and mechanistic logic which is forever 
gaining ground as the new order of industry goes forward. Such 
free income, which measures neither the investor's personal 
contribution to the production of goods nor his necessary 
consumption while engaged in industry, does not fit in with that 
mechanistic reckoning that runs in terms of tangible performance, 
and that grows ever increasingly habitual and convincing with 
every further habituation to the new order of things in the 
industrial world. Vested perquisites have no place in the new 
scheme of things; hence the new scheme is a menace. It is true, 
the well stabilised principles of the eighteenth century still 
continue to rate the investor as a producer of goods; but it is 
equally true that such a rating is palpable nonsense according to 
the mechanistic calculus of the new order, brought into bearing 
by the mechanical industry and material science. This may all be 
an untoward and distasteful turn of circumstances, but there is 
no gain of tranquillity to be got from ignoring it. 
    So it comes about that, increasingly, throughout broad 
classes in these industrial countries there is coming to be 
visible a lack of respect and affection for the vested interests, 
whether of business or of privilege; and it rises to the pitch of 
distrust and plain disallowance among those peoples on whom the 
preconceptions of the eighteenth century sit more lightly and 
loosely. It still is all vague and shifty. So much so that the 
guardians of law and order are still persuaded that they "have 
the situation in hand." But the popular feeling of incongruity 
and uselessness in the current run of law and custom under the 
rule of these timeworn preconceptions is visibly gaining ground 
and gathering consistency, even in so well ordered a republic as 
America. A cleavage of sentiment is beginning to run between the 
vested interests and the variegated mass of the common lot., and 
increasingly the common man is growing apathetic, or even 
impervious, to appeals grounded on these timeworn preconceptions 
of equity and good usage. 
    The fact of such a cleavage, as well as the existence of any 
ground for it, is painstakingly denied by the spokesmen of the 
vested interests; and in support of that comfortable delusion 
they will cite the exemplary fashion in which certain 
monopolistic labor organisations "stand pat," It is true, such a 
quasi-vested interest of the A. F. of L., which unbidden assumes 
to speak for the common man, can doubtless be counted on to 
"stand pat" on that system of imponderables in which its vested 
perquisites reside. So also the kept classes, and their stewards 
among the keepers of law and custom, are inflexibly content to 
let well enough alone. They can be counted on to see nothing more 
to the point than a stupidly subversive rapacity in that 
loosening of the bonds of convention that so makes light of the 
sacred rights of vested interest. Interested motives may count 
for something on both sides, but it is also true that the kept 
classes and the businesslike managers of the vested interests, 
whose place in the economy of nature it is to make money by 
conforming to the received law and custom, have not in the same 
degree undergone the shattering discipline of the New Order. They 
are, therefore, still to be found standing blamelessly on the 
stable principles of the Modern Point of View. 
    But a large fraction of the people in the industrial 
countries is visibly growing uneasy under these principles as 
they work out under existing circumstances. So, e.g., it is 
evident that the common man within the United Kingdom, in so far 
as the Labor Party is his accredited spokesman, is increasingly 
restive under the state of "things as they are," and it is 
scarcely less evident that he finds his abiding grievance in the 
Vested Interests and that system of law and custom which 
cherishes them. And these men, as well as their like in other 
countries, are still in an unsettled state of advance to 
positions more definitely at variance with the received law and 
custom. In some instances, and indeed in more or less massive 
formation, this movement of dissent has already reached the limit 
of tolerance and has found itself sharply checked by the 
constituted keepers of law and custom. 
    It is perhaps not unwarranted to count the I. W. W. as such a 
vanguard of dissent, in spite of the slight consistency and the 
exuberance of its movements. After all, these and their like, 
here and in other countries are an element of appreciable weight 
in the population. They are also increasingly numerous, in spite 
of well-conceived repressive measures, and they appear to grow 
increasingly sure. And it will not do to lose sight of the 
presumption that, while they may be gravely in the wrong, they 
are likely not to be far out of touch with the undistinguished 
mass of the common sort who still continue to live within the 
law. It should seem likely that the peculiar moral and 
intellectual bent which marks them as "undesirable citizens" 
will, all the while, be found to run closer to that of the common 
man than the corresponding bent of the law-abiding beneficiaries 
under the existing system. 
    Vaguely, perhaps, and with a picturesque irresponsibility, 
these and their like are talking and thinking at cross-purposes 
with the principles of free bargain and self-help. There is 
reason to believe that to their own thinking, when cast in the 
terms in which they conceive these things, their notions of 
reasonable human intercourse are not equally fantastic and 
inconclusive. So, there is the dread word. Syndicalism, which is 
quite properly unintelligible to the kept classes and the adepts 
of corporation finance, and which has no definable meaning within 
the constituent principles of the eighteenth century. But the 
notion of it seems to come easy, by mere lapse of habit, to these 
others in whom the discipline of the New Order has begun to 
displace the preconceptions of the eighteenth century. 
    Then there are, in this country, the agrarian syndicalists, 
in the shape of the Nonpartisan League, large, loose, animated, 
and untidy, but sure of itself in its settled disallowance of the 
Vested Interests, and fast passing the limit of tolerance in its 
inattention to the timeworn principles of equity. How serious is 
the moral dereliction and the subversive stupidity of these 
agrarian syndicalists, in the eyes of those who still hold fast 
to the eighteenth century, may be gathered from the animation of 
the business community, the commercial clubs, the Rotarians, and 
the traveling salesmen, in any glace where the League raises its 
untidy head. And as if advisedly to complete the case, these 
agrarians, as well as their running-mates in the industrial 
centers and along the open road, are found to be slack in respect 
of their national spirit. So, at least, it is said by those who 
are interested to know. 
    It is not that these and their like are ready with "a 
satisfactory constructive program," such as the people of the 
uplift require to be shown before they will believe that things 
are due to change. It is something of the simpler and cruder 
sort, such as history is full of, to the effect that whenever and 
so far as the time-worn rules no longer fit the new material 
circumstances they presently fail to carry conviction as they 
once did. Such wear and tear of institutions is unavoidable where 
circumstances change; and it is through the altered personal 
equation of those elements of the population which are most 
directly exposed to the changing circumstances that the wear and 
tear of institutions may be expected to take effect. To these 
untidy creatures of the New Order common honesty appears to mean 
vaguely something else, perhaps something more exacting, than 
what was "nominated in the bond" at the time when the free 
bargain and self-help were written into the moral constitution of 
Christendom by the handicraft industry and the petty trade. And 
why should it not?  
 
The End 