


THE DEATH OF OLIVIER BECAILLE


	by Emile Zola


CHAPTER I

MY PASSING


It was on a Saturday, at six in the morning, that I died after a 
three days' illness.  My wife was searching a trunk for some linen, 
and when she rose and turned she saw me rigid, with open eyes and 
silent pulses.  She ran to me, fancying that I had fainted, touched 
my hands and bent over me.  Then she suddenly grew alarmed, burst 
into tears and stammered:

"My God, my God!  He is dead!"

I heard everything, but the sounds seemed to come from a great 
distance.  My left eye still detected a faint glimmer, a whitish 
light in which all objects melted, but my right eye was quite bereft 
of sight.  It was the coma of my whole being, as if a thunderbolt 
had struck me.  My will was annihilated; not a fiber of flesh obeyed 
my bidding.  And yet amid the impotency of my inert limbs my 
thoughts subsisted, sluggish and lazy, still perfectly clear.

My poor Marguerite was crying; she had dropped on her knees beside 
the bed, repeating in heart-rending tones:

"He is dead!  My God, he is dead!"

Was this strange state of torpor, this immobility of the flesh, 
really death, although the functions of the intellect were not 
arrested?  Was my soul only lingering for a brief space before it 
soared away forever?  From my childhood upward I had been subject to 
hysterical attacks, and twice in early youth I had nearly succumbed 
to nervous fevers.  By degrees all those who surrounded me had got 
accustomed to consider me an invalid and to see me sickly.  So much 
so that I myself had forbidden my wife to call in a doctor when I 
had taken to my bed on the day of our arrival at the cheap 
lodginghouse of the Rue Dauphine in Paris.  A little rest would soon 
set me right again; it was only the fatigue of the journey which had 
caused my intolerable weariness.  And yet I was conscious of having 
felt singularly uneasy.  We had left our province somewhat abruptly; 
we were very poor and had barely enough money to support ourselves 
till I drew my first month's salary in the office where I had 
obtained a situation.  And now a sudden seizure was carrying me off!

Was it really death?  I had pictured to myself a darker night, a 
deeper silence.  As a little child I had already felt afraid to die.  
Being weak and compassionately petted by everyone, I had concluded 
that I had not long to live, that I should soon be buried, and the 
thought of the cold earth filled me with a dread I could not master--
a dread which haunted me day and night.  As I grew older the same 
terror pursued me.  Sometimes, after long hours spent in reasoning 
with myself, I thought that I had conquered my fear.  I reflected, 
"After all, what does it matter?  One dies and all is over.  It is 
the common fate; nothing could be better or easier."

I then prided myself on being able to look death boldly in the face, 
but suddenly a shiver froze my blood, and my dizzy anguish returned, 
as if a giant hand had swung me over a dark abyss.  It was some 
vision of the earth returning and setting reason at naught.  How 
often at night did I start up in bed, not knowing what cold breath 
had swept over my slumbers but clasping my despairing hands and 
moaning, "Must I die?"  In those moments an icy horror would stop my 
pulses while an appalling vision of dissolution rose before me.  It 
was with difficulty that I could get to sleep again.  Indeed, sleep 
alarmed me; it so closely resembled death.  If I closed my eyes they 
might never open again--I might slumber on forever.

I cannot tell if others have endured the same torture; I only know 
that my own life was made a torment by i asleep.  You see, I am alive, and I love you."



CHAPTER II

FUNERAL PREPARATIONS


Marguerite's cries had attracted attention, for all at once the door 
was opened and a voice exclaimed: "What is the matter, neighbor?  Is 
he worse?"

I recognized the voice; it was that of an elderly woman, Mme Gabin, 
who occupied a room on the same floor.  She had been most obliging 
since our arrival and had evidently become interested in our 
concerns.  On her own side she had lost no time in telling us her 
history.  A stern landlord had sold her furniture during the 
previous winter to pay himself his rent, and since then she had 
resided at the lodginghouse in the Rue Dauphine with her daughter 
Dede, a child of ten.  They both cut and pinked lamp shades, and 
between them they earned at the utmost only two francs a day.

"Heavens!  Is it all over?" cried Mme Gabin, looking at me.

I realt.  Death ever rose between 
me and all I loved; I can remember how the thought of it poisoned 
the happiest moments I spent with Marguerite.  During the first 
months of our married life, when she lay sleeping by my side and I 
dreamed of a fair future for her and with her, the foreboding of 
some fatal separation dashed my hopes aside and embittered my 
delights.  Perhaps we should be parted on the morrow--nay, perhaps 
in an hour's time.  Then utter discouragement assailed me; I 
wondered what the bliss of being united availed me if it were to end 
in so cruel a disruption.

My morbid imagination reveled in scenes of mourning.  I speculated 
as to who would be the first to depart, Marguerite or I.  Either 
alternative caused me harrowing grief, and tears rose to my eyes at 
the thought of our shattered lives.  At the happiest periods of my 
existence I often became a prey to grim dejection such as nobody 
could understand but which was caused by the thought of impending 
nihility.  When I was most successful I was to general wonder most 
depressed.  The fatal question, "What avails it?" rang like a knell 
in my ears.  But the sharpest sting of this torment was that it came 
with a secret sense of shame, which rendered me unable to confide my 
thoughts to another.  Husband and wife lying side by side in the 
darkened room may quiver with the same shudder and yet remain mute, 
for people do not mention death any more than they pronounce certain 
obscene words.  Fear makes it nameless.

I was musing thus while my dear Marguerite knelt sobbing at my feet.  
It grieved me sorely to be unable to comfort her by telling her that 
I suffered no pain.  If death were merely the annihilation of the 
flesh it had been foolish of me to harbor so much dread.  I 
experienced a selfish kind of restfulness in which all my cares were 
forgotten.  My memory had become extraordinarily vivid.  My whole 
life passed before me rapidly like a play in which I no longer acted 
a part; it was a curious and enjoyable sensation--I seemed to hear a 
far-off voice relating my own history.

I saw in particular a certain spot in the country near Guerande, on 
the way to Piriac.  The road turns sharply, and some scattered pine 
trees carelessly dot a rocky slope.  When I was seven years old I 
used to pass through those pines with my father as far as a 
crumbling old house, where Marguerite's parents gave me pancakes.  
They were salt gatherers and earned a scanty livelihood by working 
the adjacent salt marshes.  Then I remembered the school at Nantes, 
where I had grown up, leading a monotonous life within its ancient 
wallis and yearning for the broad horizon of Guerande and the salt 
marshes stretching to the limitless sea widening under the sky.

Next came a blank--my father was dead.  I entered the hospital as 
clerk to the managing board and led a dreary life with one solitary 
diversion: my Sunday visits to the old house on Piriac road.  The 
saltworks were doing badly; poverty reigned in the land, and 
Marguerite's parents were nearly penniless.  Marguerite, when merely 
a child, had been fond of me because I trundled her about in a 
wheelbarrow, but on the morning when I asked her in marriage she 
shrank from me with a frightened gesture, and I realized that she 
thought me hideous.  Her parents, however, consented at once; they 
looked upon my offer as a godsend, and the daughter submissively 
acquiesced.  When she became accustomed to the idea of marrying me 
she did not seem to dislike it so much.  On our wedding day at 
Guerande the rain fell in torrents, and when we got home my bride 
had to take off her dress, which was soaked through, and sit in her 
petticoats.

That was all the youth I ever had.  We did not remain long in our 
province.  One day I found my wife in tears.  She was miserable; 
life was so dull; she wanted to get away.  Six months later I had 
saved a little money by taking in extra work after office hours, and 
through the influence of a friend of my father's I obtained a petty 
appointment in Paris.  I started off to settle there with the dear 
little woman so that she might cry no more.  During the night, which 
we spent in the third-class railway carriage, the seats being very 
hard, I took her in my arms in order that she might sleep.

That was the past, and now I had just died on the narrow couch of a 
Paris lodginghouse, and my wife was crouching on the floor, crying 
bitterly.  The white light before my left eye was growing dim, but I 
remembered the room perfectly.  On the left there was a chest of 
drawers, on the right a mantelpiece surmounted by a damaged clock 
without a pendulum, the hands of which marked ten minutes past ten.  
The window overlooked the Rue Dauphine, a long, dark street.  All 
Paris seemed to pass below, and the noise was so great that the 
window shook.

We knew nobody in the city; we had hurried our departure, but I was 
not expected at the office till the following Monday.  Since I had 
taken to my bed I had wondered at my imprisonment in this narrow 
room into which we had tumbled after a railway journey of fifteen 
hours, followed by a hurried, confusing transit through the noisy 
streets.  My wife had nursed me with smiling tenderness, but I knew 
that she was anxious.  She would walk to the window, glance out and 
return to the bedside, looking very pale and startled by the sight 
of the busy thoroughfare, the aspect of the vast city of which she 
did not know a single stone and which deafened her with its 
continuous roar.  What would happen to her if I never woke up again--
alone, friendless and unknowing as she was?

Marguerite had caught hold of one of my hands which lay passive on 
the coverlet, and, covering it with kisses, she repeated wildly: 
"Olivier, answer me.  Oh, my God, he is dead, dead!"

So death was not complete annihilation.  I could hear and think.  I 
had been uselessly alarmed all those years.  I had not dropped into 
utter vacancy as I had anticipated.  I could not picture the 
disappearance of my being, the suppression of all that I had been, 
without the possibility of renewed existence.  I had been wont to 
shudder whenever in any book or newspaper I came across a date of a 
hundred years hence.  A date at which I should no longer be alive, a 
future which I should never see, filled me with unspeakable 
uneasiness.  Was I not the whole world, and would not the universe 
crumble away when I was no more?

To dream of life had been a cherished vision, but this could not 
possibly be death.  I should assuredly awake presently.  Yes, in a 
few moments I would lean over, take Marguerite in my arms and dry 
her tears.  I would rest a little while longer before going to my 
office, and then a new life would begin, brighter than the last.  
However, I did not feel impatient; the commotion had been too 
strong.  It was wrong of Marguerite to give way like that when I had 
not even the strength to turn my head on the pillow and smile at 
her.  The next time that she moaned out, "He is dead!  Dead!" I 
would embrace her and murmer softly so as not to startle her: "No, 
my darling, I was onlyzed that she was drawing nearer.  She examined me, touched me 
and, turning to Marguerite, murmured compassionately: "Poor girl!  
Poor girl!"

My wife, wearied out, was sobbing like a child.  Mme Gabin lifted 
her, placed her in a dilapidated armchair near the fireplace and 
proceeded to comfort her.

"Indeed, you'll do yourself harm if you go on like this, my dear.  
It's no reason because your husband is gone that you should kill 
yourself with weeping.  Sure enough, when I lost Gabin I was just 
like you.  I remained three days without swallowing a morsel of 
food.  But that didn't help me--on the contrary, it pulled me down.  
Come, for the Lord's sake, be sensible!"

By degrees Marguerite grew calmer; she was exhausted, and it was 
only at intervals that she gave way to a fresh flow of tears.  
Meanwhile the old woman had taken possession of the room with a sort 
of rough authority.

"Don't worry yourself," she said as she bustled about.  "Neighbors 
must help each other.  Luckily Dede has just gone to take the work 
home.  Ah, I see your trunks are not yet all unpacked, but I suppose 
there is some linen in the chest of drawers, isn't there?"

I heard her pull a drawer open; she must have taken out a napkin 
which she spread on the little table at the bedside.  She then 
struck a match, which made me think that she was lighting one of the 
candles on the mantelpiece and placing it near me as a religious 
rite.  I could follow her movements in the room and divine all her 
actions.

"Poor gentleman," she muttered.  "Luckily I heard you sobbing, poor 
dear!"  Suddenly the vague light which my left eye had detected 
vanished.  Mme Gabin had just closed my eyelids, but I had not felt 
her finger on my face.  When I understood this I felt chilled.

The door had opened again, and Dede, the child of ten, now rushed 
in, calling out in her shrill voice: "Mother, Mother!  Ah, I knew 
you would be here!  Look here, there's the money--three francs and 
four sous.  I took back three dozen lamp shades."

"Hush, hush!  Hold your tongue," vainly repeated the mother, who, as 
the little girl chattered on, must have pointed to the bed, for I 
guessed that the child felt perplexed and was backing toward the 
door.

"Is the gentleman asleep?" she whispered.

"Yes, yes--go and play," said Mme Gabin.

But the child did not go.  She was, no doubt, staring at me with 
widely opened eyes, startled and vaguely comprehending.  Suddenly 
she seemed convulsed with terror and ran out, upsetting a chair.

"He is dead, Mother; he is dead!" she gasped.

Profound silence followed.  Marguerite, lying back in the armchair, 
had left off crying.  Mme Gabin was still rummaging about the room 
and talking under her breath.

"Children know everything nowadays.  Look at that girl.  Heaven 
knows how carefully she's brought up!  When I send her on an errand 
or take the shades back I calculate the time to a minute so that she 
can't loiter about, but for all that she learns everything.  She saw 
at a glance what had happened here--and yet I never showed her but 
one corpse, that of her uncle Francois, and she was then only four 
years old.  Ah well, there are no children left--it can't be 
helped."

She paused and without any transition passed to another subject.

"I say, dearie, we must think of the formalities--there's the 
declaration at the municipal offices to be made and the seeing about 
the funeral.  You are not in a fit state to attend to business.  
What do you say if I look in at Monsieur Simoneau's to find out if 
he's at home?"

Marguerite did not reply.  It seemed to me that I watched her from 
afar and at times changed into a subtle flame hovering above the 
room, while a stranger lay heavy and unconscious on my bed.  I 
wished that Marguerite had declined the assistance of Simoneau.  I 
had seen him three or four times during my brief illness, for he 
occupied a room close to ours and had been civil and neighborly.  
Mme Gabin had told us that he was merely making a short stay in 
Paris, having come to collect some old debts due to his father, who 
had settled in the country and recently died.  He was a tall, 
strong, handsome young man, and I hated him, perhaps on account of 
his healthy appearance.  On the previous evening he had come in to 
make inquiries, and I had much disliked seeing him at Marguerite's 
side; she had looked so fair and pretty, and he had gazed so 
intently into her face when she smilingly thanked him for his 
kindness.

"Ah, here is Monsieur Simoneau," said Mme Gabin, introducing him.

He gently pushed the door ajar, and as soon as Marguerite saw him 
enter she burst into a flood of tears.  The presence of a friend, of 
the only person she knew in Paris besides the old woman, recalled 
her bereavement.  I could not see the young man, but in the darkness 
that encompassed me I conjured up his appearance.  I pictured him 
distinctly, grave and sad at finding poor Marguerite in such 
distress.  How lovely she must have looked with her golden hair 
unbound, her pale face and her dear little baby hands burning with 
fever!

"I am at your disposal, madame," he said softly.  "Pray allow me to 
manage everything."

She only answered him with broken words, but as the young man was 
leaving, accompanied by Mme Gabin, I heard the latter mention money.  
These things were always expensive, she said, and she feared that 
the poor little body hadn't a farthing--anyhow, he might ask her.  
But Simoneau silenced the old woman; he did not want to have the 
widow worried; he was going to the municipal office and to the 
undertaker's.

When silence reigned once more I wondered if my nightmare would last 
much longer.  I was certainly alive, for I was conscious of passing 
incidents, and I began to realize my condition.  I must have fallen 
into one of those cataleptic states that I had read of.  As a child 
I had suffered from syncopes which had lasted several hours, but 
surely my heart would beat anew, my blood circulate and my muscles 
relax.  Yes, I should wake up and comfort Marguerite, and, reasoning 
thus, I tried to be patient.

Time passed.  Mme Gabin had brought in some breakfast, but 
Marguerite refused to taste any food.  Later on the afternoon waned.  
Through the open window I heard the rising clamor of the Rue 
Dauphine.  By and by a slight ringing of the brass candlestick on 
the marble-topped table made me think that a fresh candle had been 
lighted.  At last Simoneau returned.

"Well?" whispered the old woman.

"It is all settled," he answered; "the funeral is ordered for 
tomorrow at eleven.  There is nothing for you to do, and you needn't 
talk of these things before the poor lady."

Nevertheless, Mme Gabin remarked: "The doctor of the dead hasn't 
come yet."

Simoneau took a seat beside Marguerite and after a few words of 
encouragement remained silent.  The funeral was to take place at 
eleven!  Those words rang in my brain like a passing bell.  And the 
doctor coming--the doctor of the dead, as Mme Gabin had called him.  
HE could not possibly fail to find out that I was only in a state of 
lethargy; he would do whatever might be necessary to rouse me, so I 
longed for his arrival with feverish anxiety.

The day was drawing to a close.  Mme Gabin, anxious to waste no 
time, had brought in her lamp shades and summoned Dede without 
asking Marguerite's permission.  "To tell the truth," she observed, 
"I do not like to leave children too long alone."

"Come in, I say," she whispered to the little girl; "come in, and 
don't be frightened.  Only don't look toward the bed or you'll catch 
it."

She thought it decorous to forbid Dede to look at me, but I was 
convinced that the child was furtively glancing at the corner where 
I lay, for every now and then I heard her mother rap her knuckles 
and repeat angrily: "Get on with your work or you shall leave the 
room, and the gentleman will come during the night and pull you by 
the feet."

The mother and daughter had sat down at our table.  I could plainly 
hear the click of their scissors as they clipped the lamp shades, 
which no doubt required very delicate manipulation, for they did not 
work rapidly.  I counted the shades one by one as they were laid 
aside, while my anxiety grew more and more intense.

The clicking of the scissors was the only noise in the room, so I 
concluded that Marguerite had been overcome by fatigue and was 
dozing.  Twice Simoneau rose, and the torturing thought flashed 
through me that he might be taking advantage of her slumbers to 
touch her hair with his lips.  I hardly knew the man and yet felt 
sure that he loved my wife.  At last little Dede began to giggle, 
and her laugh exasperated me.

"Why are you sniggering, you idiot?" asked her mother.  "Do you want 
to be turned out on the landing?  Come, out with it; what makes you 
laugh so?"

The child stammered: she had not laughed; she had only coughed, but 
I felt certain she had seen Simoneau bending over Marguerite and had 
felt amused.

The lamp had been lit when a knock was heard at the door.

"It must be the doctor at last," said the old woman.

It was the doctor; he did not apologize for coming so late, for he 
had no doubt ascended many flights of stairs during the day.  The 
room being but imperfectly lighted by the lamp, he inquired: "Is the 
body here?"

"Yes, it is," answered Simoneau.

Marguerite had risen, trembling violently.  Mme Gabin dismissed 
Dede, saying it was useless that a child should be present, and then 
she tried to lead my wife to the window, to spare her the sight of 
what was about to take place.

The doctor quickly approached the bed.  I guessed that he was bored, 
tired and impatient.  Had he touched my wrist?  Had he placed his 
hand on my heart?  I could not tell, but I fancied that he had only 
carelessly bent over me.

"Shall I bring the lamp so that you may see better?" asked Simoneau 
obligingly.

"No it is not necessary," quietly answered the doctor.

Not necessary!  That man held my life in his hands, and he did not 
think it worth while to proceed to a careful examination!  I was not 
dead!  I wanted to cry out that I was not dead!

"At what o'clock did he die?" asked the doctor.

"At six this morning," volunteered Simoneau.

A feeling of frenzy and rebellion rose within me, bound as I was in 
seemingly iron chains.  Oh, for the power of uttering one word, of 
moving a single limb!

"This close weather is unhealthy," resumed the doctor; "nothing is 
more trying than these early spring days."

And then he moved away.  It was like my life departing.  Screams, 
sobs and insults were choking me, struggling in my convulsed throat, 
in which even my breath was arrested.  The wretch!  Turned into a 
mere machine by professional habits, he only came to a deathbed to 
accomplish a perfunctory formality; he knew nothing; his science was 
a lie, since he could not at a glance distinguish life from death--
and now he was going--going!

"Good nighought helped to calm me.  It had just occurred to me that I 
had witnessed a case similar to my own when I was employed at the 
hospital of Guerande.  A man had been sleeping twenty-eight hours, 
the doctors hesitating in presence of his apparent lifelessness, 
when suddenly he had sat up in bed and was almost at once able to 
rise.  I myself had already been asleep for some twenty-five hours; 
if I awoke at ten I should still be in time.

I endeavored to ascertain who was in the room and what was going on 
there.  Dede must have been playing on the landing, for once when 
the door opened I heard her shrill childish laughter outside.  
Simoneau must have retired, for nothing indicated his presence.  Mme 
Gabin's slipshod tread was still audible over the floor.  At last 
she spoke.

"Come, my dear," she said.  "It is wrong of you not to take it while 
it is hot.  It, sir," said Simoneau.

There came a moment's silence; the doctor was probably bowing to 
Marguerite, who had turned while Mme Gabin was fastening the window.  
He left the room, and I heard his footsteps descending the stairs.

It was all over; I was condemned.  My last hope had vanished with 
that man.  If I did not wake before eleven on the morrow I should be 
buried alive.  The horror of that thought was so great that I lost 
all consciousness of my surroundings--'twas something like a 
fainting fit in death.  The last sound I heard was the clicking of 
the scissors handled by Mme Gabin and Dede.  The funeral vigil had 
begun; nobody spoke.

Marguerite had refused to retire to rest in the neighbor's room.  
She remained reclining in her armchair, with her beautiful face 
pale, her eyes closed and her long lashes wet with tears, while 
before her in the gloom Simoneau sat silently watching her.



CHAPTER III

THE PROCESSION


I cannot describe my agony during the morning of the following day.   I remember it as a hideous dream in which my impressions were so  ghastly and so confused that I could not formulate them.  The  persistent yearning for a sudden awakening increased my torture, and  as the hour for the funeral drew nearer my anguish became more  poignant still.

It was only at daybreak that I had recovered a fuller consciousness  of what was going on around me.  The creaking of hinges startled me  out of my stupor.  Mme Gabin had just opened the window.  It must  have been about seven o'clock, for I heard the cries of hawkers in  the street, the shrill voice of a girl offering groundsel and the  hoarse voice of a man shouting "Carrots!  The clamorous awakening of  Paris pacified me at first.  I could not believe that I should be  laid under the sod in the midst of so much life; and, besides, a  sudden tht would cheer you up."

She was addressing Marguerite, and a slow trickling sound as of  something filtering indicated that she had been making some coffee.

"I don't mind owning," she continued, "that I needed it.  At my age  sitting up IS trying.  The night seems so dreary when there is a  misfortune in the house.  DO have a cup of coffee, my dear--just a  drop."

She persuaded Marguerite to taste it.

"Isn't it nice and hot?" she continued, "and doesn't it set one up?   Ah, you'll be wanting all your strength presently for what you've  got to go through today.  Now if you were sensible you'd step into  my room and just wait there."

"No, I want to stay here," said Marguerite resolutely.

Her voice, which I had not heard since the previous evening, touched  me strangely.  It was changed, broken as by tears.  To feel my dear  wife near me was a last consolation.  I knew that her eyes were  fastened on me and that she was weeping with all the anguish of her  heart.

The minutes flew by.  An inexplicable noise sounded from beyond the  door.  It seemed as if some people were bringing a bulky piece of  furniture upstairs and knocking against the walls as they did so.   Suddenly I understood, as I heard Marguerite begin to sob; it was  the coffin.

"You are too early," said Mme Gabin crossly.  "Put it behind the  bed."

What o'clock was it?  Nine, perhaps.  So the coffin had come.  Amid  the opaque night around me I could see it plainly, quite new, with  roughly planed boards.  Heavens!  Was this the end then?  Was I to  be borne off in that box which I realized was lying at my feet?

However, I had one supreme joy.  Marguerite, in spite of her  weakness, insisted upon discharging all the last offices.  Assisted  by the old woman, she dressed me with all the tenderness of a wife  and a sister.  Once more I felt myself in her arms as she clothed me  in various garments.  She paused at times, overcome by grief; she  clasped me convulsively, and her tears rained on my face.  Oh, how I  longed to return her embrace and cry, "I live!"  And yet I was lying  there powerless, motionless, inert!

"You are foolish," suddenly said Mme Gabin; "it is all wasted."

"Never mind," answered Marguerite, sobbing.  "I want him to wear his  very best things."

I understood that she was dressing me in the clothes I had worn on  my wedding day.  I had kept them carefully for great occasions.   When she had finished she fell back exhausted in the armchair.

Simoneau now spoke; he had probably just entered the room.

"They are below," he whispered.

"Well, it ain't any too soon," answered Mme Gabin, also lowering her  voice.  "Tell them to come up and get it over."

"But I dread the despair of the poor little wife."

The old woman seemed to reflect and presently resumed: "Listen to  me, Monsieur Simoneau.  You must take her off to my room.  I  wouldn't have her stop here.  It is for her own good.  When she is  out of the way we'll get it done in a jiffy."

These words pierced my heart, and my anguish was intense when I  realized that a struggle was actually taking place.  Simoneau had  walked up to Marguerite, imploring her to leave the room.

"Do, for pity's sake, come with me!" he pleaded.  "Spare yourself  useless pain."

"No, no!" she cried.  "I will remain till the last minute.  Remember  that I have only him in the world, and when he is gone I shall be  all alone!"

From the bedside Mme Gabin was prompting the young man.

"Don't parley--take hold of her, carry her off in your arms."

Was Simoneau about to lay his hands on Marguerite and bear her away?   She screamed.  I wildly endeavored to rise, but the springs of my  limbs were broken.  I remained rigid, unable to lift my eyelids to  see what was going on.  The struggle continued, and my wife clung to  the furniture, repeating, "Oh, don't, don't!  Have mercy!  Let me  go!  I will not--"

He must have lifted her in his stalwart arms, for I heard her  moaning like a child.  He bore her away; her sobs were lost in the  distance, and I fancied I saw them both--he, tall and strong,  pressing her to his breast; she, fainting, powerless and conquered,  following him wherever he listed.

"Drat it all!  What a to-do!" muttered Mme Gabin.  "Now for the tug  of war, as the coast is clear at last."

In my jealous madness I looked upon this incident as a monstrous  outrage.  I had not been able to see Marguerite for twenty-four  hours, but at least I had still heard her voice.  Now even this was  denied me; she had been torn away; a man had eloped with her even  before I was laid under the sod.  He was alone with her on the other  side of the wall, comforting her--embracing her, perhaps!

But the door opened once more, and heavy footsteps shook the floor.

"Quick, make haste," repeated Mme Gabin.  "Get it done before the  lady comes back."

She was speaking to some strangers, who merely answered her with  uncouth grunts.

"You understand," she went on, "I am not a relation; I'm only a  neighbor.  I have no interest in the matter.  It is out of pure good  nature that I have mixed myself up in their affairs.  And I ain't  overcheerful, I can tell you.  Yes, yes, I sat up the whole blessed  night--it was pretty cold, too, about four o'clock.  That's a fact.   Well, I have always been a fool--I'm too soft-hearted."

The coffin had been dragged into the center of the room.  As I had  not awakened I was condemned.  All clearness departed from my ideas;  everything seemed to revolve in a black haze, and I experienced such  utter lassitude that it seemed almost a relief to leave off hoping.

"They haven't spared the material," said one of the undertaker's men  in a gruff voice.  "The box is too long."

"He'll have all the more room," said the other, laughing.

I was not heavy, and they chuckled over it since they had three  flights of stairs to descend.  As they were seizing me by the  shoulders and feet I heard Mme Gabin fly into a violent passion.

"You cursed little brat," she screamed, "what do you mean by poking  your nose where you're not wanted?  Look here, I'll teach you to spy  and pry."

Dede had slipped her tousled head through the doorway to see how the  gentleman was being put into the box.  Two ringing slaps resounded,  however, by an explosion of sobs.  And as soon as the mother  returned she began to gossip about her daughter for the benefit of  the two men who were settling me in the coffin.

"She is only ten, you know.  She is not a bad girl, but she is  frightfully inquisitive.  I do not beat her often; only I WILL be  obeyed."

"Oh," said one of the men, "all kids are alike.  Whenever there is a  corpse lying about they always want to see it."

I was commodiously stretched out, and I might have thought myself  still in bed, had it not been that my left arm felt a trifle cramped  from being squeezed against a board.  The men had been right.  I was  pretty comfortable inside on account of my diminutive stature.

"Stop!" suddenly exclaimed Mme Gabin.  "I promised his wife to put a  pillow under his head."

The men, who were in a hurry, stuffed in the pillow roughly.  One of  them, who had mislaid his hammer, began to swear.  He had left the  tool below and went to fetch it, dropping the lid, and when two  sharp blows of the hammer drove in the first nail, a shock ran  through my being--I had ceased to live.  The nails then entered in  rapid succession with a rhythmical cadence.  It was as if some  packers had been closing a case of dried fruit with easy dexterity.   After that such sounds as reached me were deadened and strangely  prolonged, as if the deal coffin had been changed into a huge  musical box.  The last words spoken in the room of the Rue Dauphine-- at least the last ones that I heard distinctly--were uttered by Mme  Gabin.

"Mind the staircase," she said; "the banister of the second flight  isn't safe, so be careful."

While I was being carried down I experienced a sensation similar to  that of pitching as when one is on board a ship in a rough sea.   However, from that moment my impressions became more and more vague.   I remember that the only distinct thought that still possessed me  was an imbecile, impulsive curiosity as to the road by which I  should be taken to the cemetery.  I was not acquainted with a single  street of Paris, and I was ignorant of the position of the large  burial grounds (though of course I had occasionally heard their  names), and yet every effort of my mind was directed toward  ascertaining whether we were turning to the right or to the left.   Meanwhile the jolting of the hearse over the paving stones, the  rumbling of passing vehicles, the steps of the foot passengers, all  created a confused clamor, intensified by the acoustical properties  of the coffin.

At first I followed our course pretty closely; then came a halt.  I  was again lifted and carried about, and I concluded that we were in  church, but when the funeral procession once more moved onward I  lost all consciousness of the road we took.  A ringing of bells  informed me that we were passing another church, and then the softer  and easier progress of the wheels indicated that we were skirting a  garden or park.  I was like a victim being taken to the gallows,  awaiting in stupor a deathblow that never came.

At last they stopped and pulled me out of the hearse.  The business  proceeded rapidly.  The noises had ceased; I knew that I was in a  deserted space amid avenues of trees and with the broad sky over my  head.  No doubt a few persons followed the bier, some of the  inhabitants of the lodginghouse, perhaps--Simoneau and others, for  instance--for faint whisperings reached my ear.  Then I heard a  psalm chanted and some Latin words mumbled by a priest, and  afterward I suddenly felt myself sinking, while the ropes rubbing  against the edges of the coffin elicited lugubrious sounds, as if a  bow were being drawn across the strings of a cracked violoncello.   It was the end.  On the left side of my head I felt a violent shock  like that produced by the bursting of a bomb, with another under my  feet and a third more violent still on my chest.  So forcible,  indeed, was this last one that I thought the lid was cleft atwain.   I fainted from it.



CHAPTER IV

THE NAIL


It is impossible for me to say how long my swoon lasted.  Eternity  is not of longer duration than one second spent in nihility.  I was  no more.  It was slowly and confusedly that I regained some degree  of consciousness.  I was still asleep, but I began to dream; a  nightmare started into shape amid the blackness of my horizon, a  nightmare compounded of a strange fancy which in other days had  haunted my morbid imagination whenever with my propensity for  dwelling upon hideous thoughts I had conjured up catastrophes.

Thus I dreamed that my wife was expecting me somewhere--at Guerande,  I believe--and that I was going to join her by rail.  As we passed  through a tunnel a deafening roll thundered over our head, and a  sudden subsidence blocked up both issues of the tunnel, leaving our  train intact in the center.  We were walled up by blocks of rock in  the heart of a mountain.  Then a long and fearful agony commenced.   No assistance could possibly reach us; even with powerful engines  and incessant labor it would take a month to clear the tunnel.  We  were prisoners there with no outlet, and so our death was only a  question of time.

My fancy had often dwelt on that hideous drama and had constantly  varied the details and touches.  My actors were men, women and  children; their number increased to hundreds, and they were ever  furnishing me with new incidents.  There were some provisions in the  train, but these were soon exhausted, and the hungry passengers, if  they did not actually devour human flesh, at least fought furiously  over the last piece of bread.  Sometimes an aged man was driven back  with blows and slowly perished; a mother struggled like a she-wolf  to keep three or four mouthfuls for her child.  In my own  compartment a bride and bridegroom were dying, clasped in each  other's arms in mute despair.

The line was free along the whole length of the train, and people  came and went, prowling round the carriages like beasts of prey in  search of carrion.  All classes were mingled together.  A  millionaire, a high functionary, it was said, wept on a workman's  shoulder.  The lamps had been extinguished from the first, and the  engine fire was nearly out.  To pass from one carriage to another it  was necessary to grope about, and thus, too, one slowly reached the  engine, recognizable by its enormous barrel, its cold, motionless  flanks, its useless strength, its grim silence, in the overwhelming  night.  Nothing could be more appalling than this train entombed  alive with its passengers perishing one by one.

I gloated over the ghastliness of each detail; howls resounded  through the vault; somebody whom one could not see, whose vicinity  was not even suspected, would suddenly drop upon another's shoulder.   But what affected me most of all was the cold and the want of air.   I have never felt so chilled; a mantle of snow seemed to enwrap me;  heavy moisture rained upon my skull; I was gasping; the rocky vault  seemed to crush my chest; the whole mountain was seemingly weighing  upon me.

Suddenly a cry of deliverance sounded.  For some time past we  fancied that we could hear a dull sound, and we tried to hope that  men were at work and that help was coming, but it came not thus.   One of the passengers, however, had discovered an air shaft in the  tunnel, and, crowding round, we all saw this shaft, above which we  could discern a blue patch about the size of a wafer.  That blue  patch filled us with rapture, for it was the sky.  We stretched  ourselves and stood on tiptoes to breathe more freely.  Then we  distinguished some black specks moving about, specks that must  surely be workmen about to deliver us.  A furious clamor arose.  The  cry "Saved! Saved!" burst from every mouth, while trembling arms  were uplifted toward the tiny azure patch above.

That roar of voices aroused me.  Where was I?  In the tunnel, of  course.  I was lying at full length; hard walls were pressing  against my ribs.  Then I attempted to rise and struck my head  roughly.  Was it the rock closing in on all sides?  The blue speck  had vanished--aye, the sky had disappeared and I was still  suffocating, shivering, with chattering teeth.

All at once I remembered.  Intense horror raised my hair on end.  I  felt the hideous truth freeze me from head to foot like ice.  I had  shaken off the long coma which for many hours had stricken me with  corpselike rigidity.  Yes, I could move; my hands could feel the  boards of my coffin; my lips parted; words came to me, and  instinctively I called out Marguerite's name.  It was a scream I  raised.  In that deal box my voice took so hoarse and weird a sound  that it terrified me.  Oh, my God, was this thing true?  I was able  to walk, speak, cry out that I was living, and yet my voice could  not be heard; I was entombed under the earth.

I made a desperate effort to remain calm and reflect.  Was there no  means of getting out?  Then my dream began afresh in my troubled  brain.  The fanciful air shaft with the blue bit of sky overhead was  mingled with the real grave in which I was lying.  I stared at the  darkness with widely opened eyes; perhaps I might discover a hole, a  slit, a glimmer of light, but only sparks of fire flitted through  that night, with rays that broadened and then faded away.  I was in  a somber abyss again.  With returning lucidity I struggled against  these fatal visions.  Indeed, I should need all my reason if I meant  to try to save myself.

The most immediate peril lay in an increasing sense of suffocation.   If I had been able to live so long without air it was owing to  suspended animation, which had changed all the normal conditions of  my existence, but now that my heart beat and my lungs breathed I  should die, asphyxiated, if I did not promptly liberate myself.  I  also suffered from cold and dreaded lest I should succumb to the  mortal numbness of those who fall asleep in the snow, never to wake  again.  Still, while unceasingly realizing the necessity of  remaining calm, I felt maddening blasts sweep through my brain, and  to quiet my senses I exhorted myself to patience, trying to remember  the circumstances of my burial.  Probably the ground had been bought  for five years, and this would be against my chances of self- deliverance, for I remembered having noticed at Nantes that in the  trenches of the common graves one end of the last lowered coffins  protruded into the next open cavity, in which case I should only  have had to break through one plank.  But if I were in a separate  hole, filled up above me with earth, the obstacles would prove too  great.  Had I not been told that the dead were buried six feet deep  in Paris?  How was I to get through the enormous mass of soil above  me?  Even if I succeeded in slitting the lid of my bier open the  mold would drift in like fine sand and fill my mouth and eyes.  That  would be death again, a ghastly death, like drowning in mud.

However, I began to feel the planks carefully.  The coffin was  roomy, and I found that I was able to move my arms with tolerable  ease.  On both sides the roughly planed boards were stout and  resistive.  I slipped my arm onto my chest to raise it over my head.   There I discovered in the top plank a knot in the wood which yielded  slightly at my pressure.  Working laboriously, I finally succeeded  in driving out this knot, and on passing my finger through the hole  I found that the earth was wet and clayey.  But that availed me  little.  I even regretted having removed the knot, vaguely dreading  the irruption of the mold.  A second experiment occupied me for a  while.  I tapped all over the coffin to ascertain if perhaps there  were any vacuum outside.  But the sound was everywhere the same.  At  last, as I was slightly kicking the foot of the coffin, I fancied  that it gave out a clearer echoing noise, but that might merely be  produced by the sonority of the wood.

At any rate, I began to press against the boards with my arms and my  closed fists.  In the same way, too, I used my knees, my back and my  feet without eliciting even a creak from the wood.  I strained with  all my strength, indeed, with so desperate an effort of my whole  frame, that my bruised bones seemed breaking.  But nothing moved,  and I became insane.

Until that moment I had held delirium at bay.  I had mastered the  intoxicating rage which was mounting to my head like the fumes of  alcohol; I had silenced my screams, for I feared that if I again  cried out aloud I should be undone.  But now I yelled; I shouted;  unearthly howls which I could not repress came from my relaxed  throat.  I called for help in a voice that I did not recognize,  growing wilder with each fresh appeal and crying out that I would  not die.  I also tore at the wood with my nails; I writhed with the  contortions of a caged wolf.  I do not know how long this fit of  madness lasted, but I can still feel the relentless hardness of the  box that imprisoned me; I can still hear the storm of shrieks and  sobs with which I filled it; a remaining glimmer of reason made me  try to stop, but I could not do so.

Great exhaustion followed.  I lay waiting for death in a state of  somnolent pain.  The coffin was like stone, which no effort could  break, and the conviction that I was powerless left me unnerved,  without courage to make any fresh attempts.  Another suffering-- hunger--was presently added to cold and want of air.  The torture  soon became intolerable.  With my finger I tried to pull small  pinches of earth through the hole of the dislodged knot, and I  swallowed them eagerly, only increasing my torment.  Tempted by my  flesh, I bit my arms and sucked my skin with a fiendish desire to  drive my teeth in, but I was afraid of drawing blood.

Then I ardently longed for death.  All my life long I had trembled  at the thought of dissolution, but I had come to yearn for it, to  crave for an everlasting night that could never be dark enough.  How  childish it had been of me to dread the long, dreamless sleep, the  eternity of silence and gloom!  Death was kind, for in suppressing  life it put an end to suffering.  Oh, to sleep like the stones, to  be no more!

With groping hands I still continued feeling the wood, and suddenly  I pricked my left thumb.  That slight pain roused me from my growing  numbness.  I felt again and found a nail--a nail which the  undertaker's men had driven in crookedly and which had not caught in  the lower wood.  It was long and very sharp; the head was secured to  the lid, but it moved.  Henceforth I had but one idea--to possess  myself of that nail--and I slipped my right hand across my body and  began to shake it.  I made but little progress, however; it was a  difficult job, for my hands soon tired, and I had to use them  alternately.  The left one, too, was of little use on account of the  nail's awkward position.

While I was obstinately persevering a plan dawned on my mind.  That  nail meant salvation, and I must have it.  But should I get it in  time?  Hunger was torturing me; my brain was swimming; my limbs were  losing their strength; my mind was becoming confused.  I had sucked  the drops that trickled from my punctured finger, and suddenly I bit  my arm and drank my own blood!  Thereupon, spurred on by pain,  revived by the tepid, acrid liquor that moistened my lips, I tore  desperately at the nail and at last I wrenched it off!

I then believed in success.  My plan was a simple one; I pushed the  point of the nail into the lid, dragging it along as far as I could  in a straight line and working it so as to make a slit in the wood.   My fingers stiffened, but I doggedly persevered, and when I fancied  that I had sufficiently cut into the board I turned on my stomach  and, lifting myself on my knees and elbows thrust the whole strength  of my back against the lid.  But although it creaked it did not  yield; the notched line was not deep enough.  I had to resume my old  position--which I only managed to do with infinite trouble--and work  afresh.  At last after another supreme effort the lid was cleft from  end to end.

I was not saved as yet, but my heart beat with renewed hope.  I had  ceased pushing and remained motionless, lest a sudden fall of earth  should bury me.  I intended to use the lid as a screen and, thus  protected, to open a sort of shaft in the clayey soil.   Unfortunately I was assailed by unexpected difficulties.  Some heavy  clods of earth weighed upon the boards and made them unmanageable; I  foresaw that I should never reach the surface in that way, for the  mass of soil was already bending my spine and crushing my face.

Once more I stopped, affrighted; then suddenly, while I was  stretching my legs, trying to find something firm against which I  might rest my feet, I felt the end board of the coffin yielding.  I  at once gave a desperate kick with my heels in the faint hope that  there might be a freshly dug grave in that direction.

It was so.  My feet abruptly forced their way into space.  An open  grave was there; I had only a slight partition of earth to displace,  and soon I rolled into the cavity.  I was saved!

I remained for a time lying on my back in the open grave, with my  eyes raised to heaven.  It was dark; the stars were shining in a sky  of velvety blueness.  Now and then the rising breeze wafted a  springlike freshness, a perfume of foliage, upon me.  I was saved!   I could breathe; I felt warm, and I wept and I stammered, with my  arms prayerfully extended toward the starry sky.  O God, how sweet  seemed life!



CHAPTER V

MY RESURRECTION


My first impulse was to find the custodian of the cemetery and ask  him to have me conducted home, but various thoughts that came to me  restrained me from following that course.  My return would create  general alarm; why should I hurry now that I was master of the  situation?  I felt my limbs; I had only an insignificant wound on my  left arm, where I had bitten myself, and a slight feverishness lent  me unhoped-for strength.  I should no doubt be able to walk unaided.

Still I lingered; all sorts of dim visions confused my mind.  I had  felt beside me in the open grave some sextons' tools which had been  left there, and I conceived a sudden desire to repair the damage I  had done, to close up the hole through which I had crept, so as to  conceal all traces of my resurrection.  I do not believe that I had  any positive motive in doing so.  I only deemed it useless to  proclaim my adventure aloud, feeling ashamed to find myself alive  when the whole world thought me dead.  In half an hour every trace  of my escape was obliterated, and then I climbed out of the hole.

The night was splendid, and deep silence reigned in the cemetery;  the black trees threw motionless shadows over the white tombs.  When  I endeavored to ascertain my bearings I noticed that one half of the  sky was ruddy, as if lit by a huge conflagration; Paris lay in that  direction, and I moved toward it, following a long avenue amid the  darkness of the branches.

However, after I had gone some fifty yards I was compelled to stop,  feeling faint and weary.  I then sat down on a stone bench and for  the first time looked at myself.  I was fully attired with the  exception that I had no hat.  I blessed my beloved Marguerite for  the pious thought which had prompted her to dress me in my best  clothes--those which I had worn at our wedding.  That remembrance of  my wife brought me to my feet again.  I longed to see her without  delay.

At the farther end of the avenue I had taken a wall arrested my  progress.  However, I climbed to the top of a monument, reached the  summit of the wall and then dropped over the other side.  Although  roughly shaken by the fall, I managed to walk for a few minutes  along a broad deserted street skirting the cemetery.  I had no  notion as to where I might be, but with the reiteration of monomania  I kept saying to myself that I was going toward Paris and that I  should find the Rue Dauphine somehow or other.  Several people  passed me but, seized with sudden distrust, I would not stop them  and ask my way.  I have since realized that I was then in a burning  fever and already nearly delirious.  Finally, just as I reached a  large thoroughfare, I became giddy and fell heavily upon the  pavement.

Here there is a blank in my life.  For three whole weeks I remained  unconscious.  When I awoke at last I found myself in a strange room.   A man who was nursing me told me quietly that he had picked me up  one morning on the Boulevard Montparnasse and had brought me to his  house.  He was an old doctor who had given up practicing.

When I attempted to thank him he sharply answered that my case had  seemed a curious one and that he had wished to study it.  Moreover,  during the first days of my convalescence he would not allow me to  ask a single question, and later on he never put one to me.  For  eight days longer I remained in bed, feeling very weak and not even  trying to remember, for memory was a weariness and a pain.  I felt  half ashamed and half afraid.  As soon as I could leave the house I  would go and find out whatever I wanted to know.  Possibly in the  delirium of fever a name had escaped me; however, the doctor never  alluded to anything I may have said.  His charity was not only  generous; it was discreet.

The summer had come at last, and one warm June morning I was  permitted to take a short walk.  The sun was shining with that  joyous brightness which imparts renewed youth to the streets of old  Paris.  I went along slowly, questioning the passers-by at every  crossing I came to and asking the way to Rue Dauphine.  When I  reached the street I had some difficulty in recognizing the  lodginghouse where we had alighted on our arrival in the capital.  A  childish terror made me hesitate.  If I appeared suddenly before  Marguerite the shock might kill her.  It might be wiser to begin by  revealing myself to our neighbor Mme Gabin; still I shrank from  taking a third party into confidence.  I seemed unable to arrive at  a resolution, and yet in my innermost heart I felt a great void,  like that left by some sacrifice long since consummated.

The building looked quite yellow in the sunshine.  I had just  recognized it by a shabby eating house on the ground floor, where we  had ordered our meals, having them sent up to us.  Then I raised my  eyes to the last window of the third floor on the left-hand side,  and as I looked at it a young woman with tumbled hair, wearing a  loose dressing gown, appeared and leaned her elbows on the sill.  A  young man followed and printed a kiss upon her neck.  It was not  Marguerite.  Still I felt no surprise.  It seemed to me that I had  dreamed all this with other things, too, which I was to learn  presently.

For a moment I remained in the street, uncertain whether I had  better go upstairs and question the lovers, who were still laughing  in the sunshine.  However, I decided to enter the little restaurant  below.  When I started on my walk the old doctor had placed a five- franc piece in my hand.  No doubt I was changed beyond recognition,  for my beard had grown during the brain fever, and my face was  wrinkled and haggard.  As I took a seat at a small table I saw Mme  Gabin come in carrying a cup; she wished to buy a penny-worth of  coffee.  Standing in front of the counter, she began to gossip with  the landlady of the establishment.

"Well," asked the latter, "so the poor little woman of the third  floor has made up her mind at last, eh?"

"How could she help herself?" answered Mme Gabin.  "It was the very  best thing for her to do.  Monsieur Simoneau showed her so much  kindness.  You see, he had finished his business in Paris to his  satisfaction, for he has inherited a pot of money.  Well, he offered  to take her away with him to his own part of the country and place  her with an aunt of his, who wants a housekeeper and companion.

The landlady laughed archly.  I buried my face in a newspaper which  I picked off the table.  My lips were white and my hands shook.

"It will end in a marriage, of course," resumed Mme Gabin.  "The  little widow mourned for her husband very properly, and the young  man was extremely well behaved.  Well, they left last night--and,  after all, they were free to please themselves."

Just then the side door of the restaurant, communicating with the  passage of the house, opened, and Dede appeared.

"Mother, ain't you coming?" she cried.  "I'm waiting, you know; do  be quick."

"Presently," said the mother testily.  "Don't bother."

The girl stood listening to the two women with the precocious  shrewdness of a child born and reared amid the streets of Paris.

"When all is said and done," explained Mme Gabin, "the dear departed  did not come up to Monsieur Simoneau.  I didn't fancy him overmuch;  he was a puny sort of a man, a poor, fretful fellow, and he hadn't a  penny to bless himself with.  No, candidly, he wasn't the kind of  husband for a young and healthy wife, whereas Monsieur Simoneau is  rich, you know, and as strong as a Turk."

"Oh yes!" interrupted Dede.  "I saw him once when he was washing-- his door was open.  His arms are so hairy!"

"Get along with you," screamed the old woman, shoving the girl out  of the restaurant.  "You are always poking your nose where it has no  business to be."

Then she concluded with these words: "Look here, to my mind the  other one did quite right to take himself off.  It was fine luck for  the little woman!"

When I found myself in the street again I walked along slowly with  trembling limbs.  And yet I was not suffering much; I think I smiled  once at my shadow in the sun.  It was quite true.  I WAS very puny.   It had been a queer notion of mine to marry Marguerite.  I recalled  her weariness at Guerande, her impatience, her dull, monotonous  life.  The dear creature had been very good to me, but I had never  been a real lover; she had mourned for me as a sister for her  brother, not otherwise.  Why should I again disturb her life?  A  dead man is not jealous.

When I lifted my eyelids I saw the garden of the Luxembourg before  me.  I entered it and took a seat in the sun, dreaming with a sense  of infinite restfulness.  The thought of Marguerite stirred me  softly.  I pictured her in the provinces, beloved, petted and very  happy.  She had grown handsomer, and she was the mother of three  boys and two girls.  It was all right.  I had behaved like an honest  man in dying, and I would not commit the cruel folly of coming to  life again.

Since then I have traveled a good deal.  I have been a little  everywhere.  I am an ordinary man who has toiled and eaten like  anybody else.  Death no longer frightens me, but it does not seem to  care for me now that I have no motive in living, and I sometimes  fear that I have been forgotten upon earth.





End 