





TILL HE COME 



by C. H. SPURGEON







                       "TILL HE COME."

                    COMMUNION MEDITATIONS

                             AND

                          ADDRESSES

                             BY

                        C. H. SPURGEON.


                            1896.





                        PREFATORY NOTE.

     For many years, whether at home or abroad, it was Mr. 
Spurgeon's constant custom to observe the ordinance of the Lord's 
supper every Sabbath-day, unless illness prevented. This he 
believed to be in accordance with apostolic precedent; and it was 
his oft-repeated testimony that the more frequently he obeyed his 
Lord's command, "This do in remembrance of Me," the more precious 
did his Saviour become to him, while the memorial celebration 
itself proved increasingly helpful and instructive as the years 
rolled by.
     Several of the discourses here published were delivered to 
thousands of communicants in the Metropolitan Tabernacle, while 
others were addressed to the little companies of Christians,--of 
different denominations, and of various nationalities,--who 
gathered around the communion table in Mr. Spurgeon's sitting-room 
at Mentone. The addresses cover a wide range of subjects; but all 
of them speak more or less fully of the great atoning sacrifice of 
which the broken bread and the filled cup are the simple yet 
significant symbols.
     Mr. Spurgeon's had intended to publish a selection of his 
Communion Addresses; so this volume may be regarded as another of 
the precious literary legacies bequeathed by him to his brethren 
and sisters in Christ who have yet to tarry a while here below. It 
is hoped that these sermonettes will be the means of deepening the 
spiritual life of many believers, and that they will suggest 
suitable themes for meditation and discourse to those who have the 
privilege and responsibility of presiding at the ordinance.


                          CONTENTS.


Mysterious Visits.
     "Thou hast visited me in the night."--Psalm xvii. 3.

"Under His Shadow."
     "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall
          abide under the shadow of the Almighty "--Psalm xci. 1.
     "The shadow of a great rock in a weary land."--Isa. xxxii. 2.
     "As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my
          Beloved among the sons. I sat down under His shadow with
          great delight, and His fruit was sweet to my taste:"
          Solomon's Song ii. 3.
     "Because Thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of
          Thy wings will I rejoice."--Psalm lxiii. 7.
     "And He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow
          of His hand hath He hid me, and made me a polished
          shaft; in His quiver hath He hid me."--Isa. xlix. 2.

Under the Apple Tree.
     "I sat down under His shadow with great delight, and His
          fruit was sweet to my taste."--Solomon's Song ii. 3.

Over the Mountains.
     "My Beloved is mine, and I am His: He feedeth among the
          lilies. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away,
          turn, my Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young hart
          upon the mountains of Bether."--Solomon's Song ii. 16,
          17.

Fragrant Spices from the Mountains of Myrrh.
     "Thou art all fair, My love; there is no spot in thee."--
          Solomon's Song iv. 7.

The Well-beloved.
     "Yea, He is altogether lovely."--Solomon's Song v. 16.

The Spiced Wine of my Pomegranate.
     "I would cause Thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of
          my pomegranate."--Solomon's Song viii. 2.
     "And of His fulness have all we received, and grace for
          grace,"--John i. 16.

The Well-beloved's Vineyard.
     "My Well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill."--
          Isaiah v. 1.

Redeemed Souls Freed from Fear.
     "Fear not: for I have redeemed thee."--Isaiah xliii. 1.

Jesus, the Great Object of Astonishment.
     "Behold, My Servant shall deal prudently, He shall be exalted
          and extolled, and be very high. As many were astonied at
          Thee; His visage was so marred more than any man, and
          His form more than the sons of men: so shall He sprinkle
          many nations, the kings shall shut their mouths at Him:
          for that which had not been told them shall they see;
          and that which they had not heard shall they consider."
          --Isaiah lii. 13-15.

Bands of Love; or, Union to Christ.
     "I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I
          was to them as they that take off the yoke on their
          jaws, and I laid meat unto them."--Hosea xi. 4.

"I will Give you Rest."
     "I will give you rest."--Matthew xi. 28.

The Memorable Hymn.
     "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount
          of Olives."--Matthew xxvi. 30.

Jesus Asleep on a Pillow.
     "And He was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a
          pillow: and they awake Him, and say unto Him, Master,
          carest Thou not that we perish? And He arose, and
          rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be
          still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great
          calm."--Mark iv. 38, 39.

Real Contact with Jesus.
     "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched Me: for I perceive
          that virtue is gone out of Me."--Luke viii. 46.

Christ and His Table-companions.
      "And when the hour was come, He sat down, and the twelve
          apostles with Him."--Luke xxii. 14.

A Word from the Beloved's Own Mouth.
     "And ye are clean."--John xiii. 10.

The Believer not an Orphan.
     "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you."--John
          xiv. 18.

Communion with Christ and His People.
     "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
          of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it
          not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being
          many are one bread, and one body: for we are all
          partakers of that one bread."--1 Cor. x. 16, 17.


The Sin-Bearer.
     "Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree,
          that we, being dead to sins, should live unto
          righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye
          were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto
          the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls."--1 Peter ii. 24,
          25.

Swooning and Reviving at Christ's Feet.
     "And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead. And He laid
          His right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am
          the first and the last: I am He that liveth, and was
          dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen: and
          have the keys of hell and of death."--Revelation i. 17,
          18.

C.H. Spurgeon's Communion Hymn




                      MYSTERIOUS VISITS.

            AN ADDRESS TO A LITTLE COMPANY AT THE
                  COMMUNION TABLE AT MENTONE.

     "Thou hast visited me in the night."--Psalm xvii. 3.


IT is a theme for wonder that the glorious God should visit sinful 
man. "What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? and the son of 
man, that Thou visitest him?" A divine visit is a joy to be 
treasured whenever we are favoured with it. David speaks of it 
with great solemnity. The Psalmist was not content barely to 
_speak_ of it; but he wrote it down in plain terms, that it might 
be known throughout all generations: "_Thou hast visited me in the 
night_." Beloved, if God has ever visited you, you also will 
marvel at it, will carry it in your memory, will speak of it to 
your friends, and will record it in your diary as one of the 
notable events of your life. Above all, you will speak of it to 
God Himself, and say with adoring gratitude, "Thou hast visited me 
in the night." It should be a solemn part of worship to remember 
and make known the condescension of the Lord, and say, both in 
lowly prayer and in joyful psalm, "Thou hast visited me."
     To you, beloved friends, who gather with me about this 
communion table, I will speak of my own experience, nothing 
doubting that it is also yours. If our God has ever visited any of 
us, personally, by His Spirit, two results have attended the 
visit: _it has been sharply searching, and it has been sweetly 
solacing_.
     When first of all the Lord draws nigh to the heart, the 
trembling soul perceives clearly the searching character of His 
visit. Remember how Job answered the Lord: "I have heard of Thee 
by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth Thee, wherefore 
I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes." We can read of God, 
and hear of God, and be little moved; but when we feel His 
presence, it is another matter. I thought my house was good enough 
for kings; but when the King of kings came to it, I saw that it 
was a hovel quite unfit for His abode. I had never known sin to be 
so "exceeding sinful" if I had not known God to be so perfectly 
holy. I had never understood the depravity of my own nature if I 
had not known the holiness of God's nature. When we see Jesus, we 
fall at His feet as dead; till then, we are alive with 
vainglorious life. If letters of light traced by a mysterious hand 
upon the wall caused the joints of Belshazzar's loins to be 
loosed, what awe overcomes our spirits when we see the Lord 
Himself! In the presence of so much light our spots and wrinkles 
are revealed, and we are utterly ashamed. We are like Daniel, who 
said, "I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there 
remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me 
into corruption." It is when the Lord visits us that we see our 
nothingness, and ask, "Lord, what is man?"
     I do remember well when God first visited me; and assuredly 
it was the night of nature, of ignorance, of sin. His visit had 
the same effect upon me that it had upon Saul of Tarsus when the 
Lord spake to him out of heaven. He brought me down from the high 
horse, and caused me to fall to the ground; by the brightness of 
the light of His Spirit He made me grope in conscious blindness; 
and in the brokenness of my heart I cried, "Lord, what wilt Thou 
have me to do?" I felt that I had been rebelling against the Lord, 
kicking against the pricks, and doing evil even as I could; and my 
soul was filled with anguish at the discovery. Very searching was 
the glance of the eye of Jesus, for it revealed my sin, and caused 
me to go out and weep bitterly. As when the Lord visited Adam, and 
called him to stand naked before Him, so was I stripped of all my 
righteousness before the face of the Most High. Yet the visit 
ended not there; for as the Lord God clothed our first parents in 
coats of skins, so did He cover me with the righteousness of the 
great sacrifice, and He gave me songs in the night It was night, 
but the visit was no dream: in fact, I there and then ceased to 
dream, and began to deal with the reality of things.
     I think you will remember that, when the Lord first visited 
you in the night, it was with you as with Peter when Jesus came to 
him. He had been toiling with his net all the night, and nothing 
had come of it; but when the Lord Jesus came into his boat, and 
bade him launch out into the deep, and let down his net for a 
draught, he caught such a great multitude of fishes that the boat 
began to sink. See! the boat goes down, down, till the water 
threatens to engulf it, and Peter, and the fish, and all. Then 
Peter fell down at Jesus knees, and cried, "Depart from me; for I 
am a sinful man, O Lord!" The presence of Jesus was too much for 
him: his sense of unworthiness made him sink like his boat, and 
shrink away from the Divine Lord. I remember that sensation well; 
for I was half inclined to cry with the demoniac of Gadara, "What 
have I to do with Thee, Jesus, Thou Son of God most high?" That 
first discovery of His injured love was overpowering; its very 
hopefulness increased my anguish; for then I saw that I had slain 
the Lord who had come to save me. I saw that mine was the hand 
which made the hammer fall, and drove the nails that fastened the 
Redeemer's hands and feet to the cruel tree.

     "My conscience felt and own'd the guilt,
        And plunged me in despair;
     I saw my sins His blood had spilt,
        And help'd to nail Him there."

     This is the sight which breeds repentance: "They shall look 
upon Him whom they have pierced, and mourn for Him." When the Lord 
visits us, He humbles us, removes all hardness from our hearts, 
and leads us to the Saviour's feet.
     When the Lord first visited us in the night it was very much 
with us as with John, when the Lord visited him in the isle that 
is called Patmos. He tells us, "And when I saw Him, I fell at His 
feet as dead." Yes, even when we begin to see that He has put away 
our sin, and removed our guilt by His death, we feel as if we 
could never look up again, because we have been so cruel to our 
best Friend. It is no wonder if we then say, "It is true that He 
has forgiven me; but I never can forgive myself. He makes me live, 
and I live in Him; but at the thought of His goodness I fall at 
His feet as dead. Boasting is dead, self is dead, and all desire 
for anything beyond my Lord is dead also." Well does Cowper sing 
of--

     "That dear hour, that brought me to His foot,
     And cut up all my follies by the root."

     The process of destroying follies is more hopefully performed 
at Jesus' feet than anywhere else. Oh, that the Lord would come 
again to us as at the first, and like a consuming fire discover 
and destroy the dross which now alloys our gold! The word visit 
brings to us who travel the remembrance of the government officer 
who searches our baggage; thus doth the Lord seek out our secret 
things. But it also reminds us of the visits of the physician, who 
not only finds out our maladies, but also removes them. Thus did 
the Lord Jesus visit us at the first.
     Since those early days, I hope that you and I have had many 
visits from our Lord. Those first visits were, as I said, sharply 
searching; but the later ones have been sweetly solacing. Some of 
us have had them, especially in the night, when we have been 
compelled to count the sleepless hours. "Heaven's gate opens when 
this world's is shut." The night is still; everybody is away; work 
is done; care is forgotten, and then the Lord Himself draws near. 
Possibly there may be pain to be endured, the head may be aching, 
and the heart may be throbbing; but if Jesus comes to visit us, 
our bed of languishing becomes a throne of glory. Though it is 
true "He giveth His beloved sleep," yet at such times He gives 
them something better than sleep, namely; His own presence, and 
the fulness of joy which comes with it. By night upon our bed we 
have seen the unseen. I have tried sometimes not to sleep under an 
excess of joy, when the company of Christ has been sweetly mine.
     "Thou hast visited me in the night." Believe me, there are 
such things as personal visits from Jesus to His people. He has 
not left us utterly. Though He be not seen with the bodily eye by 
bush or brook, nor on the mount, nor by the sea, yet doth He come 
and go, observed only by the spirit, felt only by the heart. Still 
he standeth behind our wall, He showeth Himself through the 
lattices.

     "Jesus, these eyes have never seen
        That radiant form of Thine!
     The veil of sense hangs dark between
        Thy blessed face and mine!

     "I see Thee not, I hear Thee not,
        Yet art Thou oft with me,
     And earth hath ne'er so dear a spot
        As where I meet with Thee.

     "Like some bright dream that comes unsought,
        When slumbers o'er me roll,
     Thine image ever fills my thought,
        And charms my ravish'd soul.

     "Yet though I have not seen, and still
        Must rest in faith alone;
     I love Thee, dearest Lord! and will,
        Unseen, but not unknown."

     Do you ask me to describe these manifestations of the Lord? 
It were hard to tell you in words: you must know them for 
yourselves. If you had never tasted sweetness, no man living could 
give you an idea of honey. Yet if the honey be there, you can 
"taste and see." To a man born blind, sight must be a thing past 
imagination; and to one who has never known the Lord, His visits 
are quite as much beyond conception.
     For our Lord to visit us is something more than for us to 
have the assurance of our salvation, though that is very 
delightful, and none of us should rest satisfied unless we possess 
it. To know that Jesus loves me, is one thing; but to be visited 
by Him in love, is more.
     Nor is it simply a close contemplation of Christ; for we can 
picture Him as exceedingly fair and majestic, and yet not have Him 
consciously near us. Delightful and instructive as it is to behold 
the likeness of Christ by meditation, yet the enjoyment of His 
actual presence is something more. I may wear my friend's portrait 
about my person, and yet may not be able to say, "Thou hast 
visited me."
     It is the actual, though spiritual, coming of Christ which we 
so much desire. The Romish church says much about the _real_ 
presence; meaning thereby, the corporeal presence of the Lord 
Jesus. The priest who celebrates mass tells us that he believes in 
the _real_ presence, but we reply, "Nay, you believe in knowing 
Christ after the flesh, and in that sense the only real presence 
is in heaven; but we firmly believe in the real presence of Christ 
which is spiritual, and yet certain." By spiritual we do not mean 
unreal; in fact, the spiritual takes the lead in real-ness to 
spiritual men. I believe in the true and real presence of Jesus 
with His people: such presence has been real to my spirit. Lord 
Jesus, Thou Thyself hast visited me. As surely as the Lord Jesus 
came really as to His flesh to Bethlehem and Calvary, so surely 
does He come really by His Spirit to His people in the hours of 
their communion with Him. We are as conscious of that presence as 
of our own existence.
     When the Lord visits us in the night, what is the effect upon 
us? When hearts meet hearts in fellowship of love, communion 
brings first peace, then rest, and then joy of soul. I am speaking 
of no emotional excitement rising into fanatical rapture; but I 
speak of sober fact, when I say that the Lord's great heart 
touches ours, and our heart rises into sympathy with Him.
     First, we experience _peace_. All war is over, and a blessed 
peace is proclaimed; the peace of God keeps our heart and mind by 
Christ Jesus.

     "Peace! perfect peace! in this dark world of sin?
     The blood of Jesus whispers peace within.

     "Peace! perfect peace! with sorrows surging round?
     On Jesus' bosom nought but calm is found."

     At such a time there is a delightful sense of _rest_; we have 
no ambitions, no desires. A divine serenity and security envelop 
us. We have no thought of foes, or fears, or afflictions, or 
doubts. There is a joyous laying aside of our own will. We _are_ 
nothing, and we _will_ nothing: Christ is everything, and His will 
is the pulse of our soul. We are perfectly content either to be 
ill or to be well, to be rich or to be poor, to be slandered or to 
be honoured, so that we may but abide in the love of Christ. Jesus 
fills the horizon of our being.
     At such a time a flood of great _joy_ will fill our minds. We 
shall half wish that the morning may never break again, for fear 
its light should banish the superior light of Christ's presence. 
We shall wish that we could glide away with our Beloved to the 
place where He feedeth among the lilies. We long to hear the 
voices of the white-robed armies, that we may follow their 
glorious Leader whithersoever He goeth. I am persuaded that there 
is no great actual distance between earth and heaven: the distance 
lies in our dull minds. When the Beloved visits us in the night, 
He makes our chambers to be the vestibule of His palace-halls. 
Earth rises to heaven when heaven comes down to earth.
     Now, beloved friends, you may be saying to yourselves, "_We_ 
have not enjoyed such visits as these." You may do so. If the 
Father loves you even as He loves His Son, then you are on 
visiting terms with Him. If, then, He has not called upon you, you 
will be wise to call on Him. Breathe a sigh to Him, and say,--

     "When wilt Thou come unto me, Lord?
        Oh come, my Lord most dear!
     Come near, come nearer, nearer still,
        I'm blest when Thou art near.

     "When wilt Thou come unto me, Lord?
        I languish for the sight;
     Ten thousand suns when Thou art hid,
        Are shades instead of light.

     "When wilt Thou come unto me, Lord?
        Until Thou dost appear,
     I count each moment for a day,
        Each minute for a year."

     "As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my 
soul after Thee, O God!" If you long for Him, He much more longs 
for you. Never was there a sinner that was half so eager for 
Christ as Christ is eager for the sinner; nor a saint one-tenth so 
anxious to behold his Lord as his Lord is to behold him. If thou 
art running to Christ, He is already near thee. If thou dost sigh 
for His presence, that sigh is the evidence that He is with thee. 
He is with thee now: therefore be calmly glad.
     Go forth, beloved, and talk with Jesus on the beach, for He 
oft resorted to the sea-shore. Commune with Him amid the olive-
groves so dear to Him in many a night of wrestling prayer. If ever 
there was a country in which men should see traces of Jesus, next 
to the Holy Land, this Riviera is the favoured spot. It is a land 
of vines, and figs, and olives, and palms; I have called it "Thy 
land, O Immanuel." While in this Mentone, I often fancy that I am 
looking out upon the Lake of Gennesaret, or walking at the foot of 
the Mount of Olives, or peering into the mysterious gloom of the 
Garden of Gethsemane. The narrow streets of the old town are such 
as Jesus traversed, these villages are such as He inhabited. Have 
your hearts right with Him, and He will visit you often, until 
every day you shall walk with God, as Enoch did, and so turn week-
days into Sabbaths, meals into sacraments, homes into temples, and 
earth into heaven. So be it with us! Amen.




                       UNDER HIS SHADOW.

      A BRIEF SACRAMENTAL DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT MENTONE
                  TO ABOUT A SCORE BRETHREN.

     "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall 
abide under the shadow of the Almighty."--Psalm xci. 1.


I MUST confess of my short discourse, as the man did of the axe 
which fell into the stream, that it is borrowed. The outline of it 
is taken from one who will never complain of me, for to the great 
loss of the Church she has left these lower choirs to sing above. 
Miss Havergal, last and loveliest of our modern poets, when her 
tones were most mellow, and her language most sublime, has been 
caught up to swell the music of heaven. Her last poems are 
published with the title, "Under His Shadow," and the preface 
gives the reason for the name. She said, "I should like the title 
to be, 'Under His Shadow.' I seem to see four pictures suggested 
by that: under the shadow of a rock, in a weary plain; under the 
shadow of a tree; closer still, under the shadow of His wing; 
nearest and closest, in the shadow of His hand. Surely that hand 
must be the pierced hand, that may oftentimes press us sorely, and 
yet evermore encircling, upholding, and shadowing."
     "Under His Shadow," is our afternoon subject, and we will in 
a few words enlarge on the Scriptural plan which Miss Havergal has 
bequeathed to us. Our text is, "He that dwelleth in the secret 
place of the most High shall abide _under the shadow_ of the 
Almighty." The shadow of God is not the occasional resort, but the 
constant abiding-place, of the saint. Here we find not only our 
consolation, but our habitation. We ought never to be out of the 
shadow of God. It is to dwellers, not to visitors, that the Lord 
promises His protection. "He that _dwelleth_ in the secret place 
of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty:" 
and that shadow shall preserve him from nightly terror and ghostly 
ill, from the arrows of war and of pestilence, from death and from 
destruction. Guarded by Omnipotence, the chosen of the Lord are 
always safe; for as they dwell in the holy place, hard by the 
mercy-seat, where the blood was sprinkled of old, the pillar of 
fire by night, the pillar of cloud by day, which ever hangs over 
the sanctuary, covers them also. Is it not written, "In the time 
of trouble He shall hide me in His pavilion, in the secret of His 
tabernacle shall He hide me"? What better security can we desire? 
As the people of God, we are always under the protection of the 
Most High. Wherever we go, whatever we suffer, whatever may be our 
difficulties, temptations, trials, or perplexities, we are always 
"under the shadow of the Almighty." Over all who maintain their 
fellowship with God the most tender guardian care is extended. 
Their heavenly Father Himself interposes between them and their 
adversaries. The experience of the saints, albeit they are all 
under the shadow, yet differs as to the form in which that 
protection has been enjoyed by them, hence the value of the four 
figures which will now engage our attention.
     I. We will begin with the first picture which Miss Havergal 
mentions, namely, the rock sheltering the weary traveller:--"_The 
shadow of a great rock in a weary land_" (Isaiah xxxii. 2).
     Now, I take it that this is where we begin to know our Lord's 
shadow. He was at the first to us _a refuge in time of trouble_. 
Weary was the way, and great was the heat; our lips were parched, 
and our souls were fainting; we sought for shelter, and we found 
none; for we were in the wilderness of sin and condemnation, and 
who could bring us deliverance, or even hope? Then we cried unto 
the Lord in our trouble, and He led us to the Rock of ages, which 
of old was cleft for us. We saw our interposing Mediator coming 
between us and the fierce heat of justice, and we hailed the 
blessed screen. The Lord Jesus was unto us a covering for sin, and 
so a covert from wrath. The sense of divine displeasure, which had 
beaten upon our conscience, was removed by the removal of the sin 
itself, which we saw to be laid on Jesus, who in our place and 
stead endured its penalty.
     The shadow of a rock is remarkably cooling, and so was the 
Lord Jesus eminently comforting to us. The shadow of a rock is 
more dense, more complete, and more cool than any other shade; and 
so the peace which Jesus gives passeth all understanding, there is 
none like it. No chance beam darts through the rock-shade, nor can 
the heat penetrate as it will do in a measure through the foliage 
of a forest. Jesus is a complete shelter, and blessed are they who 
are "under His shadow." Let them take care that they abide there, 
and never venture forth to answer for themselves, or to brave the 
accusations of Satan.
     As with sin, so with sorrow of every sort: the Lord is the 
Rock of our refuge. No sun shall smite us, nor, any heat, because 
we are never out of Christ. The saints know where to fly, and they 
use their privilege.

     "When troubles, like a burning sun,
        Beat heavy on their head,
     To Christ their mighty Rock they run,
        And find a pleasing shade."

     There is, however, something of awe about this great shadow. 
A rock is often so high as to be terrible, and we tremble in 
presence of its greatness. The idea of littleness hiding behind 
massive greatness is well set forth; but there is no tender 
thought of fellowship, or gentleness: even so, at the first, we 
view the Lord Jesus as our shelter from the consuming heat of 
well-deserved punishment, and we know little more. It is most 
pleasant to remember that this is only one panel of the four-fold 
picture. Inexpressibly dear to my soul is the deep cool rock-shade 
of my blessed Lord, as I stand in Him a sinner saved; yet is there 
more.
     II. Our second picture, that of the tree, is to be found in 
the Song of Solomon ii. 3:--"_As the apple tree among the trees of 
the wood, so is my Beloved among the sons. I sat down under His 
shadow with great delight, and His fruit was sweet to my taste_."
     Here we have not so much refuge from trouble as special _rest 
in times of joy_. The spouse is happily wandering through a wood, 
glancing at many trees, and rejoicing in the music of the birds. 
One tree specially charms her: the citron with its golden fruit 
wins her admiration, and she sits under its shadow with great 
delight; such was her Beloved to her, the best among the good, the 
fairest of the fair, the joy of her joy, the light of her delight. 
Such is Jesus to the believing soul.
     The sweet influences of Christ are intended to give us a 
happy rest, and we ought to avail ourselves of them; "I sat down 
under His shadow." This was Mary's better part, which Martha well-
nigh missed by being cumbered. That is the good old way wherein we 
are to walk, the way in which we find rest unto our souls. Papists 
and papistical persons, whose religion is all ceremonies, or all 
working, or all groaning, or all feeling, have never come to an 
end. We may say of their religion as of the law, that it made 
nothing perfect; but under the gospel there is something finished, 
and that something is the sum and substance of our salvation, and 
therefore there is rest for us, and we ought to sing, "I sat 
down."
     Dear friends, is Christ to each one of us a place of sitting 
down? I do not mean a rest of idleness and self-content,--God 
deliver us from that; but there is rest in a conscious grasp of 
Christ, a rest of contentment with Him as our all in all. God give 
us to know more of this! This shadow is also meant to yield 
perpetual solace, for the spouse did not merely come under it, but 
there she sat down as one who meant to stay. Continuance of repose 
and joy is purchased for us by our Lord's perfected work. Under 
the shadow she found food; she had no need to leave it to find a 
single needful thing, for the tree which shaded also yielded 
fruit; nor did she need even to rise from her rest, but sitting 
still she feasted on the delicious fruit. You who know the Lord 
Jesus know also what this meaneth.
     The spouse never wished to go beyond her Lord. She knew no 
higher life than that of sitting under the Well-beloved's shadow. 
She passed the cedar, and oak, and every other goodly tree, but 
the apple-tree held her, and there she sat down. "Many there be 
that say, who will show us any good? But as for us, O Lord, our 
heart is fixed, our heart is fixed, resting on Thee. We will go no 
further, for Thou art our dwelling-place, we feel at home with 
Thee, and sit down beneath Thy shadow." Some Christians cultivate 
reverence at the expense of childlike love; they kneel down, but 
they dare not sit down. Our Divine Friend and Lover wills not that 
it should be so; He would not have us stand on ceremony with Him, 
but come boldly unto Him.

     "Let us be simple with Him, then,
        Not backward, stiff or cold,
     As though our Bethlehem could be
        What Sina was of old."

     Let us use His sacred name as a common word, as a household 
word, and run to Him as to a dear familiar friend. Under His 
shadow we are to feel that we are at home, and then He will make 
Himself at home to us by becoming food unto our souls, and giving 
spiritual refreshment to us while we rest. The spouse does not 
here say that she reached up to the tree to gather its fruit, but 
she sat down on the ground in intense delight, and the fruit came 
to her where she sat. It is wonderful how Christ will come down to 
souls that sit beneath His shadow; if we can but be at home with 
Christ, He will sweetly commune with us. Has He not said, "Delight 
thyself also in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of 
thine heart"?
     In this second form of the sacred shadow, the sense of awe 
gives place to that of restful delight in Christ. Have you ever 
figured in such a scene as the sitter beneath the grateful shade 
of the fruitful tree? Have you not only possessed security, but 
experienced delight in Christ? Have you sung,--

     "I sat down under His shadow,
        Sat down with great delight;
     His fruit was sweet unto my taste,
        And pleasant to my sight"?

     This is as necessary an experience as it is joyful: necessary 
for many uses. The joy of the Lord is our strength, and it is when 
we delight ourselves in the Lord that we have assurance of power 
in prayer. Here faith develops, and hope grows bright, while love 
sheds abroad all the fragrance of her sweet spices. Oh! get you to 
the apple-tree, and find out who is the fairest among the fair. 
Make the Light of heaven the delight of your heart, and then be 
filled with heart's-ease, and revel in complete content.
     III. The third view of the one subject is,--the shadow of his 
wings,--a precious word. I think the best specimen of it, for it 
occurs several times, is in that blessed Psalm, the sixty-third, 
verse seven:--
     "_Because Thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of 
Thy wings will I rejoice_."
     Does not this set forth our Lord as _our trust in hours of 
depression?_ In the Psalm now open before us, David was banished 
from the means of grace to a dry and thirsty land, where no water 
was. What is much worse, he was in a measure away from all 
conscious enjoyment of God. He says, "Early will I seek Thee. My 
soul thirsteth for Thee." He sings rather of memories than of 
present communion with God. We also have come into this condition, 
and have been unable to find any present comfort. "Thou hast been 
my help," has been the highest note we could strike, and we have 
been glad to reach to that. At such times, the light of God's face 
has been withdrawn, but our faith has taught us to rejoice under 
the shadow of His wings. Light there was none; we were altogether 
in the shade, but it was a warm shade. We felt that God who had 
been near must be near us still, and therefore we were quieted. 
Our God cannot change, and therefore as He was our help He must 
still be our help, our help even though He casts a shadow over us, 
for it must be the shadow of His own eternal wings. The metaphor 
is, of course, derived from the nestling of little birds under the 
shadow of their mother's wings, and the picture is singularly 
touching and comforting. The little bird is not yet able to take 
care of itself, so it cowers down under the mother, and is there 
happy and safe. Disturb a hen for a moment, and you will see all 
the little chickens huddling together, and by their chirps making 
a kind of song. Then they push their heads into her feathers, and 
seem happy beyond measure in their warm abode. When we are very 
sick and sore depressed, when we are worried with the care of 
pining children, and the troubles of a needy household, and the 
temptations of Satan, how comforting it is to run to our God,--
like the little chicks run to the hen,--and hide away near His 
heart, beneath His Wings. Oh, tried ones, press closely to the 
loving heart of your Lord, hide yourselves entirely beneath His 
wings! Here awe has disappeared, and rest itself is enhanced by 
the idea of loving trust. The little birds are safe in their 
mother's love, and we, too, are beyond measure secure and happy in 
the loving favour of the Lord.
     IV. The last form of the shadow is that of the hand, and 
this, it seems to me, points to power and position in service. 
Turn to Isaiah xlix. 2:--
     "_And He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow 
of His hand hath He kid me, and made me a polished shaft; in His 
quiver hath He hid me_."
     This undoubtedly refers to the Saviour, for the passage 
proceeds:--"And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in 
whom I will be glorified. Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I 
have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my 
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And now, saith 
the Lord that formed me from the womb to be His servant, to bring 
Jacob again to Him, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be 
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. 
And He said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be My servant 
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of 
Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that 
thou mayest be My salvation unto the end of the earth." Our Lord 
Jesus Christ was hidden away in the hand of Jehovah, to be used by 
Him as a polished shaft for the overthrow of His enemies, and the 
victory of His people. Yet, inasmuch as it is Christ, it is also 
all Christ's servants, since as He is so are we also in this 
world; and to make quite sure of it, we have the same expression 
in the sixteenth verse of the fifty-first chapter, where, speaking 
of His people, He says, "I have covered thee in the shadow of Mine 
hand." Is not this an excellent minister's text? Every one of you 
who will speak a word for Jesus shall have a share in it. This is 
where those who are workers for Christ should long to be,--"in the 
shadow of His hand," to achieve His eternal purpose. What are any 
of God's servants without their Lord but weapons out of the 
warrior's hand, having no power to do anything? We ought to be as 
the arrows of the Lord which He shoots at His enemies; and so 
great is His hand of power, and so little are we as His 
instruments, that He hides us away in the hollow of His hand, 
unseen until He darts us forth. As workers, we are to be hidden 
away in the hand of God, or to quote the other figure, "in His 
quiver hath He hid me:" we are to be unseen till He uses us. It is 
impossible for us not to be known somewhat if the Lord uses us, 
but we may not aim at being noticed, but, on the contrary, if we 
be as much used as the very chief of the apostles, we must 
truthfully add, "though I be nothing." Our desire should be that 
Christ should be glorified, and that self should be concealed. 
Alas! there is a way of always showing self in what we do, and we 
are all too ready to fall into it. You can visit the poor in such 
a way that they will feel that his lordship or her ladyship has 
condescended to call upon poor Betsy; but there is another way of 
doing the same thing so that the tried child of God shall know 
that a brother beloved or a dear sister in Christ has shown a 
fellow-feeling for her, and has talked to her heart. There is a 
way of preaching, in which a great divine has evidently displayed 
his vast learning and talent; and there is another way of 
preaching, in which a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, depending 
upon his Lord, has spoken in his Master's name, and left a rich 
unction behind. Within the hand of God is the place of acceptance, 
and safety; and for service it is the place of power, as well as 
of concealment. God only works with those who are in His hand; and 
the more we lie hidden there, the more surely will He use us ere 
long. May the Lord do unto us according to His word, "I have put 
My words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of My 
hand." In this case we shall feel all the former emotions 
combined: awe that the Lord should condescend to take us into His 
hand, rest and delight that He should deign to use us, trust that 
out of weakness we shall now be made strong, and to this will be 
added an absolute assurance that the end of our being must be 
answered, for that which is urged onward by the Almighty hand 
cannot miss its mark.
     These are mere surface thoughts. The subject deserves a 
series of discourses. Your best course, my beloved friends, will 
be to enlarge upon these hints by a long personal experience of 
abiding under the shadow of the Almighty. May God the Holy Ghost 
lead you into it, and keep you there, for Jesus' sake!




                     UNDER THE APPLE TREE.

     "I sat down under His shadow with great delight, and His 
fruit was sweet to my taste."--Solomon's Song ii. 3.


Christ _known should be Christ used_. The spouse knew her Beloved 
to be like a fruit-bearing tree, and at once she sat under His 
shadow, and fed upon His fruit. It is a pity that we know so much 
about Christ, and yet enjoy Him so little. May our experience keep 
pace with our knowledge, and may that experience be composed of a 
practical using of our Lord! Jesus casts a shadow, let us sit 
under it: Jesus yields fruit, let us taste the sweetness of it. 
Depend upon it that the way to learn more is to use what you know; 
and, moreover, the way to learn a truth thoroughly is to learn it 
experimentally. You know a doctrine beyond all fear of 
contradiction when you have proved it for yourself by personal 
test and trial. The bride in the song as good as says, "I am 
certain that my Beloved casts a shadow, for I have sat under it, 
and I am persuaded that He bears sweet fruit, for I have tasted of 
it." The best way of demonstrating the power of Christ to save is 
to trust in Him and be saved yourself; and of all those who are 
sure of the divinity of our holy faith, there are none so certain 
as those who feel its divine power upon themselves. You may reason 
yourself into a belief of the gospel, and you may by further 
reasoning keep yourself orthodox; but a personal trial, and an 
inward knowing of the truth, are incomparably the best evidences. 
If Jesus be as an apple tree among the trees of the wood, do not 
keep away from Him, but sit under His shadow, and taste His fruit. 
He is a Saviour; do not believe the fact and yet remain unsaved. 
As far as Christ is known to you, so far make use of Him. Is not 
this sound common-sense?
     We would further remark that _we are at liberty to make every 
possible use of Christ_. Shadow and fruit may both be enjoyed. 
Christ in His infinite condescension exists for needy souls. Oh, 
let us say it over again: it is a bold word, but it is true,--as 
Christ Jesus, our Lord exists for the benefit of His people. A 
Saviour only exists to save. A physician lives to heal. The Good 
Shepherd lives, yea, dies, for His sheep. Our Lord Jesus Christ 
hath wrapped us about His heart; we are intimately interwoven with 
all His offices, with all His honours, with all His traits of 
character, with all that He has done, and with all that He has yet 
to do. The 'sinners' Friend lives for sinners, and sinners may 
have Him and use Him to the uttermost. He is as free to us as the 
air we breathe. What are fountains for, but that the thirsty may 
drink? What is the harbour for but that storm-tossed barques may 
there find refuge? What is Christ for but that poor guilty ones 
like ourselves may come to Him and look and live, and afterwards 
may have all our needs supplied out of His fulness?
     We have thus the door set open for us, and we pray that the 
Holy Spirit may help us to enter in while we notice in the text 
two things which we pray that you may enjoy to the full. First, 
_the heart's rest in Christ:_ "I sat down under His shadow with 
great delight." And, secondly, _the heart's refreshment in 
Christ:_ "His fruit was sweet to my taste."
     I. To begin with, we have here the heart's rest in Christ. To 
set this forth, let us notice the character of the person who 
uttered this sentence. She who said, "I sat down under His shadow 
with great delight," was one who _had known before what weary 
travel meant, and therefore valued rest;_ for the man who has 
never laboured knows nothing of the sweetness of repose. The 
loafer who has eaten bread he never earned, from whose brow there 
never oozed a drop of honest sweat, does not deserve rest, and 
knows not what it is. It is to the labouring man that rest is 
sweet; and when at last we come, toil-worn with many miles of 
weary plodding, to a shaded place where we may comfortably sit 
down, then are we filled with delight.
     The spouse had been seeking her Beloved, and in looking for 
Him she had asked where she was likely to find Him. "Tell me," 
says she, "O Thou whom my soul loveth, where Thou feedest, where 
Thou makest Thy flock to rest at noon." The answer was given to 
her, "Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock." She did go 
her way; but, after a while, she came to this resolution: "I will 
_sit down_ under His shadow."
     Many of you have been sorely wearied with going your way to 
find peace. Some of you tried ceremonies, and trusted in them, and 
the priest came to your help; but he mocked your heart's distress. 
Others of you sought by various systems of thought to come to an 
anchorage; but, tossed from billow to billow, you found no rest 
upon the seething sea of speculation. More of you tried by your 
good works to gain rest to your consciences. You multiplied your 
prayers, you poured out floods of tears, you hoped, by almsgiving 
and by the like, that some merit might accrue to you, and that 
your heart might feel acceptance with God, and so have rest. You 
toiled and toiled, like the men that were in the vessel with Jonah 
when they rowed hard to bring their ship to land, but could not, 
for the sea wrought and was tempestuous. There was no escape for 
you that way, and so you were driven to another way, even to rest 
in Jesus. My heart looks back to the time when I was under a sense 
of sin, and sought with all my soul to find peace, but could not 
discover it, high or low, in any place beneath the sky; yet when 
"I saw one hanging on a tree," as the Substitute for sin, then my 
heart sat down under His shadow with great delight. My heart 
reasoned thus with herself,--Did Jesus suffer in my stead? Then I 
shall not suffer. Did He bear my sin? Then I do not bear it. Did 
God accept His Son as my Substitute? Then He will never smite 
_me_. Was Jesus acceptable with God as my Sacrifice? Then what 
contents the Lord may well enough content me, and so I will go no 
farther, but: "sit down under His shadow," and enjoy a delightful 
rest.
     She who said, "I sat down under His shadow with great 
delight," _could appreciate shade, for she had been sunburnt_. Did 
we not read just now her exclamation,--"Look not upon me, for I am 
black, because the sun hath looked upon me"? She knew what heat 
meant, what the burning sun meant; and therefore shade was 
pleasant to her. You know nothing about the deliciousness of shade 
till you travel in a thoroughly hot country; then you are 
delighted with it. Did you ever feel the heat of divine wrath? Did 
the great Sun--that Sun without variableness or shadow of a 
turning--ever dart upon you His hottest rays,--the rays of his 
holiness and justice? Did you cower down beneath the scorching 
beams of that great Light, and say, "We are consumed by Thine 
anger"? If you have ever felt _that_, you have found it a very 
blessed thing to come under the shadow of Christ's atoning 
sacrifice. A shadow, you know, is cast by a body coming between us 
and the light and heat; and our Lord's most blessed body has come 
between us and the scorching sun of divine justice, so that we sit 
under the shadow of His mediation with great delight.
     And now, if any other sun begins to scorch us, we fly to our 
Lord. If domestic trouble, or business care, or Satanic 
temptation, or inward corruption, oppresses us, we hasten to 
Jesus' shadow, to hide under Him, and there "sit down" in the cool 
refreshment with great delight. The interposition of our blessed 
Lord is the cause of our inward quiet. The sun cannot scorch _me_, 
for it scorched _Him_. My troubles need not trouble me, for He has 
taken my trouble, and I have left it in His hands. "I sat down 
under His shadow."
     Mark well these two things concerning the spouse. She knew 
what it was to be weary, and she knew what it was to be sunburnt; 
and just in proportion as you also know these two things, your 
valuation of Christ will rise. You who have never pined under the 
wrath of God have never prized the Saviour. Water is of small 
value in this land of brooks and rivers, and so you commonly 
sprinkle the roads with it; but I warrant you that, if you were 
making a day's march over burning sand, a cup of cold water would 
be worth a king's ransom; and so to thirsty souls Christ is 
precious, but to none beside.
     Now, when the spouse was sitting down, restful and delighted, 
_she was overshadowed_. She says, "I sat down _under His shadow_." 
I do not know a more delightful state of mind than to feel quite 
overshadowed by our beloved Lord. Here is my black sin, but there 
is His precious blood overshadowing my sin, and hiding it for 
ever. Here is my condition by nature, an enemy to God; but He who 
reconciled me to God by His blood has overshadowed that also, so 
that I forget that I was once an enemy in the joy of being now a 
friend. I am very weak; but He is strong, and His strength 
overshadows my feebleness. I am very poor; but He hath all riches, 
and His riches overshadow my poverty. I am most unworthy; but He 
is so worthy that if I use His name I shall receive as much as if 
I were worthy: His worthiness doth overshadow my unworthiness. It 
is very precious to put the truth the other way, and say, If there 
be anything good in me, it is not good when I compare myself with 
Him, for His goodness quite eclipses and overshadows it. Can I say 
I love Him? So I do, but I hardly dare call it love, for His love 
overshadows it. Did I suppose that I served Him? So I would; but 
my poor service is not worth mentioning in comparison with what He 
has done for me. Did I think I had any degree of holiness? I must 
not deny what His Spirit works in me; but when I think of His 
immaculate life, and all His divine perfections, where am I? What 
am I? Have you not sometimes felt this? Have you not been so 
overshadowed and hidden under your Lord that you became as 
nothing? I know myself what it is to feel that if I die in a 
workhouse it does not matter so long as my Lord is glorified. 
Mortals may cast out my name as evil, if they like; but what 
matters it since His dear name shall one day be printed in stars 
athwart the sky? Let Him overshadow me; I delight that it should 
be so.
     The spouse tells us that, when she became quite overshadowed, 
then _she felt great delight_. Great "_I_" never has great 
delight, for it cannot bear to own a greater than itself, but the 
humble believer finds his delight in being overshadowed by his 
Lord. In the shade of Jesus we have more delight than in any 
fancied light of our own. The spouse had _great_ delight. I trust 
that you Christian people do have great delight; and if not, you 
ought to ask yourselves whether you really are the people of God. 
I like to see a cheerful countenance; ay, and to hear of raptures 
in the hearts of those who are God's saints! There are people who 
seem to think that religion and gloom are married, and must never 
be divorced. Pull down the blinds on Sunday, and darken the rooms; 
if you have a garden, or a rose in flower, try to forget that 
there are such beauties: are you not to serve God as dolorously as 
you can? Put your book under your arm, and crawl to your place of 
worship in as mournful a manner as if you were being marched to 
the whipping-post. Act thus if you will; but give me that religion 
which cheers my heart, fires my soul, and fills me with enthusiasm 
and delight,--for that is likely to be the religion of heaven, and 
it agrees with the experience of the Inspired Song.
     Although I trust that we know what delight means, I question 
if we have enough of it to describe ourselves as _sitting down_ in 
the enjoyment of it. Do you give yourselves enough time to sit at 
Jesus' feet? _There_ is the place of delight, do you abide in it? 
Sit down under His shadow. "I have no leisure," cries one. Try and 
make a little. Steal it from your sleep if you cannot get it 
anyhow else. Grant leisure to your heart. It would be a great pity 
if a man never spent five minutes with his wife, but was forced to 
be always hard at work. Why, that is slavey, is it not? Shall we 
not then have time to commune with our Best-beloved? Surely, 
somehow or other, we can squeeze out a little season in which we 
shall have nothing else to do but to sit down under His shadow 
with great delight! When I take my Bible, and want to feed on it 
for myself, I generally get thinking about preaching upon the 
text, and what I should say to you from it. This will not do; I 
must get away from that, and forget that there is a Tabernacle, 
that I may sit personally at Jesus' feet. And, oh, there is an 
intense delight in being overshadowed by Him! He is near you, and 
you know it. His dear presence is as certainly with you as if you 
could see Him, for His influence surrounds you.
     Often have I felt as if Jesus leaned over me, as a friend 
might look over my shoulder. Although no cool shade comes over 
your brow, yet you may as much feel His shadow as if it did, for 
your heart grows calm; and if you have been wearied with the 
family, or troubled with the church, or vexed with yourself, you 
come down from the chamber where you have seen your Lord, and you 
feel braced for the battle of life, ready for its troubles and its 
temptations, because you have seen the Lord. "I sat down" said 
she, "under His shadow with _great delight_." How great that 
delight was she could not tell, but she sat down as one 
overpowered with it, needing to sit still under the load of bliss. 
I do not like to talk much about the secret delights of 
Christians, because there are always some around us who do not 
understand our meaning; but I will venture to say this much--that 
if worldlings could but even guess what are the secret joys of 
believers, they would give their eyes to share with us. We have 
troubles, and we admit it, we expect to have them; but we have 
joys which are frequently excessive. We should not like that 
others should be witnesses of the delight which now and then 
tosses our soul into a very tempest of joy. You know what it 
means, do you not? When you have been quite alone with the 
heavenly Bridegroom, you wanted to tell the angels of the sweet 
love of Christ to you, a poor unworthy one. You even wished to 
teach the golden harps fresh music, for seraphs know not the 
heights and depths of the grace of God as you know them.
     The spouse had great delight, and we know that she had, for 
this one reason, that _she did not forget it_. This verse and the 
whole Song are a remembrance of what she had enjoyed. She says, "I 
sat down under His shadow." It may have been a month, it may have 
been years ago; but she had not forgotten it. The joys of 
fellowship with God are written in marble. "Engraved as in eternal 
brass" are memories of communion with Christ Jesus. "Above 
fourteen years ago," says the apostle, "I knew a man." Ah, it was 
worth remembering all those years! He had not told his delight, 
but he had kept it stored up. He says, "I knew a man in Christ 
above fourteen years ago (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or 
whether out of the body, I cannot tell:)" so great had his 
delights been. When we look back, we forget birthdays, holidays, 
and bonfire-nights which we have spent after the manner of men, 
but we readily recall our times of fellowship with the Well-
beloved. We have known our Tabors, our times of transfiguration 
fellowship, and like Peter we remember when we were "with Him in 
the holy mount." Our head has leaned upon the Master's bosom, and 
we can never forget the intense delight; nor will we fail to put 
on record for the good of others the joys with which we have been 
indulged.
     Now I leave this first part of the subject, only noticing how 
beautifully natural it is. There was a tree, and she sat down 
under the shadow: there was nothing strained, nothing formal. So 
ought true piety ever to be consistent with common-sense, with 
that which seems most fitting, most comely, most wise, and most 
natural. There is Christ, we may enjoy Him, let us not despise the 
privilege.
     II. The second part of our subject is, the heart's 
refreshment in Christ. His fruit was sweet to my taste. Here I 
will not enlarge, but give you thoughts in brief which you can 
beat out afterwards. _She did not feast upon the fruit of the tree 
till first she was under the shadow of it._ There is no knowing 
the excellent things of Christ till you trust Him. Not a single 
sweet apple shall fall to the lot of those who are outside the 
shadow. Come and trust Christ, and then all that there is in 
Christ shall be enjoyed by you. O unbelievers, what you miss! If 
you will but sit down under His shadow, you shall have all things; 
but if you will not, neither shall any good thing of Christ's be 
yours.
     _But as soon as ever she was under the shadow, then the fruit 
was all hers_. "I sat down under His shadow," saith she, and then, 
"His fruit was sweet to my taste." Dost thou believe in Jesus, 
friend? Then Jesus Christ Himself is thine; and if thou dost own 
the tree, thou mayest well eat the fruit. Since He Himself becomes 
thine altogether, then His redemption and the pardon that comes of 
it, His living power, His mighty intercession, the glories of His 
Second Advent, and all that belong to Him are made over to thee 
for thy personal and present use and enjoyment. All things are 
yours, since Christ is yours. Only mind you imitate the spouse: 
_when she found that the fruit was hers, she ate it_. Copy her 
closely in this. It is a great fault in many believers, that they 
do not appropriate the promises, and feed on them. Do not err as 
they do. Under the shadow you have a right to eat the fruit. Deny 
not yourselves the sacred entertainment.
     Now, it would appear, as we read the text, that _she obtained 
this fruit without effort_. The proverb says, "He who would gain 
the fruit must climb the tree." But she did not climb, for she 
says, "I sat down under His shadow." I suppose the fruit dropped 
down to her. I know that it is so with us. We no longer spend our 
money for that which is not bread, and our labour for that which 
satisfieth not; but we sit under our Lord's shadow, and we eat 
that which is good, and our soul delights itself in sweetness. 
Come Christian, enter into the calm rest of faith, by sitting down 
beneath the cross, and thou shalt be fed even to the full.
     _The spouse rested while feasting:_ she sat and ate. So, O 
true believer, rest whilst thou art feeding upon Christ! The 
spouse says, "I sat, and I ate." Had she not told us in the former 
chapter that the King _sat_ at His table? See how like the Church 
is to her Lord, and the believer to his Saviour! We sit down also, 
and we eat, even as the King doth. Right royally are we 
entertained. His joy is in us, and His peace keeps our hearts and 
minds.
     Further, notice that, _as the spouse fed upon this fruit, she 
had a relish for it._ It is not every palate that likes every 
fruit. Never dispute with other people about tastes of any sort, 
for agreement is not possible. That dainty which to one person is 
the most delicious is to another nauseous; and if there were a 
competition as to which fruit is preferable to all the rest, there 
would probably be almost as many opinions as there are fruits. But 
blessed is he who hath a relish for Christ Jesus! Dear hearer, is 
He sweet to you? Then He is yours. There never was a heart that 
did relish Christ but what Christ belonged to that heart. If thou 
hast been feeding on Him, and He is sweet to thee, go on feasting, 
for He who gave thee a relish gives thee Himself to satisfy thine 
appetite.
     What are the fruits which come from Christ? Are they not 
peace with God, renewal of heart, joy in the Holy Ghost, love to 
the brethren? Are they not regeneration, justification, 
sanctification, adoption, and all the blessings of the covenant of 
grace? And are they not each and all sweet to our taste? As we 
have fed upon them, have we not said, "Yes, these things are 
pleasant indeed. There is none like them. Let us live upon them 
evermore"? Now, sit down, sit down and feed. It seems a strange 
thing that we should have to persuade people to do that, but in 
the spiritual world things are very different from what they are 
in the natural. In the case of most men, if you put a joint of 
meat before them, and a knife and fork, they do not need many 
arguments to persuade them to fall to. But I will tell you when 
they will not do it, and that is when they are full: and I will 
also tell you when they will do it, and that is when they are 
hungry. Even so, if thy soul is weary after Christ the Saviour, 
thou wilt feed on Him; but if not, it is useless for me to preach 
to thee, or bid thee come. However, thou that art there, sitting 
under His shadow, thou mayest hear Him utter these words: "Eat, O 
friend: drink, yea, drink abundantly." Thou canst not have too 
much of these good things: the more of Christ, the better the 
Christian.
     We know that the spouse feasted herself right heartily with 
this food from the tree of life, for _in after days she wanted 
more_. Will you kindly read on in the fourth verse? The verse 
which contains our text describes, as it were, her first love to 
her Lord, her country love, her rustic love. She went to the wood, 
and she found Him there like an apple tree, and she enjoyed Him as 
one relishes a ripe apple in the country. But she grew in grace, 
she learned more of her Lord, and she found that her Best-beloved 
was a King. I should not wonder but what she learned the doctrine 
of the Second Advent, for then she began to sing, "He brought me 
to the banqueting house." As much as to say,--He did not merely 
let me know Him out in the fields as the Christ in His 
humiliation, but He brought me into the royal palace; and, since 
He is a King, He brought forth a banner with His own brave 
escutcheon, and He waved it over me while I was sitting at the 
table, and the motto of that banneret was love.
     She grew very full of this. It was such a grand thing to find 
a great Saviour, a triumphant Saviour, an exalted Saviour! But it 
was too much for her, and she became sick of soul with the 
excessive glory of what she had learned; and do you see what her 
heart craves for? She longs for her first simple joys, those 
countrified delights. "Comfort me with apples," she says. Nothing 
but the old joys will revive her. Did you ever feel like that? I 
have been satiated with delight in the love of Christ as a 
glorious exalted Saviour when I have seen Him riding on His white 
horse, and going forth conquering and to conquer; I have been 
overwhelmed when I have beheld Him in the midst of the throne, 
with all the brilliant assembly of angels and archangels adoring 
Him, and my thought has gone forward to the day when He shall 
descend with all the pomp of God, and make all kings and princes 
shrink into nothingness before the infinite majesty of His glory. 
Then I have felt as though, at the sight of Him, I must fall at 
His feet as dead; and I have wanted somebody to come and tell me 
over again "the old, old story" of how He died in order that I 
might be saved. His throne overpowers me, let me gather fruit from 
His cross. Bring me apples from "the tree" again. I am awe-struck 
while in the palace, let me get away to the woods again. Give me 
an apple plucked from the tree, such as I have given out to boys 
and girls in His family, such an apple as this, "Come unto Me all 
ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." Or 
this: "This man receiveth sinners." Give me a promise from the 
basket of the covenant. Give me the simplicity of Christ, let me 
be a child and feast on apples again, if Jesus be the apple tree. 
I would fain go back to Christ on the tree in my stead, Christ 
overshadowing me, Christ feeding me. This is the happiest state to 
live in. Lord, evermore give us these apples! You recollect the 
old story we told, years ago, of Jack the huckster who used to 
sing,--

     "I'm a poor sinner, and nothing at all,
     But Jesus Christ is my all in all."

     Those who knew him were astonished at his constant composure. 
They had a world of doubts and fears, and so they asked him why he 
never doubted. "Well," said he, "I can't doubt but what I am a 
poor sinner, and nothing at all, for I know that, and feel it 
every day. And why should I doubt that Jesus Christ is my all in 
all? for He says He is." "Oh!" said his questioner, "I have my ups 
and downs." "I don't," says Jack;" I can never go up, for I am a 
poor sinner, and nothing at all; and I cannot go down, for Jesus 
Christ is my all in all." He wanted to join the church, and they 
said he must tell his experience. He said, "All my experience is 
that I am a poor sinner, and nothing at all, and Jesus Christ is 
my all in all." "Well," they said, "when you come before the 
church-meeting, the minister may ask you questions." "I can't help 
it," said Jack, "all I know I will tell you; and that is all I 
know,--

     "'I'm a poor sinner, and nothing at all,
     But Jesus Christ is my all in all.'"

     He was admitted into the church, and continued with the 
brethren, walking in holiness; but that was still all his 
experience, and you could not get him beyond it. "Why," said one 
brother, "I sometimes feel so full of grace, I feel so advanced in 
sanctification, that I begin to be very happy." "I never do," said 
Jack; "I am a poor sinner, and nothing at all." "But then," said 
the other, "I go down again, and think I am not saved, because I 
am not as sanctified as I used to be." "But I never doubt my 
salvation," said Jack, "because Jesus Christ is my all in all, and 
He never alters." That simple story is grandly instructive, for it 
sets forth a plain man's faith in a plain salvation; it is the 
likeness of a soul under the apple tree, resting in the shade, and 
feasting on the fruit.
     Now, at this time I want you to think of Jesus, not as a 
Prince, but as an apple tree; and when this is done, I pray you to 
_sit down under His shadow_. It is not much to do. Any child, when 
it is hot, can sit down in a shadow. I want you next to feed on 
Jesus: any simpleton can eat apples when they are ripe upon the 
tree. Come and take Christ, then. You who never came before, come 
now. Come and welcome. You who have come often, and have entered 
into the palace, and are reclining at the banqueting table, you 
lords and peers of Christianity, come to the common wood and to 
the common apple tree where poor saints are shaded and fed. You 
had better come under the apple tree, like poor sinners such as I 
am, and be once more shaded with boughs and comforted with apples, 
for else you may faint beneath the palace glories. The best of 
saints are never better than when they eat their first fare, and 
are comforted with the apples which were their first gospel feast.
     The Lord Himself bring forth His own sweet fruit to you! 
Amen.




                      OVER THE MOUNTAINS.

     "My Beloved is mine, and I am His: He feedeth among the 
lilies. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my 
Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains 
of Bether."--Solomon's Song ii. 16, 17.


IT may be that there are saints who are always at their best, and 
are happy enough never to lose the light of their Father's 
countenance. I am not sure that there are such persons, for those 
believers with whom I have been most intimate have had a varied 
experience; and those whom I have known, who have boasted of their 
constant perfectness, have not been the most reliable of 
individuals. I hope there is a spiritual region attainable where 
there are no clouds to hide the Sun of our soul; but I cannot 
speak with positiveness, for I have not traversed that happy land. 
Every year of my life has had a winter as well as a summer, and 
every day its night. I have hitherto seen clear shinings and heavy 
rains, and felt warm breezes and fierce winds. Speaking for the 
many of my brethren, I confess that though the substance be in us, 
as in the teil-tree and the oak, yet we do lose our leaves, and 
the sap within us does not flow with equal vigour at all seasons. 
We have our downs as well as our ups, our valleys as well as our 
hills. We are not always rejoicing; we are sometimes in heaviness 
through manifold trials. Alas! we are grieved to confess that our 
fellowship with the Well-beloved is not always that of rapturous 
delight; but we have at times to seek Him, and cry, "Oh, that I 
knew where I might find Him!" This appears to me to have been in a 
measure the condition of the spouse when she cried, "Until the day 
break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my Beloved."
     I. These words teach us, first, that communion may be broken. 
The spouse had lost the company of her Bridegroom: conscious 
communion with Him was gone, though she loved her Lord, and sighed 
for Him. In her loneliness she was sorrowful; but _she had by no 
means ceased to love Him_, for she calls Him her Beloved, and 
speaks as one who felt no doubt upon that point. Love to the Lord 
Jesus may be quite as true, and perhaps quite as strong, when we 
sit in darkness as when we walk in the light. Nay, _she had not 
last her assurance of His love to her_, and of their mutual 
interest in one another; for she says, "My Beloved is mine, and I 
am His;" and yet she adds, "Turn, my Beloved." The condition of 
our graces does not always coincide with the state of our joys. We 
may be rich in faith and love, and yet have so low an esteem of 
ourselves as to be much depressed.
     It is plain, from this Sacred Canticle, that the spouse may 
love and be loved, may be confident in her Lord, and be fully 
assured of her possession of Him, and yet there may for the 
present be mountains between her and Him. Yes, we may even be far 
advanced in the divine life, and yet be exiled for a while from 
conscious fellowship. There are nights for men as well as babes, 
and the strong know that the sun is hidden quite as well as do the 
sick and the feeble. Do not, therefore, condemn yourself, my 
brother, because a cloud is over you; cast not away your 
confidence; but the rather let faith burn up in the gloom, and let 
your love resolve to come at your Lord again whatever be the 
barriers which divide you from Him.
     When Jesus is absent from a true heir of heaven, sorrow will 
ensue. The healthier our condition, the sooner will that absence 
be perceived, and the more deeply will it be lamented. This sorrow 
is described in the text as darkness; this is implied in the 
expression, "_Until the day break_." Till Christ appears, no day 
has dawned for us. We dwell in midnight darkness; the stars of the 
promises and the moon of experience yield no light of comfort till 
our Lord, like the sun, arises and ends the night. We must have 
Christ with us, or we are benighted: we grope like blind men for 
the wall, and wander in dismay.
     The spouse also speaks of shadows. "Until the day break, _and 
the shadows flee away_." Shadows are multiplied by the departure 
of the sun, and these are apt to distress the timid. We are not 
afraid of real enemies when Jesus is with us; but when we miss 
Him, we tremble at a shade. How sweet is that song, "Yea, though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no 
evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort 
me!" But we change our note when midnight is now come, and Jesus 
is not with us: then we people the night with terrors: spectres, 
demons, hobgoblins, and things that never existed save in fancy, 
are apt to swarm about us; and we are in fear where no fear is.
     The spouse's worst trouble was that _the back of her Beloved 
was turned to her_, and so she cried, "Turn, my Beloved." When His 
face is towards her, she suns herself in His love; but if the 
light of His countenance is withdrawn, she is sorely troubled. Our 
Lord turns His face from His people though He never turns His 
heart from His people. He may even close His eyes in sleep when 
the vessel is tossed by the tempest, but His heart is awake all 
the while. Still, it is pain enough to have grieved Him in any 
degree: it cuts us to the quick to think that we have wounded His 
tender heart. He is jealous, but never without cause. If He turns 
His back upon us for a while, He has doubtless a more than 
sufficient reason. He would not walk contrary to us if we had not 
walked contrary to Him. Ah, it is sad work this! The presence of 
the Lord makes this life the preface to the life celestial; but 
His absence leaves us pining and fainting, neither doth any 
comfort remain in the land of our banishment. The Scriptures and 
the ordinances, private devotion and public worship, are all as 
sun-dials,--most excellent when the sun shines, but of small avail 
in the dark. O Lord Jesus, nothing can compensate us for Thy loss! 
Draw near to Thy beloved yet again, for without Thee our night 
will never end.

     "See! I repent, and vex my soul,
        That I should leave Thee so!
     Where will those vile affections roll
        That let my Saviour go?"

     When communion with Christ is broken, in all true hearts 
_there is a strong desire to win it back again_. The man who has 
known the joy of communion with Christ, if he loses it, will never 
be content until it is restored. Hast thou ever entertained the 
Prince Emmanuel? Is He gone elsewhere? Thy chamber will be dreary 
till He comes back again. "Give me Christ or else I die," is the 
cry of every spirit that has lost, the dear companionship of 
Jesus. We do not part with such heavenly delights without many a 
pang. It is not with us a matter of "maybe He will return, and we 
hope He will;" but it must be, or we faint and die. We cannot live 
without Him; and this is a cheering sign; for the soul that cannot 
live without Him shall not live without Him: He comes speedily 
where life and death hang on His coming. If you must have Christ 
you shall have Him. This is just how the matter stands: we must 
drink of this well or die of thirst; we must feed upon Jesus or 
our spirit will famish.
     II. We will now advance a step, and say that when communion 
with Christ is broken, there are great difficulties in the way of 
its renewal. It is much easier to go down hill than to climb to 
the same height again. It is far easier to lose joy in God than to 
find the lost jewel. The spouse speaks of "mountains" dividing her 
from her Beloved: she means that _the difficulties were great_. 
They were not little hills, but mountains, that closed up her way. 
Mountains of remembered sin, Alps of backsliding, dread ranges of 
forgetfulness, ingratitude, worldliness, coldness in prayer, 
frivolity, pride, unbelief. Ah me, I cannot teach you all the dark 
geography of this sad experience! Giant walls rose before her like 
the towering steeps of Lebanon. How could she come at her Beloved?
     _The dividing difficulties were many_ as well as great. She 
does not speak of "a mountain", but of "mountains": Alps rose on 
Alps, wall after wall. She was distressed to think that in so 
short a time so much could come between her and Him of whom she 
sang just now, "His left hand is under my head, and His right hand 
doth embrace me." Alas, we multiply these mountains of Bether with 
a sad rapidity! Our Lord is jealous, and we give Him far too much 
reason, for hiding His face. A fault, which seemed so small at the 
time we committed it, is seen in the light of its own 
consequences, and then it grows and swells till it towers aloft, 
and hides the face of the Beloved. Then has our sun gone down, and 
fear whispers, "Will His light ever return? Will it ever be 
daybreak? Will the shadows ever flee away?" It is easy to grieve 
away the heavenly sunlight, but ah, how hard to clear the skies, 
and regain the unclouded brightness!
     Perhaps the worst thought of all to the spouse was the dread 
that _the dividing barrier might be permanent_. It was high, but 
it might dissolve; the walls were many, but they might fall; but, 
alas, they were mountains, and these stand fast for ages! She felt 
like the Psalmist, when he cried, "My sin is ever before me." The 
pain of our Lord's absence becomes: intolerable when we fear that 
we are hopelessly shut out from Him. A night one can bear, hoping 
for the morning; but what if the day should never break? And you 
and I, if we have wandered away from Christ, and feel that there 
are ranges of immovable mountains between Him and us, will feel 
sick at heart. We try to pray, but devotion dies on our lips. We 
attempt to approach the Lord at the communion table, but we feel 
more like Judas than John. At such times we have felt that we 
would give our eyes once more to behold the Bridegroom's face, and 
to know that He delights in us as in happier days. Still there 
stand the awful mountains, black, threatening, impassable; and in 
the far-off land the Life of our life is away, and grieved.
     So the spouse seems to have come to the conclusion that _the 
difficulties in her way were insurmountable by her own power_. She 
does not even think of herself going over the mountains to her 
Beloved, but she cries, "Until the day break, and the shadows flee 
away, turn, my Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young hart 
upon the mountains of Bether." She will not try to climb the 
mountains, she knows she cannot: if they had been less high, she 
might have attempted it; but their summits reach to heaven. If 
they had been less craggy or difficult, she might have tried to 
scale them; but these mountains are terrible, and no foot may 
stand upon their lone crags. Oh, the mercy of utter self-despair! 
I love to see a soul driven into that close corner, and forced 
therefore to look to God alone. The end of the creature is the 
beginning of the Creator. Where the sinner ends the Saviour 
begins. If the mountains can be climbed, we shall have to climb 
them; but if they are quite impassable, then the soul cries out 
with the prophet, "Oh, that Thou wouldest rend the heavens, that 
Thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at Thy 
presence. As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the 
waters to boil, to make Thy name known to Thine adversaries, that 
the nations may tremble at Thy presence. When Thou didst terrible 
things which we looked not for, Thou camest down, the mountains 
flowed down at Thy presence." Our souls are lame, they cannot move 
to Christ, and we turn our strong desires to Him, and fix our 
hopes alone upon Him; will He not remember us in love, and fly to 
us as He did to His servant of old when He rode upon a cherub, and 
did fly, yea, He did fly upon the wings of the wind?
     III. Here arises that prayer of the text which fully meets 
the case. "Turn, my Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young 
hart upon the mountains of division." Jesus can come to us when we 
cannot go to Him. The roe and the young hart, or, as you may read 
it, the gazelle and the ibex, live among the crags of the 
mountains, and leap across the abyss with amazing agility. For 
swiftness and sure-footedness they are unrivalled. The sacred poet 
said, "He maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and setteth me upon my 
high places," alluding to the feet of those creatures which are so 
fitted to stand securely on the mountain's side. Our blessed Lord 
is called, in the title of the twenty-second Psalm, "the Hind of 
the morning "; and the spouse in this golden Canticle sings, "My 
Beloved is like a roe or a young hart; behold He cometh, leaping 
upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills."
     Here I would remind you that this prayer is one that we may 
fairly offer, because _it is the way of Christ to come to us_ when 
our coming to Him is out of the question. "How?" say you. I answer 
that of old He did this; for we remember "His great love wherewith 
He loved us even when we were dead in trespasses and in sins." His 
first coming into the world in human form, was it not because man 
could never come to God until God had come to him? I hear of no 
tears, or prayers, or entreaties after God on the part of our 
first parents; but the offended Lord spontaneously gave the 
promise that the Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head. Our Lord's coming into the world was unbought, unsought, 
unthought of; he came altogether of His own free will, delighting 
to redeem.

     "With pitying eyes, the Prince of grace
        Beheld our helpless grief;
     He saw, and (oh, amazing love!)
        He ran to our relief."

     His incarnation was a type of the way in which He comes to us 
by His Spirit. He saw us cast out, polluted, shameful, perishing; 
and as He passed by, His tender lips said, "Live!" In us is 
fulfilled that word, "I am found of them that sought Me not." We 
were too averse to holiness, too much in bondage to sin, ever to 
have returned to Him if He had not turned to us. What think you? 
Did He come to us when we were enemies, and will He not visit us 
now that we are friends? Did He come to us when we were dead 
sinners, and will He not hear us now that we are weeping saints? 
If Christ's coming to the earth was after this manner, and if His 
coming to each one of us was after this style, we may well hope 
that now He will come to us in like fashion, like the dew which 
refreshes the grass, and waiteth not for man, neither tarrieth for 
the sons of men. Besides, He is coming again in person, in the 
latter-day, and mountains of sin, and error, and idolatry, and 
superstition, and oppression stand in the way of His kingdom; but 
He will surely come and overturn, and overturn, till He shall 
reign over all. He will come in the latter-days, I say, though He 
shall leap the hills to do it, and because of that I am sure we 
may comfortably conclude that He will draw near to us who mourn 
His absence so bitterly. Then let us bow our heads a moment, and 
silently present to His most excellent Majesty the petition of our 
text: "Turn, my Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young hart 
upon the mountains of division."
     Our text gives us sweet assurance that _our Lord is at home 
with those difficulties_ which are quite insurmountable by us. 
Just as the roe or the young hart knows the passes of the 
mountains, and the stepping-places among the rugged rocks, and is 
void of all fear among the ravines and the precipices, so does our 
Lord know the heights and depths, the torrents and the caverns of 
our sin and sorrow. He carried the whole of our transgression, and 
so became aware of the tremendous load of our guilt. He is quite 
at home with the infirmities of our nature; He knew temptation in 
the wilderness, heart-break in the garden, desertion on the cross. 
He is quite at home with pain and weakness, for "Himself took our 
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." He is at home with 
despondency, for He was "a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with 
grief." He is at home even with death, for He gave up the ghost, 
and passed through the sepulchre to resurrection. O yawning gulfs 
and frowning steeps of woe, our Beloved, like hind or hart, has 
traversed your glooms! O my Lord, Thou knowest all that divides me 
from Thee; and Thou knowest also that I am far too feeble to climb 
these dividing mountains, so that I may come at Thee; therefore, I 
pray Thee, come Thou over the mountains to meet my longing spirit! 
Thou knowest each yawning gulf and slippery steep, but none of 
these can stay Thee; haste Thou to me, Thy servant, Thy beloved, 
and let me again live by Thy presence.
     _It is easy, too, for Christ to come over the mountains for 
our relief_. It is easy for the gazelle to cross the mountains, it 
is made for that end; so is it easy for Jesus, for to this purpose 
was He ordained from of old that He might come to man in his worst 
estate, and bring with Him the Father's love. What is it that 
separates us from Christ? Is it a sense of sin? You have been 
pardoned once, and Jesus can renew most vividly a sense of full 
forgiveness. But you say, "Alas! I have sinned again: fresh guilt 
alarms me." He can remove it in an instant, for the fountain 
appointed for that purpose is opened, and is still full. It is 
easy for the dear lips of redeeming love to put away the child's 
offences, since He has already obtained pardon for the criminal's 
iniquities. If with His heart's blood He won our pardon from our 
Judge, he can easily enough bring us the forgiveness of our 
Father. Oh, yes, it is easy enough for Christ to say again, "Thy 
sins be forgiven"! "But I feel so unfit, so unable to enjoy 
communion." He that healed all manner of bodily diseases can heal 
with a word your spiritual infirmities. Remember the man whose 
ankle-bones received strength, so that he ran and leaped; and her 
who was sick of a fever, and was healed at once, and arose, and 
ministered unto her Lord. "My grace is sufficient for thee; for My 
strength is made perfect in weakness." "But I have such 
afflictions, such troubles, such sorrows, that I am weighted down, 
and cannot rise into joyful fellowship." Yes, but Jesus can make 
every burden light, and cause each yoke to be easy. Your trials 
can be made to aid your heavenward course instead of hindering it. 
I know all about those heavy weights, and I perceive that you 
cannot lift them; but skilful engineers can adapt ropes and 
pulleys in such a way that heavy weights lift other weights. The 
Lord Jesus is great at gracious machinery, and He has the art of 
causing a weight of tribulation to lift from us a load of 

spiritual deadness, so that we ascend by that which, like a 
millstone, threatened to sink us down.
     What else doth hinder? I am sure that, if it were a sheer 
impossibility, the Lord Jesus could remove it, for things 
impossible with men are possible with God. But someone objects, "I 
am so unworthy of Christ. I can understand eminent saints and 
beloved disciples being greatly indulged, but I am a worm, and no 
man; utterly below such condescension." Say you so? Know you not 
that the worthiness of Christ covers your unworthiness, and He is 
made of God unto you wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 
redemption? In Christ, the Father thinks not so meanly of you as 
you think of yourself; you are not worthy to be called His child, 
but He does call you so, and reckons you to be among His jewels. 
Listen, and you shall hear Him say," Since thou wast precious in 
My sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee. I gave 
Egypt for thy ransom; Ethiopia and Seba for thee." Thus, then, 
there remains nothing which Jesus cannot overleap if He resolves 
to come to you, and re-establish your broken fellowship.
     To conclude, _our Lord can do all this directly_. As in the 
twinkling of an eye the dead shall be raised incorruptible, so in 
a moment can our dead affections rise to fulness of delight. He 
can say to this mountain, "Be thou removed hence, and be thou cast 
into the midst of the sea," and it shall be done. In the sacred 
emblems now upon this supper table, Jesus is already among us. 
Faith cries, "He has come!" Like John the Baptist, she gazes 
intently on Him, and cries, "Behold the Lamb of God!" At this 
table Jesus feeds us with His body and His blood. His corporeal 
presence we have not, but His real spiritual presence we perceive. 
We are like the disciples when none of them durst ask Him, "Who 
art Thou?" knowing that it was the Lord. He is come. He looketh 
forth at these windows,--I mean this bread and wine; showing 
Himself through the lattices of this instructive and endearing 
ordinance. He speaks. He saith, "The winter is past, the rain is 
over and gone." And so it is; we feel it to be so: a heavenly 
springtide warms our frozen hearts. Like the spouse, we 
wonderingly cry, "Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the 
chariots of Amminadib." Now in happy fellowship we see the 
Beloved, and hear His voice; our heart burns; our affections glow; 
we are happy, restful, brimming over with delight. The King has 
brought us into his banqueting-house, and His banner over us is 
love. It is good to be here!
     Friends, we must now go our ways. A voice saith, "Arise, let 
us go hence." O Thou Lord of our hearts, go with us! Home will not 
be home without Thee. Life will not be life without Thee. Heaven 
itself would not be heaven if Thou wert absent. Abide with us. The 
world grows dark, the gloaming of time draws on. Abide with us, 
for it is toward evening. Our years increase, and we near the 
night when dews fall cold and chill. A great future is all about 
us, the splendours of the last age are coming down; and while we 
wait in solemn, awe-struck expectation, our heart continually 
cries within herself, "Until the day break, and the shadows flee 
away, turn, my Beloved, and be Thou like a roe or a young hart 
upon the mountains of division."

     "Hasten, Lord! the promised hour;
     Come in glory and in power;
     Still Thy foes are unsubdued;
     Nature sighs to be renew'd.
     Time has nearly reach'd its sum,
     All things with Thy bride say 'Come;'
     Jesus, whom all worlds adore,
     Come and reign for evermore!"




         FRAGRANT SPICES FROM THE MOUNTAINS OF MYRRH.

     "Thou art all fair, My love; there is no spot in thee."--
Solomon's Song iv. 7.


HOW marvellous are these words! "Thou art all fair, My love; there 
is no spot in thee." The glorious Bridegroom is charmed with His 
spouse, and sings soft canticles of admiration. When the bride 
extols her Lord there is no wonder, for He deserves it well, and 
in Him there is room for praise without possibility of flattery. 
But does He who is wiser than Solomon condescend to praise this 
sunburnt Shulamite? 'Tis even so, for these are His own words, and 
were uttered by His own sweet lips. Nay, doubt not, O young 
believer, for we have more wonders to reveal! There are greater 
depths in heavenly things than thou hast at present dared to hope. 
The Church not only is all fair in the eyes of her Beloved, but in 
one sense she always was so.

     "In God's decree, her form He view'd;
     All beauteous in His eyes she stood,
     Presented by Th' eternal name,
     Betroth'd in love, and free from blame.

     "Not as she stood in Adam's fall,
     When guilt and ruin cover'd all;
     But as she'll stand another day,
     Fairer than sun's meridian ray."

     He delighted in her before she had either a natural or a 
spiritual being, and from the beginning could He say, "My delights 
were with the sons of men." (Prov. viii. 31.) Having covenanted to 
be the Surety of the elect, and having determined to fulfil every 
stipulation of that covenant, He from all eternity delighted to 
survey the purchase of His blood, and rejoiced to view His Church, 
in the purpose and decree, as already by Him delivered from sin, 
and exalted to glory and happiness.

     "Oh, glorious grace, mysterious plan
     Too great for angel-mind to scan,
     Our thoughts are lost, our numbers fail;
     All hail, redeeming love, all hail!"

     Now with joy and gladness let us approach the subject of 
Christ's delight in His Church, as declared by Him whom the Spirit 
has sealed in our hearts as the faithful and true Witness.
     Our first bundle of myrrh lies in the open hand of the text.
     I. Christ has a high esteem for his church. He does not 
blindly admire her faults, or even conceal them from Himself. He 
is acquainted with her sin, in all its heinousness of guilt, and 
desert of punishment. That sin He does not shun to reprove. His 
own words are, "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten." (Rev 
iii. 19.) He abhors sin in her as much as in the ungodly world, 
nay even more, for He sees in her an evil which is not to be found 
in the transgressions of others,--sin against love and grace. She 
is black in her own sight, how much more so in the eyes of her 
Omniscient Lord! Yet there it stands, written by the inspiration 
of the Holy Spirit, and flowing from the lips of the Bridegroom, 
"Thou art all fair, My love; there is no spot in thee." How then 
is this? Is it a mere exaggeration of love, an enthusiastic 
canticle, which the sober hand of truth must strip of its glowing 
fables? Oh, no! The King is full of love, but He is not so 
overcome with it as to forget His reason. The words are true, and 
He means us to understand them as the honest expression of His 
unbiassed judgment, after having patiently examined her in every 
part. He would not have us diminish aught, but estimate the gold 
of His opinions by the bright glittering of His expressions; and, 
therefore, in order that there may be no mistake, _He states it 
positively:_ "Thou art all fair, My love," _and confirms it by a 
negative:_ "there is no spot in thee."
     When He speaks _positively_, how complete is His admiration! 
She is "fair", but that is not a full description; He styles her 
"all fair." He views her in Himself, washed in His sin-atoning 
blood, and clothed in His meritorious righteousness, and He 
considers her to be full of comeliness and beauty. No wonder that 
such is the case, since it is but His own perfect excellences that 
He admires, seeing that the holiness, glory, and perfection of His 
Church are His own garments on the back of His own well-beloved 
spouse, and she is "bone of His bone, and flesh of His flesh." She 
is not simply pure, or well-proportioned; she is positively lovely 
and fair! She has actual merit! Her deformities of sin are 
removed; but more, she has through her Lord obtained a meritorious 
righteousness by which an actual beauty is conferred upon her. 
Believers have a positive righteousness given to them when they 
become "accepted in the Beloved." (Eph. i. 6.)
     Nor is the Church barely lovely, she is _superlatively so_. 
Her Lord styles her, "Thou fairest among women." (Sol. Song i. 8.) 
She has a real worth and excellence which cannot be rivalled by 
all the nobility and royalty of the world. If Jesus could exchange 
His elect bride for all the queens and empresses of earth, or even 
for the angels in heaven, He would not, for He puts her first and 
foremost,--"fairest among women." Nor is this an opinion which He 
is ashamed of, for He invites all men to hear it. He puts a 
"behold" before it, a special note of exclamation, inviting and 
arresting attention. "_Behold_, thou art fair, My love; _behold_, 
thou art fair." (Sol. Song iv. 1.) His opinion He publishes abroad 
even now, and one day from the throne of His glory He will avow 
the truth of it before the assembled universe. "Come, ye blessed 
of My Father" (Matt. xxv. 34), will be His solemn affirmation of 
the loveliness of His elect.
     Let us mark well _the repeated sentences of His approbation_.

     "Lo, thou art fair! lo, thou art fair!
        Twice fair thou art, I say;
     My righteousness and graces are
        Thy double bright array.

     "But since thy faith can hardly own
        My beauty put on thee;
     Behold! behold! twice be it known
        Thou art all fair to Me!"

     He turns again to the subject, a second time looks into those 
doves' eyes of hers, and listens to her honey-dropping lips. It is 
not enough to say, "Behold, thou art fair, My love;" He rings that 
golden bell again, and sings again, and again, "Behold, thou art 
fair."
     After having surveyed her whole person with rapturous 
delight, He cannot be satisfied until He takes a second gaze, and 
afresh recounts her beauties. Making but little difference between 
His first description and the last, he adds extraordinary 
expressions of love to manifest His increased delight. "Thou art 
beautiful, O My love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as 
an army with banners. Turn away thine eyes from Me, for they have 
overcome Me: thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from 
Gilead. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the 
washing, whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one 
barren among them. As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples 
within thy locks. . . . My dove, My undefiled is but one; she is 
the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare 
her." (Sol. Song vi. 4-7, 9.)
     The beauty which He admires is _universal_, He is as much 
enchanted with her temples as with her breasts. All her offices, 
all her pure devotions, all her earnest labours, all her constant 
sufferings, are precious to His heart. She is "all fair." Her 
ministry, her psalmody, her intercessions, her alms, her watching, 
all are admirable to Him, when performed in the Spirit. Her faith, 
her love, her patience, her zeal, are alike in His esteem as "rows 
of jewels" and "chains of gold." (Sol. Song i. 10.) He loves and 
admires her everywhere. In the house of bondage, or in the land of 
Canaan, she is ever fair. On the top of Lebanon His heart is 
ravished with one of her eyes, and in the fields and villages He 
joyfully receives her loves. He values her above gold and silver 
in the days of His gracious manifestations, but He has an equal 
appreciation of her when He withdraws Himself, for it is 
immediately after He had said, "Until the day break, and the 
shadows flee away, I will get Me to the mountain of myrrh, and to 
the hill of frankincense," (Sol. Song iv. 6,) that He exclaims, in 
the words of our text, "Thou art all fair, My love." At all 
seasons believers are very near the heart of the Lord Jesus, they 
are always as the apple of His eye, and the jewel of His crown. 
Our name is still on His breastplate, and our persons are still in 
His gracious remembrance. He never thinks lightly of His people; 
and certainly in all the compass of His Word there is not one 
syllable which looks like contempt of them. They are the choice 
treasure and peculiar portion of the Lord of hosts; and what king 
will undervalue his own inheritance? What loving husband will 
despise his own wife? Let others call the Church what they may, 
Jesus does not waver in His love to her, and does not differ in 
His judgment of her, for He still exclaims, "How fair and how 
pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!" (Sol. Song vii. 6.)
     Let us remember that He who pronounces the Church and each 
individual believer to be "all fair" is none other than the 
glorious Son of God, who is "very God of very God." Hence His 
declaration is decisive, since infallibility has uttered it. There 
can be no mistake where the all-seeing Jehovah is the Judge. If He 
has pronounced her to be incomparably fair, she is so, beyond a 
doubt; and though hard for our poor puny faith to receive, it is 
nevertheless as divine a verity as any of the undoubted doctrines 
of revelation.
     Having thus pronounced her _positively_ full of beauty, He 
now confirms His praise by _a precious negative_: "There is no 
spot in thee." As if the thought occurred to the Bridegroom that 
the carping world would insinuate that He had only mentioned her 
comely parts, and had purposely omitted those features which were 
deformed or defiled, He sums all up by declaring her universally 
and entirely fair, and utterly devoid of stain. A spot may soon be 
removed, and is the very least thing that can disfigure beauty, 
but even from this little blemish the Church is delivered in her 
Lord's sight. If He had said there is no hideous scar, no horrible 
deformity, no filthy ulcer, we might even then have marvelled; but 
when He testifies that she is free from the slightest spot, all 
these things are included, and the depth of wonder is increased. 
If He had but promised to remove all spots, we should have had 
eternal reason for joy; but when He Speaks of it as already done, 
who can restrain the most intense emotions of satisfaction and 
delight? O my soul, here is marrow and fatness for thee; eat thy 
full, and be abundantly glad therein!
     Christ Jesus has no quarrel with His spouse. She often 
wanders from Him, and grieves His Holy Spirit, but He does not 
allow her faults to affect His love. He sometimes chides, but it 
is always in the tenderest manner, with the kindest intentions;--
it is "My love" even then. There is no remembrance of our follies, 
He does not cherish ill thoughts of us, but He pardons, and loves 
as well after the offence as before it. It is well for us it is 
so, for if Jesus were as mindful of injuries as we are, how could 
He commune with us? Many a time a believer will put himself out of 
humour with the Lord for some slight turn in providence, but our 
precious Husband knows our silly hearts too well to take any 
offence at our ill manners.
     If He were as easily provoked as we are, who among us could 
hope for a comfortable look or a kind salutation? but He is "ready 
to pardon, . . . slow to anger." (Neh. ix. 17.) He is like Noah's 
sons, He goes backward, and throws a cloak over our nakedness; or 
we may compare Him to Apelles, who, when he painted Alexander, put 
his finger over the scar on the cheek, that it might not be seen 
in the picture. "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither 
hath He seen perverseness in Israel" (Num. xxiii. 21); and hence 
He is able to commune with the erring sons of men.
     But the question returns,--How is this? Can it be explained, 
so as not to clash with the most evident fact that sin remaineth 
even in the hearts of the regenerate? Can our own daily bewailings 
of sin allow of anything like perfection as a present attainment? 
The Lord Jesus saith it, and therefore it must be true; but in 
what sense is it to be understood? How are we "all fair" though we 
ourselves feel that we are black, because the sun hath looked upon 
us? (Sol. Song i. 6.) The answer is ready, if we consider the 
analogy of faith.
     1. In the matter of justification, the saints are complete 
and without sin. As Durham says, these words are spoken "in 
respect of the imputation of Christ's righteousness wherewith they 
are adorned, and which they have put on, which makes them very 
glorious and lovely, so that they are beautiful beyond all others, 
through His comeliness put upon them."
     And Dr. Gill excellently expresses the same idea, when he 
writes, "though all sin is seen by God, _in articulo providentiae, 
in the matter of providence_, wherein nothing escapes His all-
seeing eye; yet _in articula iustificationis, in the matter of 
justification_, He sees no sin in His people, so as to reckon it 
to them, or condemn them for it; for they all stand 'holy and 
unblameable and unreproveable in His sight.'" (Col. i. 22.) The 
blood of Jesus removes all stain, and His righteousness confers 
perfect beauty; and, therefore, in the Beloved, the true believer 
is at this hour as much accepted and approved, in the sight of 
God, as He will be when He stands before the throne in heaven. The 
beauty of justification is at its fulness the moment a soul is by 
faith received into the Lord Jesus. This is righteousness so 
transcendent that no one can exaggerate its glorious merit. Since 
this righteousness is that of Jesus, the Son of God, it is 
therefore divine, and is, indeed, the holiness of God; and, hence, 
Kent was not too daring when, in a bold flight of rapture, he 
sang,--

     "In thy Surety thou art free,
     His dear hands were pierced for thee;
     With His spotless vesture on,
     Holy as the Holy One.

     "Oh, the heights and depths of grace,
     Shining with meridian blaze;
     Here the sacred records show
     Sinners black, but comely too!"

     2. But perhaps it is best to understand this as relating to 
the design of Christ concerning them. It is His purpose to present 
them without "spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing." (Eph. v. 27.) 
They shall be holy and unblameable and unreproveable in the sight 
of the Omniscient God. In prospect of this, the Church is viewed 
as being virtually what she is soon to be actually. Nor is this a 
frivolous antedating of her excellence; for be it ever remembered 
that the Representative, in whom she is accepted, is actually 
complete in all perfections and glories at this very moment. As 
the Head of the body is already without sin, being none other than 
the Lord from heaven, it is but in keeping that the whole body 
should be pronounced comely and fair through the glory of the 
Head. The fact of her future perfection is so certain that it is 
spoken of as if it were already accomplished, and indeed it is so 
in the mind of Him to whom a thousand years are but as one day. 
"Christ often expounds an honest believer, from His own heart, 
purpose and design; in which respect they get many titles, 
otherwise unsuitable to their present condition. (Durham.) Let us 
magnify the name of our Jesus, who loves us so well that He will 
overleap the dividing years of our pilgrimage, that He may give us 
even now the praise which seems to be only fitted for the 
perfection of Paradise. As Erskine sings,--

     "My love, thou seem'st a loathsome worm:
        Yet such thy beauties be,
     I spoke but half thy comely form;
        Thou'rt wholly fair to Me.

     "Whole justified, in perfect dress;
        Nor justice, nor the law
     Can in thy robe of righteousness
        Discern the smallest flaw.

     "Yea, sanctified in ev'ry part,
        Thou art perfect in design:
     And I judge thee by what thou art
        In thy intent and Mine.

     "Fair love, by grace complete in Me,
        Beyond all beauteous brides;
     Each spot that ever sullied thee
        My purple vesture hides."

     II. Our Lord's admiration is sweetened by love. He addresses 
the spouse as "My love." The virgins called her "the fairest among 
women"; they saw and admired, but it was reserved for her Lord to 
love her. Who can fully tell the excellence of His love? Oh, how 
His heart goeth forth after His redeemed! As for the love of David 
and Jonathan, it is far exceeded in Christ. No tender husband was 
ever so fond as He. No figures can completely set forth His 
heart's affection, for it surpasses all the love that man or woman 
hath heard or thought of. Our blessed Lord, Himself, when He would 
declare the greatness of it, was compelled to compare one 
inconceivable thing with another, in order to express His own 
thoughts. "As the Father hath loved Me, so have I loved you." 
(John xv. 9.) All the eternity, fervency, immutability, and 
infinity which are to be found in the love of Jehovah the Father, 
towards Jehovah-Jesus the Son, are copied to the letter in the 
love of the Lord Jesus towards His chosen ones. Before the 
foundation of the world He loved His people, in all their 
wanderings He loved them, and unto the end He will abide in His 
love. (John xiii. 1.) He has given them the best proof of His 
affection, in that He gave Himself to die for their sins, and hath 
revealed to them complete pardon as the result of His death. The 
willing manner of His death is further confirmation of His 
boundless love. How Christ did delight in the work of our 
redemption! "Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written 
of Me, I delight to do Thy will, O my God." (Psalm xl. 7, 8.) When 
He came into the world to sacrifice His life for us, it was a 
freewill offering. "I have a baptism to be baptized with." (Luke 
xii. 50.) Christ was to be, as it were, baptized in His own blood, 
and how did He thirst for that time! "How am I straitened till it 
be accomplished." There was no hesitation, no desire to be quit of 
His engagement. He went to His crucifixion without once halting by 
the way to deliberate whether He should complete His sacrifice. 
The stupendous mass of our fearful debt He paid at once, asking 
neither delay nor diminution. From the moment when He said, "Not 
My will, but Thine, be done" (Luke xxii. 42), His course was swift 
and unswerving; as if He had been hastening to a crown rather than 
to a cross. The fulness of time was His only remembrancer; He was 
not driven by bailiffs to discharge the obligations of His Church, 
but joyously, even when full of sorrow, He met the law, answered 
its demands, and cried, "It is finished."
     How hard it is to talk of love so as to convey out meaning 
with it! How often have our eyes been full of tears when we have 
realized the thought that Jesus loves us! How has our spirit been 
melted within us at the assurance that He thinks of us and bears 
us on His heart! But we cannot kindle the like emotion in others, 
nor can we give, by word of mouth, so much as a faint idea of the 
bliss which coucheth in that exclamation, "Oh, how He loves!" 
Come, reader, canst thou say of thyself, "He loved me"? (Gal. ii. 
20.) Then look down into this sea of love, and endeavour to guess 
its depth. Doth it not stagger thy faith, that He should love 
_thee?_ Or, if thou hast strong confidence, say, does it not 
enfold thy spirit in a flame of admiring and adoring gratitude? O 
ye angels, such love as this ye never knew! Jesus doth not bear 
your names upon His hands, or call you His bride. No! this highest 
fellowship he reserves for worms whose only return is tearful, 
hearty thanksgiving and love.
     III. Let us note that Christ delights to think upon his 
Church, and to look upon her beauty. As the bird returneth often 
to its nest, and as the wayfarer hastens to his home, so doth the 
mind continually pursue the object of its choice. We cannot look 
too often upon that face which we love; we desire always to have 
our precious things in our sight. It is even so with our Lord 
Jesus. From all eternity, "His delights were with the sons of 
men;" His thoughts rolled onward to the time when His elect should 
be born into the world; He viewed them in the mirror of His fore-
knowledge. "In thy book," He says, "all my members were written, 
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of 
them." (Ps. cxxxix. 16.) When the world was set upon its pillars, 
He was there, and He set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel. Many a time, before His 
incarnation, He descended to this earth in the similitude of a 
man; on the plains of Mamre (Gen. xviii.), by the brook of Jabbok 
(Gen. xxxii. 24-30), beneath the walls of Jericho (Josh. v. 13), 
and in the fiery furnace of Babylon (Dan. iii. 19-25), the Son of 
man did visit His people. Because His soul delighted in them, He 
could not rest away from them, for His heart longed after them. 
Never were they absent from His heart, for He had written their 
names upon His hands, and graven them upon His heart. As the 
breast-plate containing the names of the tribes of Israel was the 
most brilliant ornament worn by the high priest, so the names of 
Christ's elect were His most precious Jewels, which He ever hung 
nearest His heart. We may often forget to meditate upon the 
perfections of our Lord, but He never ceases to remember us. He 
cares not one half so much for any of His most glorious works as 
He does for His children. Although His eye seeth everything that 
hath beauty and excellence in it, He never fixes His gaze anywhere 
with that admiration and delight which He spends upon His 
purchased ones. He charges His angels concerning them, and calls 
upon those holy beings to rejoice with Him over His lost sheep. 
(Luke xv. 4-7.) He talked of them to Himself, and even on the tree 
of doom He did not cease to soliloquize concerning them. He saw of 
the travail of His soul, and He was abundantly satisfied.

     "That day acute of ignominious woe,
     Was, notwithstanding, in a perfect sense,
     'The day of His heart's gladness,' for the joy
     That His redeem'd should be brought home at last
     (Made ready as in robes of bridal white),
     Was set before Him vividly,--He look'd;--
     And for that happiness anticipate,
     Endurance of all torture, all disgrace,
     Seem'd light infliction to His heart of love."

     Like a fond mother, Christ Jesus, our thrice-blessed Lord, 
sees every dawning of excellence, and every bud of goodness in us, 
making much of our litties, and rejoicing over the beginnings of 
our graces. As He is to be our endless song, so we are His 
perpetual prayer. When He is absent He thinks of us, and in the 
black darkness He has a window through which He looks upon us. 
When the sun sets in one part of the earth, he rises in another 
place beyond our visible horizon; and even so Jesus, our Sun of 
Righteousness, is only pouring light upon His people in a 
different way, when to our apprehension He seems to have set in 
darkness. His eye is ever upon the vineyard, which is His Church: 
"I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any 
hurt it, I will keep it night and day." (Isa. xxvii. 3.) He will 
not trust to His angels to do it, for it is His delight to do all 
with His own hands. Zion is in the centre of His heart, and He 
cannot forget her, for every day His thoughts are set upon her. 
When the bride by her neglect of Him hath hidden herself from His 
sight, He cannot be quiet until again He looks upon her. He calls 
her forth with the most wooing words, "O My dove, that art in the 
clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let Me see 
thy countenance; let Me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, 
and thy countenance is comely." (Sol. Song ii. 14.) She thinks 
herself unmeet to keep company with such a Prince, but He entices 
her from her lurking-place, and inasmuch as she comes forth 
trembling, and bashfully hides her face with her veil, He bids her 
uncover her face, and let her Husband gaze upon her. She is 
ashamed to do so, for she is black in her own esteem, and 
therefore He urges that she is comely to Him.
     Nor is He content with looking, He must feed His ears as well 
as His eyes, and therefore He commends her speech, and intreats 
her to let Him hear her voice. See how truly our Lord rejoiceth in 
us. Is not this unparalleled love! We have heard of princes who 
have been smitten by the beauty of a peasant's daughter, but what 
of that? Here is the Son of God doting upon a worm, looking with 
eyes of admiration upon a poor child of Adam, and listening with 
joy to the lispings of poor flesh and blood. Ought we not to be 
exceedingly charmed by such matchless condescension? And should 
not our hearts as much delight in Him as He doth in us? O 
surprising truth! Christ Jesus rejoices over His poor, tempted, 
tried, and erring people.
     IV. It is not to be forgotten that sometimes the Lord Jesus 
tells His people His love thoughts. "He does not think it enough 
behind her back to tell it, but in her very presence, He says, 
'Thou art all fair, My love.' It is true, this is not His ordinary 
method; He is a wise lover, that knows when to keep back the 
intimation of love, and when to let it out; but there are times 
when He will make no secret of it; times when He will put it 
beyond all dispute in the souls of His people."
     The Holy Spirit is often pleased in a most gracious manner to 
witness with our spirits of the love of Jesus. He takes of the 
things of Christ, and reveals them unto us. No voice is heard from 
the clouds, and no vision is seen in the night, but we have a 
testimony more sure than either of these. If an angel should fly 
from heaven, and inform the saint personally of the Saviour's love 
to him, the evidence would not be one whir more satisfactory than 
that which is borne in the heart by the Holy Ghost. Ask those of 
the Lord's people who have lived the nearest to the gates of 
heaven, and they will tell you that they have had seasons when the 
love of Christ towards them has been a fact so clear and sure, 
that they could no more doubt it than they could question their 
own existence.
     Yes, beloved believer, you and I have had times of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord, and then our faith has mounted to 
the topmost heights of assurance. We have had confidence to lean 
our heads upon the bosom of our Lord, and we have had no more 
question about our Master's affection than John had when in that 
blessed posture, nay, nor so much; for the dark question, "Lord, 
is it I that shall betray Thee?" has been put far from us. He has 
kissed us with the kisses of His love, and killed our doubts by 
the closeness of His embrace. His love has been sweeter than wine 
to our souls. We felt that we could sing, "His left hand is under 
my head, and His right hand doth embrace me." (Sol. Song viii. 3.) 
Then all earthly troubles were light as the chaff of the 
threshing-floor, and the pleasures of the world as tasteless as 
the white of an egg. We would have welcomed death as the messenger 
who would introduce us to our Lord to whom we were in haste to be 
gone; for His love had stirred us to desire more of Him, even His 
immediate and glorious presence. I have, sometimes, when the Lord 
has assured me of His love, felt as if I could not contain more 
joy and delight. My eyes ran down with tears of gratitude. I fell 
upon my knees to bless Him, but rose again in haste, feeling as if 
I had nothing more to ask for, but must stand up and praise Him; 
then have I lifted my hands to heaven, longing to fill my arms 
with Him; panting to talk with Him, as a man talketh with his 
friend, and to see Him in His own person, that I might tell Him 
how happy He had made His unworthy servant, and might fall on my 
face, and kiss His feet in unutterable thankfulness and love. Such 
a banquet have I had upon one word of my Beloved,--"_thou art 
Mine_,"--that I wished, like Peter, to build tabernacles in that 
mount, and dwell for ever. But, alas, we have not, all of us, yet 
learned how to preserve that blessed assurance. We stir up our 
Beloved and awake Him, then He leaves our unquiet chamber, and we 
grope after Him, and make many a weary journey trying to find Him.
     If we were wiser and more careful, we might preserve the 
fragrance of Christ's words far longer; for they are not like the 
ordinary manna which soon rotted, but are comparable to that omer 
of it which was put in the golden pot, and preserved for many 
generations. The sweet Lord Jesus has been known to write his 
love-thoughts on the heart of His people in so clear and deep a 
manner, that they have for months, and even for years, enjoyed an 
abiding sense of His affection. A few doubts have flitted across 
their minds like thin clouds before a summer's sun, but the warmth 
of their assurance has remained the same for many a gladsome day. 
Their path has been a smooth one, they have fed in the green 
pastures beside the still waters, for His rod and staff have 
comforted them, and His right hand hath led them. I am inclined to 
think that there is more of this in the Church than some men would 
allow. We have a goodly number who dwell upon the hills, and 
behold the light of the sun. There are giants in these days, 
though the times are not such as to allow them room to display 
their gigantic strength; in many a humble cot, in many a crowded 
workshop, in many a village manse there are to be found men of the 
house of David, men after God's own heart, anointed with the holy 
oil. It is, however, a mournful truth, that whole ranks in the 
army of our Lord are composed of dwarfish Littlefaiths. The men of 
fearful mind and desponding heart are everywhere to be seen. Why 
is this? Is it the Master's fault, or ours? Surely _He_ cannot be 
blamed. Is it not then a matter of enquiry in our own souls, Can I 
not grow stronger? Must I be a mourner all my days? How can I get 
rid of my doubts? The answer must be: yes, you can be comforted, 
but only the mouth of the Lord can do it, for anything less than 
this will be unsatisfactory.
     I doubt not that there are means, by the use of which those 
who are now weak and trembling may attain unto boldness in faith 
and confidence in hope; but I see not how this can be done unless 
the Lord Jesus Christ manifest His love to them, and tell them of 
their union to Him. This He will do, if we seek it of Him. The 
importunate pleader shall not lack his reward. Haste thee to Him, 
O timid one, and tell Him that nothing will content thee but a 
smile from His own face, and a word from His own lips! Speak to 
Him, and say, "O my Lord Jesus, I cannot rest unless I know that 
Thou lovest me! I desire to have proof of Thy love under Thine own 
hand and seal.
     I cannot live upon guesses and surmises; nothing but 
certainty will satisfy my trembling heart. Lord, look upon me, if, 
indeed, Thou lovest me, and though I be less than the least of all 
saints, say unto my soul, 'I am thy salvation.'" When this prayer 
is heard, the castle of despair must totter; there is not one 
stone of it which can remain upon another, if Christ whispers 
forth His love. Even Despondency and Much-afraid will dance, and 
Ready-to-Halt leap upon his crutches.
     Oh, for more of these Bethel visits, more frequent 
visitations from the God of Israel! Oh, how sweet to hear Him say 
to us, as He did to Abraham, "Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, 
and thy exceeding great reward." (Gen. xv. 1.) To be addressed as 
Daniel was of old, "O man greatly beloved" (Dan. x. 19), is worth 
a thousand ages of this world's joy. What more can a creature want 
this side of heaven to make him peaceful and happy than a plain 
avowal of love from his Lord's own lips? Let me ever hear Thee, 
speak in mercy to my soul, and, O my Lord, I ask no more while 
here I dwell in the land of my pilgrimage!
     Brethren, let us labour to obtain a confident assurance of 
the Lord's delight in us, for this, as it enables Him to commune 
with us, will be one of the readiest ways to produce a like 
feeling in our hearts towards Him. Christ is well pleased with us; 
let us approach Him with holy familiarity; let us unbosom our 
thoughts to Him, for His delight in us will secure us an audience. 
The child may stay away from the father, when he is conscious that 
he has aroused his father's displeasure, but why should we keep at 
a distance when Christ Jesus is smiling upon us? No! since His 
smiles attract us, let us enter into His courts, and touch His 
golden sceptre. O Holy Spirit, help us to live in happy fellowship 
with Him whose soul is knit unto us!

     "O Jesus! let eternal blessings dwell
     On Thy transporting name.    *   *   *
     Let me be wholly Thine from this blest hour.
     Let Thy lov'd image be for ever present;
     Of Thee be all my thoughts, and let my tongue
     Be sanctified with the celestial theme.
     Dwell on my lips, Thou dearest, sweetest name!
     Dwell on my lips, 'till the last parting breath!
     Then let me die, and bear the charming sound
     In triumph to the skies. In other strains,
     In language all divine, I'll praise Thee then;
     While all the Godhead opens in the view
     Of a Redeemer's love. Here let me gaze,
     For ever gaze; the bright variety
     Will endless joy and admiration yield.
     Let me be wholly Thine from this blest hour.
     Fly from my soul all images of sense,
     Leave me in silence to possess my Lord:
     My life, my pleasures, flow from Him alone,
     My strength, my great salvation, and my hope.
     Thy name is all my trust; O name divine!
     Be Thou engraven on my inmost soul,
     And let me own Thee with my latest breath,
     Confess Thee in the face of ev'ry horror,
     That threat'ning death or envious hell can raise;
     Till all their strength subdu'd, my parting soul
     Shall give a challenge to infernal rage,
     And sing salvation to the Lamb for ever."




                       THE WELL-BELOVED.

                A COMMUNION ADDRESS AT MENTONE.

     "Yea, He is altogether lovely."--Solomon's Song v. 16.


THE soul that is familiar with the Lord worships Him in the outer 
court of nature, wherein it admires His _works_, and is charmed by 
every thought of what He must be who made them all. When that soul 
enters the nearer circle of inspiration, and reads the wonderful 
_words_ of God, it is still more enraptured, and its admiration is 
heightened. In revelation, we see the same all-glorious Lord as in 
creation, but the vision is more clear, and the consequent love is 
more intense.
     The Word is an inner court to the Creation; but there is yet 
an innermost sanctuary, and blessed are they who enter it, and 
have fellowship with the Lord Himself. We come to Christ, and in 
coming to Him we come to God; for Jesus says, "He that hath seen 
Me hath seen the Father." When we know the Lord Jesus, we stand 
before the mercy-seat, where the glory of Jehovah shineth forth. I 
like to think of the text as belonging to those who are as priests 
unto God, and stand in the Holy of holies, while they say, "Yea, 
He is altogether lovely." His works are marvellous, His words are 
full of majesty, but He Himself is altogether lovely.
     Can we come into this inner circle? All do not enter here. 
Alas! many are far off from Him, and are blind to His beauties. 
"He was despised and rejected of men," and He is so still. They do 
not see God in His works, but dream that these wonders were 
evolved, and not created by the Great Primal Cause. As for His 
words, they seem to them as idle tales, or, at best, as inspired 
only in the same sense as the language of Shakespeare or Spenser. 
They see not the Lord in the stately aisles of Holy Scripture; and 
have no vision of _Himself_. May He, who openeth the eyes of the 
blind, have pity on them!
     Certain others are in a somewhat happier position, for they 
are enquirers after Christ. They are like the persons who, in the 
ninth verse of the chapter, asked, "What is thy Beloved more than 
another beloved, O thou fairest among women? What is thy Beloved 
more than another beloved, that thou dost so charge us?" They want 
to know who this Jesus is. But they have not seen Him yet, and 
cannot join with the spouse in saying, "He is altogether lovely."
     If we enter this sacred inner circle, we must become 
witnesses, as she does who speaks of Christ, "Yea, He is 
altogether lovely." She knows what He is, for she has seen Him. 
The verses which precede the text are a description of every 
feature of the heavenly Bridegroom; all His members are there set 
forth with richness of Oriental imagery. The spouse speaks what 
she knows. Have we, also, seen the Lord? Are we His familiar 
acquaintances? If so, may the Lord help us to understand our text!
     If we are to know the full joy of the text, we must come to 
our Lord as His intimates. He permits us this high honour, since, 
in this ordinance, He makes us His table-companions. He says, 
"Henceforth I call you not servants; but I have called you 
friends." He calls upon us to eat bread with Him; yea, to partake 
of Himself, by eating His flesh and drinking His blood. Oh, that 
we may pass beyond the outward signs into the closest intimacy 
with _Himself!_ Perhaps, when you are at home, you will examine 
the spouse's description of her Lord. It is a wonderful piece of 
tapestry. She has wrought into its warp and woof all things 
charming, sweet, and precious. In Him she sees all lovely 
colours,--"My Beloved is white and ruddy." In comparison with Him 
all others fail, for He is "chief among ten thousand" chieftains. 
She cannot think of Him as comparable to anything less valuable 
than "fine gold." She sees, soaring in the air, birds of divers 
wing; and these must aid her, whether it be the raven or the dove. 
The rivers of waters, and the beds of spices and myrrh-dropping 
lilies, must come into the picture, with sweet flowers and goodly 
cedars. All kinds of treasured things are in Him; for He is like 
to gold rings set with the beryl, and bright ivory overlaid with 
sapphires, and pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine gold. 
She labours to describe His beauty and His excellency, and strains 
all comparisons to their utmost use, and somewhat more; and yet 
she is conscious of failure, and therefore sums up all with the 
pithy sentence, "Yea, He is altogether lovely."
     If the Holy Spirit will help me, I should like to lift the 
veil, that we may, in sacred contemplation, look on our Beloved.
     I. We would do so, first, with reverent emotions. In the 
words before us, "Yea, He is altogether lovely," two emotions are 
displayed, namely, admiration and affection.
     It is _admiration_ which speaks of Him as "altogether lovely" 
or beautiful. This admiration rises to the highest degree. The 
spouse would fain show that her Beloved is more than any other 
beloved; therefore she cries, "He is altogether lovely." Surely no 
one else has reached that point. Many are lovely, but no one save 
Jesus is "altogether lovely." We see something that is lovely in 
one, and another point is lovely in another; but all loveliness 
meets in Him. Our soul knows nothing which can rival Him: He is 
the gathering up of all sorts of loveliness to make up one perfect 
loveliness. He is the climax of beauty; the crown of glory; the 
uttermost of excellence.
     Our admiration of Him, also, is unrestrained. The spouse 
dared to say, even in the presence of the daughters of Jerusalem, 
who were somewhat envious, "Yea, He is altogether lovely." They 
knew not, as yet, His perfections; they even asked, "What is thy 
Beloved more than another beloved?" But she was not to be blinded 
by their want of sympathy, neither did she withhold her testimony 
from fear of their criticism. To her, He was "altogether lovely", 
and she could say no less. Our admiration of Christ is such that 
we would tell the kings of the earth that they have no majesty in 
His presence; and tell the wise men that He alone is wisdom; and 
tell the great and mighty that He is the blessed and only 
Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords.
     Our admiration of our Lord is inexpressible. We can never 
tell all we know of our Lord; yet all our knowledge is little. All 
that we know is, that His love passeth knowledge, that His 
excellence baffles understanding, that His glory is unutterable. 
We can embrace Him by our love, but we can scarcely touch Him with 
our intellect, He is so high, so glorious. As to describing Him, 
we cry, with Mr. Berridge,--

     "Then my tongue would fain express
     All His love and loveliness;
     But I lisp, and falter forth
     Broken words, not half His worth.

     "Vex'd, I try and try again,
     Still my efforts all are vain:
     Living tongues are dumb at best,
     We must die to speak of Christ."

     "He is altogether lovely." Do we not feel an inexpressible 
admiration for Him? There is none like unto Thee, O Son of God!
     Still, our paramount emotion is not admiration, but 
_affection_. "He is altogether"--not beautiful, nor admirable,--
but "lovely." All His beauties are loving beauties towards us, and 
beauties which draw our hearts towards Him in humble love. He 
charms us, not by a cold comeliness, but by a living loveliness, 
which wins our hearts. His is an approachable beauty, which not 
only overpowers us with its glory, but holds us captive by its 
charms. We love Him: we cannot do otherwise, for "He is altogether 
lovely." He has within Himself and unquenchable flame of love, 
which sets our soul on fire. He is all love, and all the love in 
the world is less than His. Put together all the loves of husband 
wives, parents, children, brothers, sisters, and they only make a 
drop compared with His great deeps of love, unexplored and 
unexplorable. This love of His has a wonderful power to beget love 
in unlovely hearts, and to nourish it into a mighty force. " It is 
a torrent which sweeps all before it when its founts break forth 
within the soul. It is a Gulf Stream in which all icebergs melt. 
When our heart is full of love to Jesus, His loveliness becomes 
the passion of the soul, and sin and self are swept away. May we 
feel it now!
     There He stands: we know Him by the thorn-crown, and the 
wounds, and the visage more marred than that of any man! He 
suffered all this for us. O Son of man! O Son of God! With the 
spouse, we feel, in the inmost depths of our soul, that Thou art 
"altogether lovely."
     II. Now would I lift the veil a second time, with deep 
solemnity, not so much to suggest emotions as to secure your 
intelligent assurance of the fact that "He is altogether lovely." 
We say this with absolute certainty. The spouse places a "Yea" 
before her enthusiastic declaration, because she is sure of it. 
She sees her Beloved, and sees Him to be altogether lovely. This 
is no fiction, no dream, no freak of imagination, no outburst of 
partiality. The highest love to Christ does not make us speak more 
than the truth; we are as reasonable when we are filled with love 
to Him as ever we were in our lives; nay, never are we more 
reasonable than when we are carried clean away by a clear 
perception of His superlative excellence.
     Let us meditate upon the proof of our assertion. "He is 
altogether lovely" _in His person_. He is God. The glory of 
Godhead I must leave in lowly silence. Yet is our Jesus also man, 
more emphatically man than any one here present this afternoon, 
for we are English, American, French, German, Dutch, Russian; but 
Christ is man, the second Adam, the Head of the race: as truly as 
He is very God of very God, so is He man, of the substance of His 
mother. What a marvellous union! The miracle of miracles! In his 
incomparible personality He is altogether lovely; for in Him we 
see how God comes down to man in condescension, and how man goes 
up to God in close relationship. There is no other such as He, in 
all respects, even in heaven itself: in His personality He must 
ever stand alone, in the eyes of both God and man, "altogether 
lovely."
     As for _His character_, time would fail us to enter upon that 
vast subject; but the more we know of the character of our Lord, 
and the more we grow like Him, the more lovely will it appear to 
us. In all aspects, it is lovely; in all its minutiae and details, 
it is perfect; and as a whole, it is perfection's model. Take any 
one action of His, look into its mode, its spirit, its motive, and 
all else that can be revealed by a microscopic examination, and it 
is "altogether lovely." Consider his life, as a whole, in 
reference to God, to man, to His friends, to His foes, to those 
around Him, and to the ages yet to be, and you shall find it 
absolutely perfect. More than that: there is such a thing as a 
cold perfection, with which one can find no fault, and yet it 
commands no love; but in Christ, our Well-beloved, every part of 
His character attracts. To a true heart, the life of Christ is as 
much an object of love as of reverence: "He is altogether lovely." 
We must _love_ that which we see in Him: admiration is not the 
word. When cold critics commend Him, their praise is half an 
insult: what know these frozen hearts of our Beloved? As for a 
word against Him, it wounds us to the soul. Even an omission of 
His praise is a torture to us. If we hear a sermon which has no 
Christ in it, we weary of it. If we read a book that contains a 
slighting syllable of Him, we abhor it. He, Himself, has become 
everything to us now, and only in the atmosphere of fervent love 
to Him can we feel at home.
     Passing from His character to _His sacrifice;_ there 
especially "He is altogether lovely." You may have read 
"Rutherford's Letters"; I hope you have. How wondrously he writes, 
when he describes his Lord in garments red from His sweat of 
blood, and with hands bejewelled with His wounds! When we view His 
body taken down from the cross, all pale and deathly, and wrapped 
in the cerements of the grave, we see a strange beauty in Him. He 
is to us never more lovely than when we read in our Beloved's 
white and red that His Sacrifice is accomplished, and He has been 
obedient unto death for us. In Him, as the sacrifice once offered, 
we see our pardon, our life, our heaven, our all. So lovely is 
Christ in His sacrifice, that He is for ever most pleasing to the 
great Judge of all, ay, so lovely to His Father, that He makes us 
also lovely to God the Father, and we are "accepted in the 
Beloved." His sacrifice has such merit and beauty in the sight of 
heaven, that in Him God is well pleased, and guilty men become in 
Him pleasant unto the Lord. Is not His sacrifice most sweet to us? 
Here our guilty conscience finds peace; here we see ourselves made 
comely in His comeliness. We cannot stand at Calvary, and see the 
Saviour die, and hear Him cry, "It is finished," without feeling 
that "He is altogether lovely." Forgive me that I speak so coolly! 
I dare not enter fully into a theme which would pull up the 
sluices of my heart.
     Remember what He was when He rose from the grave on the third 

day. Oh, to have seen Him in the freshness of _His resurrection 
beauty!_ And what will He be in _His glory_, when He comes again 
the second time, and all His holy angels with Him, when He shall 
sit upon the throne of His glory, and heaven and earth shall flee 
away before His face? To His people He will then be "altogether 
lovely." Angels will adore Him, saints made perfect will fall on 
their faces before Him; and we ourselves shall feel that, at last, 
our heaven is complete. We shall see Him, and being like Him, we 
shall be satisfied.
     _Every feature of our Lord is lovely._ You cannot think of 
anything that has to do with Him which is unworthy of our praise. 
All over glorious is our Lord. The spouse speaks of His head, His 
locks, His eyes, His cheeks, His lips, His hands, His legs, His 
countenance, His mouth; and when she has mentioned them all, she 
sums up with reference to all by saying, "Yea, He is altogether 
lovely."
     There is _nothing unlovely about Him_. Certain persons would 
be beautiful were it not for a wound or a bruise, but our Beloved 
is all the more lovely for His wounds; the marring of His 
countenance has enhanced its charms. His scars are, for glory and 
for beauty, the jewels of our King. To us He is lovely even from 
that side which others dread: His very frown has comfort in it to 
His saints, since He only frowns on evil. Even His feet, which are 
"like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace," are lovely 
to us for His sake; these are His poor saints, who are sorely 
tried, but are able to endure the fire. Everything of Christ, 
everything that partakes of Christ, everything that hath a flavour 
or savour of Christ, is lovely to us.
     There is _nothing lacking about His loveliness_. Some would 
be very lovely were there a brightness in their eyes, or a colour 
in their countenances: but something is away. The absence of a 
tooth or of an eyebrow may spoil a countenance, but in Christ 
Jesus there is no omission of excellence. Everything that should 
be in Him is in Him; everything that is conceivable in perfection 
is present to perfection in Him.
     _In Him is nothing excessive_. Many a face has one feature in 
it which is overdone; but in our Lord's character everything is 
balanced and proportionate. You never find His kindness lessening 
His holiness, nor His holiness eclipsing His wisdom, nor His 
wisdom abating His courage, nor His courage injuring His meekness. 
Everything is in our Lord that should be there, and everything in 
due measure. Like rare spices, mixed after the manner of the 
apothecary, our Lord's whole person, and character, and sacrifice, 
are as incense sweet unto the Lord.
     _Neither is there anything in our Lord which is incongruous 
with the rest_. In each one of us there is, at least, a little 
that is out of place. We could not be fully described without the 
use of a "but." If we could all look within, and see ourselves as 
God sees us, we should note a thousand matters, which we now 
permit, which we should never allow again. But in the Well-beloved 
all is of a piece, all is lovely; and when the sum of the whole is 
added up, it comes to an absolute perfection of loveliness: "Yea, 
He is altogether lovely."
     We are sure that the Lord Jesus must be Himself exceedingly 
lovely, since _He gives loveliness to His people_. Many saints are 
lovely in their lives; one reads biographies of good men and women 
which make us wish to grow like them; yet all the loveliness of 
all the most holy among men has come from Jesus their Lord, and is 
a copy of His perfect beauty. Those who write well do so because 
He sets the copy.
     What is stranger and more wonderful still, _our Lord Jesus 
makes sinners lovely._ In their natural state, men are deformed 
and hideous to the eye of God; and as they have no love to God, so 
He has no delight in them. He is weary of them, and is grieved 
that He made men upon the earth. The Lord is angry with the wicked 
every day. Yet, when our Lord Jesus comes in, and covers these 
sinful ones with His righteousness, and, at the same time, infuses 
into them His life, the Lord is well pleased with them for His 
Son's sake. Even in heaven, the infinite Jehovah sees nothing 
which pleases Him like His Son. The Father from eternity loved His 
Only-begotten, and again and again He hath said of Him, "This is 
My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." What higher encomium 
can be passed upon Him?
     If we had time to think over this subject, we should say of 
our Lord that _He is lovely in every office._ He is the most 
admirable Priest, and King, and Prophet that ever yet exercised 
the office. He is a lovely Shepherd of a chosen flock, a lovely 
Friend, lovely Husband, a lovely Brother: He is admirable in every 
position that He occupies for our sakes.
     _Our Lord's loveliness appears in every condition:_ in the 
manger, or in the temple; by the well, or on the sea; in the 
garden, or on the cross; in the tomb, or in the resurrection; in 
His first, or in His second coming. He is not as the herb, which 
flowers only at one season; or as the tree, which loses its leaves 
in winter; or as the moon, which waxes and wanes; or as the sea, 
which ebbs and flows. In every condition, and at every time, "He 
is altogether lovely."
     _He is lovely, whichever way we look at Him._ If we view Him 
as in the past, entering into a covenant of peace on our behalf; 
or, in the present, yielding Himself to us as Intercessor, 
Representative, and Forerunner; or, in the future, coming, 
reigning, and glorifying His people; "He is altogether lovely." 
Behold Him from heaven, view Him from the gates of hell, regard 
Him as he goes before, look up to Him as He sits above; He is as 
beautiful from one point of view as from another; "Yea, He is 
altogether lovely." Wherever we may be, He is the same in His 
perfection. How lovely He was to my eyes when I was sinking in 
despair! To see Him suffering for my sin upon the tree, was as the 
opening of the gates of the morning to my darkened soul. How 
lovely He is to us when we are sick, and the hours of night seem 
lengthened into days! "He giveth songs in the night." How lovely 
has He been to us when the world has frowned, and friends have 
forsaken, and worldly goods have been scant! To see "the King in 
His beauty" is a sight sufficient, even if we never saw another 
ray of comfort. How blessed, when we lie dying, to hear Him say, 
"I am the resurrection and the life"! Mark that word; He says not, 
"I will give you resurrection and life," but, "I am the 
resurrection and the life." Blessed are the eyes which can see 
that in Jesus which is really in Him. When we think of seeing Him 
as He is, and being like Him, how heaven approaches us! We shall 
soon behold the beatific vision, of which He will be the centre 
and the sun. At the thought thereof our soul takes wing, and our 
imagination soars aloft, while our faith, with eagle eye, beholds 
the glory. As we think of that glad period, when we shall be with 
our Beloved for ever, we are ready to swoon away with delight. It 
is near, far nearer than we think.
     III. The little time which we can give to this meditation has 
run out, and therefore I hasten to a close. I have bidden you look 
at our Lord as "altogether lovely" with reverent emotions, and 
with absolute certainty. Now, to conclude, think of Him with 
practical results. "He is altogether lovely." What shall we do for 
this chief among ten thousand?
     First, _we will tell others of Him_. For that cause was our 
text spoken. The daughters of Jerusalem asked the spouse, "What is 
thy Beloved more than another beloved?" Her answer is here: "He is 
altogether lovely." It is a great joy to praise our Lord to 
enquiring minds. We, who are preachers, have a glorious time of it 
when we extol our Lord. If we had nothing to do but to preach 
Christ, and had no discipline to administer, no sin to battle 
with, no doubts to drive away, we should have a heavenly service. 
For my part, I wish I could be bound over to play only upon this 
one string. Paul did well when he turned ignoramus, and determined 
to know nothing among the Corinthians save Jesus Christ, and Him 
crucified. As the harp of Anacreon would resound love alone, so 
would I have but one sole subject for my ministry,--the love and 
loveliness of my Lord. Then to speak would be its own reward; and 
to study and prepare discourses would be only a phase of rest. 
Fain would I make my whole ministry to speak of Christ and His 
surpassing loveliness.
     You who are not preachers cannot do better than speak much of 
Jesus, as opportunity offers. Make _Him_ the theme of 
conversation. People talk about ministers; but we beg you to talk 
of our Master. Our undecided neighbours are always talking of 
hypocrites and inconsistent professors; but we would say to them, 
"Never mind about His followers: talk about the Master Himself." 
His followers, by themselves considered, never were worth your 
words; but what a theme is this,-- "He is altogether lovely"! Our 
Lord's people are far worthier than the world thinks them to be; 
for my part, I rejoice in the many gracious and beautiful 
characters with which I meet, but even if all the ill reports we 
hear were true, this would not detract from the loveliness of our 
Lord, who is infinitely beyond all praise.
     The next practical result of viewing the loveliness of our 
blessed Lord is, that _we appropriate Him to ourselves_, grasping 
Him with our two hands of faith and love, and making the rest of 
the verse to be our own: "This is my Beloved, and this is my 
Friend, O daughters of Jerusalem!" Since He is so amiable, He must 
be "my Beloved"; my heart clings to Him. Since He is admirable, I 
rejoice that He is "my Friend"; my soul trusts in Him. The heart 
that most appreciates Jesus is the most eager to appropriate Him. 
He who beholds Jesus as "altogether lovely" will never rest till 
he is altogether sure that Jesus is altogether his own. I think I 
may also add that appreciation is in great measure the seal of 
appropriation, for the soul that values Christ most is the soul 
that hath most surely taken possession of Christ. Sometimes a 
heart prizes the Lord very highly, and tremblingly longs for Him; 
but it is my conviction that the very fact of prizing Him argues a 
measure of possession of Him. Jesus never wins a heart to which He 
refuses His love. If thou lovest Him, He loves thee: be sure of 
that. No soul ever cries, "Yea, He is altogether lovely," without 
sooner or later adding, "This is my Beloved, and this is my 
Friend."
     Rest not, any one of you, till you know of a surety that 
Jesus is yours. Do not be content with a hope, struggle after the 
full assurance of faith. This is to be had, and you ought not to 
be content without it. It may be your lifelong song, "My Beloved 
is mine, and I am His." You need not pine in the shade: the sun is 
shining, "walk in the light." Away with the idea that we cannot 
know whether we are condemned or forgiven, in Christ or out of 
Him! We may know, we must know; and, as we appreciate our Lord, we 
shall know. Either Jesus is ours, or He is not. If He is, let us 
rejoice in the priceless possession. If He is not ours, let us at 
once lay hold upon Him by faith; for, the moment we trust Him, He 
is ours. The enjoyment of religion lies in assurance: a mere hope 
is scant diet.
     Once more, it is a fair fruit of our delight in our Lord that 
_our valuation of Him becomes a bond of union between us and 
others_. The spouse cries, "This is my Beloved, and this is my 
Friend, O daughters of Jerusalem!" and they reply, "Whither is thy 
Beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? Whither is thy Beloved 
turned aside, that we may seek Him with thee?" Thus, you see, they 
institute a companionship through the Well-beloved. Few of us, in 
this room, would ever have known each other, had it not been for 
our common admiration of the Lord Jesus. We should have gone on 
walking past each other by the sea to this day, and we should have 
missed much cheering fellowship. Our Lord has become our centre; 
we meet in Him, and feel that in Him we are partakers of one life. 
We seek our Well-beloved together, and around His table we find 
Him together; and finding Him, we have found one another, and the 
lost jewel of Christian love glitters on every bosom. We have 
differing views on certain parts of divine truth; and I do not 
know that it is wrong for us to differ where the Holy Spirit has 
left truth without rigidly defining it. We are bound each one 
devoutly to use his judgment in the interpretation of the Sacred 
Word; but we all agree in this one clear judgment: "Yea, He is 
altogether lovely." This is the point of union. Those who 
enthusiastically love the same person are on the way to loving 
each other. This is growingly our case; and it is the same with 
all spiritual people. Professors quarrel, but possessors are at 
one. We hear much discourse upon "the Unity of the Church" as a 
thing to be desired, and we may heartily agree with it; but it 
would be well also to remember that in the true Church of Christ 
real union already exists. Our Lord prayed for those whom the 
Father had given Him, that they might be one, and the Father 
granted the prayer: the Lord's own people are one. In this room we 
have an example of how closely we are united in Christ. Some of 
you are more at home in this assembly, taken out of all churches, 
than you are in the churches to which you nominally belong. Our 
union in one body as Episcopalians, Baptists, Presbyterians, or 
Independents, is not the thing which our Lord prayed for; but our 
union _in Himself_. _That_ union we do at this moment enjoy; and 
therefore do we eat of one bread, and drink of one cup, and are 
baptized into one Spirit, at His feet who is to each one of us, 
and so to all of us, altogether lovely.

     "White and ruddy is my Belov?d,
        All His heavenly beauties shine;
     Nature can't produce an object,
        Nor so glorious, so divine;
                He hath wholly
        Won my soul to realms above.

     "Farewell, all ye meaner creatures,
        For in Him is every store;
     Wealth, or friends, or darling beauty,
        Shall not draw me any more;
                In my Saviour
        I have found a glorious whole."




              THE SPICED WINE OF MY POMEGRANATE;

              OR, THE COMMUNION OF COMMUNICATION.

     I would cause Thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my 
pomegranate."--Solomon's Song viii. 2.

     And of His fulness have all we received, and grace for 
grace."--John i. 16.


THE immovable basis of communion having been laid of old in the 
eternal union which subsisted between Christ and His elect, it 
only needed a fitting occasion to manifest itself in active 
development. The Lord Jesus had for ever delighted Himself with 
the sons of men, and he ever stood prepared to reveal and 
communicate that delight to His people; but they were incapable of 
returning His affection or enjoying His fellowship, having fallen 
into a state so base and degraded, that they were dead to Him, and 
careless concerning Him. It was therefore needful that something 
should be done for them, and in them, before they could hold 
converse with Jesus, or feel concord with Him. This preparation 
being a work of grace and a result of previous union, Jesus 
determined that, even in the preparation for communion, there 
should be communion. If they must be washed before they could 
fully converse with Him, He would commune with them in the 
washing; and if they must be enriched by gifts before they could 
have full access to Him, He would commune with them in the giving. 
He has therefore established a fellowship in imparting His grace, 
and in partaking of it.
     This order of fellowship we have called "The Communion of 
Communication," and we think that a few remarks will prove that we 
are not running beyond the warranty of Scripture.
     The word koinwnia, or communion, is frequently employed by 
inspired writers in the sense of communication or contribution. 
When, in our English version, we read, "For it hath pleased them 
of Macedonia and Achaia to make _a certain contribution_ for the 
poor saints which are at Jerusalem" (Romans xv. 26), it is 
interesting to know that the word koinonia used, as if to show 
that the generous gifts of the Church in Achaia to its sister 
Church at Jerusalem was a communion. Calvin would have us notice 
this, because, saith he, "The word here employed well expresses 
the feeling by which it behoves us to succour the wants of our 
brethren, even because there is to be a common and mutual regard 
on account of the union of the body." He would not have strained 
the text if he had said that there was in the contribution the 
very essence of communion. Gill, in his commentary upon the above 
verse, most pertinently remarks, "Contribution, or communion, as 
the word signifies, it being one part of the communion of churches 
and of saints to relieve their poor by communicating to them." The 
same word is employed in Hebrews xiii. 16, and is there translated 
by the word "_communicate_." "But to do good, and to communicate, 
forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." It 
occurs again in 2 Corinthians ix. 13, "And for your liberal 
_distribution_ unto them, and unto all men;" and in numerous other 
passages the careful student will observe the word in various 
forms, representing the ministering of the saints to one another 
as an act of fellowship. Indeed, at the Lord's supper, which is 
the embodiment of communion, we have ever been wont to make a 
special contribution for the poor of the flock, and we believe 
that in the collection there is as true and real an element of 
communion as in the partaking of the bread and wine. The giver 
holds fellowship with the receiver when he bestows his benefaction 
for the Lord's sake, and because of the brotherhood existing 
between him and his needy friends. The teacher holds communion 
with the young disciple when he labours to instruct him in the 
faith, being moved thereto by a spirit of Christian love. He who 
intercedes for a saint because he desires his well-being as a 
member of the one family, enters into fellowship with his brother 
in the offering of prayer. The loving and mutual service of 
church-members is fellowship of a high degree. And let us remember 
that the recipient communes with the benefactor: the communion is 
not confined to the giver, but the heart overflowing with 
liberality is met by the heart brimming with gratitude, and the 
love manifested in the bestowal is reciprocated in the acceptance. 
When the hand feeds the mouth or supports the head, the divers 
members feel their union, and sympathize with one another; and so 
is it with the various portions of the body of Christ, for they 
commune in mutual acts of love.
     Now, this meaning of the word communion furnishes us with 
much instruction, since it indicates the manner in which 
recognized fellowship with Jesus is commenced and maintained, 
namely, by giving and receiving, by _communication_ and reception. 
The Lord's supper is the divinely-ordained exhibition of 
communion, and therefore in it there is the breaking of bread and 
the pouring forth of wine, to picture the free gift of the 
Saviour's body and blood to us; and there is also the eating of 
the one and the drinking of the other, to represent the reception 
of these priceless gifts by us. As without bread and wine there 
could be no Lord's supper, so without the gracious bequests of 
Jesus to us there would have been no communion between Him and our 
souls: and as participation is necessary before the elements truly 
represent the meaning of the Lord's ordinance, so is it needful 
that we should receive His bounties, and feed upon His person, 
before we can commune with Him.
     It is one branch of this mutual communication which we have 
selected as the subject of this address. "Looking unto Jesus," who 
hath delivered us from our state of enmity, and brought us into 
fellowship with Himself, we pray for the rich assistance of the 
Holy Spirit, that we may be refreshed in spirit, and encouraged to 
draw more largely from the covenant storehouse of Christ Jesus the 
Lord.
     We shall take a text, and proceed at once to our delightful 
task. "_And of His fulness have all we received, and grace for 
grace_." (John i. 16.)
     As the life of grace is first begotten in us by the Lord 
Jesus, so is it constantly sustained by Him. We are always drawing 
from this sacred fountain, always deriving sap from this divine 
root; and as Jesus communes with us in the bestowing of mercies, 
it is our privilege to hold fellowship with Him in the receiving 
of them.
     There is this difference between Christ and ourselves, He 
never gives without manifesting fellowship, but we often receive 
in so ill a manner that communion is not reciprocated, and we 
therefore miss the heavenly opportunity of its enjoyment. We 
frequently receive grace insensibly, that is to say, the sacred 
oil runs through the pipe, and maintains our lamp, while we are 
unmindful of the secret influence. We may also be the partakers of 
many mercies which, through our dulness, we do not perceive to be 
mercies at all; and at other times well-known blessings are 
recognized as such, but we are backward in tracing them to their 
source in the covenant made with Christ Jesus.
     Following out the suggestion of our explanatory preface, we 
can well believe that when the poor saints received the 
contribution of their brethren, many of them did in earnest 
acknowledge the fellowship which was illustrated in the generous 
offering, but it is probable that some of them merely looked upon 
the material of the gift, and failed to see the spirit moving in 
it. Sensual thoughts in some of the receivers might possibly, at 
the season when the contribution was distributed, have 
mischievously injured the exercise of spirituality; for it is 
possible that, after a period of poverty, they would be apt to 
give greater prominence to the fact that their need was removed 
than to the sentiment of fellowship with their sympathizing 
brethren. They would rather rejoice over famine averted than 
concerning fellowship manifested. We doubt not that, in many 
instances, the mutual benefactions of the Church fail to reveal 
our fellowship to our poor brethren, and produce in them no 
feelings of communion with the givers.
     Now this sad fact is an illustration of the yet more 
lamentable statement which we have made. We again assert that, as 
many of the partakers of the alms of the Church are not alive to 
the communion contained therein, so the Lord's people are never 
sufficiently attentive to fellowship with Jesus in receiving His 
gifts, but many of them are entirely forgetful of their privilege, 
and all of them are too little aware of it. Nay, worse than this, 
how often doth the believer pervert the gifts of Jesus into food 
for his own sin and wantonness! We are not free from the 
fickleness of ancient Israel, and well might our Lord address us 
in the same language: "Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon 
thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread My skirt 
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and 
entered into a covenant with Thee, saith the Lord God, and thou 
becamest Mine. Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly 
washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil. I 
clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers? 
skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee 
with silk. I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets 
upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck. And I put a jewel on thy 
forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon 
thine head. Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy 
raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou 
didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding 
beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. And thy renown 
went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect 
through My comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord 
God. But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the 
harlot because of thy renown." (Ezek. xvi. 8-16.)
     Ought not the mass of professors to confess the truth of this 
accusation? Have not the bulk of us most sadly departed from the 
purity of our love? We rejoice, however, to observe a remnant of 
choice spirits, who live near the Lord, and know the sweetness of 
fellowship. These receive the promise and the blessing, and so 
digest them that they become good blood in their veins, and so do 
they feed on their Lord that they grow up into Him. Let us imitate 
those elevated minds, and obtain their high delights. There is no 
reason why the meanest of us should not be as David, and David as 
the servant of the Lord. We may now be dwarfs, but growth is 
possible; let us therefore aim at a higher stature. Let the 
succeeding advice be followed, and, the Holy Spirit helping us, we 
shall have attained thereto.
     _Make every time of need a time of embracing thy Lord_. Do 
not leave the mercy-seat until thou hast clasped Him in thine 
arms. In every time of need He has promised to give thee grace to 
help, and what withholdeth thee from obtaining sweet fellowship as 
a precious addition to the promised assistance? Be not as the 
beggar who is content with the alms, however grudgingly it may be 
cast to him; but, since thou art a near kinsman, seek a smile and 
a kiss with every benison He gives thee. Is He not better than His 
mercies? What are they without Him? Cry aloud unto Him, and let 
thy petition reach His ears, "O my Lord, it is not enough to be a 
partaker of Thy bounties, I must have Thyself also; if Thou dost 
not give me Thyself with Thy favours, they are but of little use 
to me! O smile on me, when Thou blessest me, for else I am still 
unblest! Thou puttest perfume into all the flowers of Thy garden, 
and fragrance into Thy spices; if Thou withdrawest Thyself, they 
are no more pleasant to me. Come, then, my Lord, and give me Thy 
love with Thy grace." Take good heed, Christian, that thine own 
heart is in right tune, that when the fingers of mercy touch the 
strings, they may resound with full notes of communion. How sad is 
it to partake of favour without rejoicing in it! Yet such is often 
the believer's case. The Lord casts His lavish bounties at our 
doors, and we, like churls, scarcely look out to thank Him. Our 
ungrateful hearts and unthankful tongues mar our fellowship, by 
causing us to miss a thousand opportunities for exercising it.
     If thou wouldst enjoy communion with the Lord Jesus in the 
reception of His grace, _endeavor to be always sensibly drawing 
supplies from Him_. Make thy needs public in the streets of thine 
heart, and when the supply is granted, let all the powers of thy 
soul be present at the reception of it. Let no mercy come into 
thine house unsung. Note in thy memory the list of thy Master's 
benefits. Wherefore should the Lord's bounties be hurried away in 
the dark, or buried in forgetfulness? Keep the gates of thy soul 
ever open, and sit thou by the wayside to watch the treasures of 
grace which God the Spirit hourly conveys into thy heart from 
Jehovah--Jesus, thy Lord.
     Never let an hour pass without drawing upon the bank of 
heaven. If all thy wants seem satisfied, look steadfastly until 
the next moment brings another need, and then delay not, but with 
this warrant of necessity, hasten to thy treasury again. Thy 
necessities are so numerous that thou wilt never lack a reason for 
applying to the fulness of Jesus; but if ever such an occasion 
should arise, enlarge thine heart, and then there will be need of 
more love to fill the wider space. But do not allow any 
supposititious riches of thine own to suspend thy daily receivings 
from the Lord Jesus. You have constant need of Him. You need His 
intercession, His upholding, His sanctification; you need that He 
should work all your works in you, and that He should preserve you 
unto the day of His appearing. There is not one moment of your 
life in which you can do without Christ. Therefore be always at 
His door, and the wants which you bemoan shall be remembrances to 
turn your heart unto your Saviour. Thirst makes the heart pant for 
the waterbrooks, and pain reminds man of the physician. Let your 
wants conduct you to Jesus, and may the blessed Spirit reveal Him 
unto you while He lovingly affords you the rich supplies of His 
love! Go, poor saint, let thy poverty be the cord to draw thee to 
thy rich Brother. Rejoice in the infirmity which makes room for 
grace to rest upon thee, and be glad that thou hast constant needs 
which compel thee perpetually to hold fellowship with thine 
adorable Redeemer.
     Study thyself, seek out thy necessities, as the housewife 
searches for chambers where she may bestow her summer fruits. 
Regard thy wants as rooms to be filled with more of the grace of 
Jesus, and suffer no corner to be unoccupied. Pant after more of 
Jesus. Be covetous after Him. Let all the past incite thee to seek 
greater things. Sing the song of the enlarged heart,--

     "All this is not enough: methinks I grow
     More greedy by fruition; what I get
        Serves but to set
     An edge upon my appetite;
     And all Thy gifts invite
        My pray'rs for more."

     Cry out to the Lord Jesus to fill the dry beds of thy rivers 
until they overflow, and then empty thou the channels which have 
hitherto been filled with thine own self-sufficiency, and beseech 
Him to fill these also with His superabundant grace. If thy heavy 
trials sink thee deeper in the flood of His consolations, be glad 
of them; and if thy vessel shall be sunken up to its very 
bulwarks, be not afraid. I would be glad to feel the mast-head of 
my soul twenty fathoms beneath the surface of such an ocean; for, 
as Rutherford said, "Oh, to be over the ears in this well! I would 
not have Christ's love entering into me, but I would enter into 
it, and be swallowed up of that love." Cultivate an insatiable 
hunger and a quenchless thirst for this communion with Jesus 
through His communications. Let thine heart cry for ever, "Give, 
give," until it is filled in Paradise.

     "O'ercome with Jesu's condescending love,
     Brought into fellowship with Him and His,
     And feasting with Him in His house of wine,
     I'm sick of love,--and yet I pant for more
     Communications from my loving Lord.
     Stay me with flagons full of choicest wine,
     Press'd from His heart upon Mount Calvary,
     To cheer and comfort my love-conquer'd soul.
        *       *       *       Thyself I crave!
     Thy presence is my life, my joy, my heav'n,
     And all, without Thyself, is dead to me.
     Stay me with flagons, Saviour, hear my cry,
     Let promises, like apples, comfort me;
     Apply atoning blood, and cov'nant love,
     Until I see Thy face among the guests
     Who in Thy Father's kingdom feast."
                        (Nymphas, by JOSEPH IRONS.)

     This is the only covetousness which is allowable: but this is 
not merely beyond rebuke, it is worthy of commendation. O saints, 
be not straitened in your own bowels, but enlarge your desires, 
and so receive more of your Saviour's measureless fulness! I 
charge thee, my soul, thus to hold continual fellowship with thy 
Lord, since He invites and commands thee thus to partake of His 
riches.
     _Rejoice thyself in benefits received_. Let the satisfaction 
of thy spirit overflow in streams of joy. When the believer 
reposes all his confidence in Christ, and delights himself in Him, 
there is an exercise of communion. If he forgetteth his psalm-
book, and instead of singing is found lamenting, the mercies of 
the day will bring no communion. Awake, O music! stir up thyself, 
O my soul, be glad in the Lord, and exceedingly rejoice! Behold 
His favours, rich, free, and continual; shall they be buried in 
unthankfulness? Shall they be covered with a winding-sheet of 
ingratitude? No! I will praise Him. I must extol Him. Sweet Lord 
Jesus, let me kiss the dust of Thy feet, let me lose myself in 
thankfulness, for Thy thoughts unto me are precious, how great is 
the sum of them! Lo, I embrace Thee in the arms of joy and 
gratitude, and herein I find my soul drawn unto Thee!
     This is a blessed method of fellowship. It is kissing the 
divine lip of benediction with the sanctified lip of affection. 
Oh, for more rejoicing grace, more of the songs of the heart, more 
of the melody of the soul!
     _Seek to recognize the source of thy mercies as lying alone 
in Him who is our Head_. Imitate the chicken, which, every time it 
drinketh of the brook, lifts up its head to heaven, as if it would 
return thanks for every drop. If we have anything that is 
commendable and gracious, it must come from the Holy Spirit, and 
that Spirit is first bestowed on Jesus, and then through Him on 
us. The oil was first poured on the head of Aaron, and thence it 
ran down upon his garments. Look on the drops of grace, and 
remember that they distil from the Head, Christ Jesus. All thy 
rays are begotten by this Sun of Righteousness, all thy showers 
are poured from this heaven, all thy fountains spring from this 
great and immeasurable depth. Oh, for grace to see the hand of 
Jesus on every favour! So will communion be constantly and firmly 
in exercise. May the great Teacher perpetually direct us to Jesus 
by making the mercies of the covenant the handposts on the road 
which leadeth to Him. Happy is the believer who knows how to find 
the secret abode of his Beloved by tracking the footsteps of His 
loving providence: herein is wisdom which the casual observer of 
mere second causes can never reach. Labour, O Christian, to follow 
up every clue which thy Master's grace affords thee!
     _Labour to maintain a sense of thine entire dependence upon 
His good will and pleasure for the continuance of thy richest 
enjoyments_. Never try to live on the old manna, nor seek to find 
help in Egypt. All must come from Jesus, or thou art undone for 
ever. Old anointings will not suffice to impart unction to our 
spirit; thine head must have fresh oil poured upon it from the 
golden horn of the sanctuary, or it will cease from its glory. To-
day thou mayest be upon the summit of the mount of God; but He who 
has put thee there must keep thee there, or thou wilt sink far 
more speedily than thou dreamest. Thy mountain only stands firm 
when He settles it in its place; if He hide His face, thou wilt 
soon be troubled. If the Saviour should see fit, there is not a 
window through which thou seest the light of heaven which he could 
not darken in an instant. Joshua bade the sun stand still, but 
Jesus can shroud it in total darkness. He can withdraw the joy of 
thine heart, the light of thine eyes, and the strength of thy 
life; in His hand thy comforts lie, and at His will they can 
depart from thee. Oh! how rich the grace which supplies us so 
continually, and doth not refrain itself because of our 
ingratitude! O Lord Jesus, we would bow at Thy feet, conscious of 
our utter inability to do aught without Thee, and in every favour 
which we are privileged to receive, we would adore Thy blessed 
name, and acknowledge Thine unexhausted love!
     _When thou hast received much, admire the all-sufficiency 
which still remaineth undiminished_, thus shall you commune with 
Christ, not only in what you obtain from Him, but also in the 
superabundance which remains treasured up in Him. Let us ever 
remember that giving does not impoverish our Lord. When the 
clouds, those wandering cisterns of the skies, have poured floods 
upon the dry ground, there remains an abundance in the storehouse 
of the rain: so in Christ there is ever an unbounded supply, 
though the most liberal showers of grace have fallen ever since 
the foundation of the earth. The sun is as bright as ever after 
all his shining, and the sea is quite as full after all the clouds 
have been drawn from it: so is our Lord Jesus ever the same 
overflowing fountain of fulness. All this is ours, and we may make 
it the subject of rejoicing fellowship. Come, believer, walk 
through the length and breadth of the land, for as far as the eye 
can reach, the land is thine, and far beyond the utmost range of 
thine observation it is thine also, the gracious gift of thy 
gracious Redeemer and Friend. Is there not ample space for 
fellowship _here?_
     _Regard every spiritual mercy as an assurance of the Lord's 
communion with thee_. When the young man gives jewels to the 
virgin to whom he is affianced, she regards them as tokens of his 
delight in her. Believer, do the same with the precious presents 
of thy Lord. The common bounties of providence are shared in by 
all men, for the good Householder provides water for His swine as 
well as for His children: such things, therefore, are no proof of 
divine complacency. But thou hast richer food to eat; "the 
children's bread" is in thy wallet, and the heritage of the 
righteous is reserved for thee. Look, then, on every motion of 
grace in thine heart as a pledge and sign of the moving of thy 
Saviour's heart towards thee. There is His whole heart in the 
bowels of every mercy which He sends thee. He has impressed a kiss 
of love upon each gift, and He would have thee believe that every 
jewel of mercy is a token of His boundless love. Look on thine 
adoption, justification, and preservation, as sweet enticements to 
fellowship. Let every note of the promise sound in thine ears like 
the ringing of the bells of the house of thy Lord, inviting thee 
to come to the banquets of His love. Joseph sent to his father 
asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and good old Jacob 
doubtless regarded them as pledges of the love of his son's heart: 
be sure not to think less of the kindnesses of Jesus.
     _Study to know the value of His favours._ They are no 
ordinary things, no paste jewels, no mosaic gold: they are every 
one of them so costly, that, had all heaven been drained of 
treasure, apart from the precious offering of the Redeemer, it 
could not have purchased so much as the least of His benefits. 
When thou seest thy pardon, consider how great a boon is contained 
in it! Bethink thee that hell had been thine eternal portion 
unless Christ had plucked thee from the burning! When thou art 
enabled to see thyself as clothed in the imputed righteousness of 
Jesus, admire the profusion of precious things of which thy robe 
is made. Think how many times the Man of sorrows wearied Himself 
at that loom of obedience in which He wove that matchless garment; 
and reckon, if thou canst, how many worlds of merit were cast into 
the fabric at every throw of the shuttle! Remember that all the 
angels in heaven could not have afforded Him a single thread which 
would have been rich enough to weave into the texture of His 
perfect righteousness. Consider the cost of thy maintenance for an 
hour; remember that thy wants are so large, that all the granaries 
of grace that all the saints could fill, could not feed thee for a 
moment.
     What an expensive dependent thou art! King Solomon made 
marvellous provision for his household (1 Kings iv. 22), but all 
his beeves and fine flour would be as the drop of the bucket 
compared with thy daily wants. Rivers of oil, and ten thousand 
rams or fed beasts, would not provide enough to supply the 
necessities of thy hungering soul. Thy least spiritual want 
demands infinity to satisfy it, and what must be the amazing 
aggregate of thy perpetually repeated draughts upon thy Lord! 
Arise, then, and bless thy loving Immanuel for the invaluable 
riches with which He has endowed thee. See what a dowry thy 
Bridegroom has brought to His poor, penniless spouse. He knows the 
value of the blessings which He brings thee, for He has paid for 
them out of His heart's richest blood; be not thou so ungenerous 
as to pass them over as if they were but of little worth. Poor men 
know more of the value of money than those who have always 
revelled in abundance of wealth. Ought not thy former poverty to 
teach thee the preciousness of the grace which Jesus gives thee? 
For remember, there was a time when thou wouldst have given a 
thousand worlds, if they had been thine, in order to procure the 
very least of His abundant mercies.
     _Remember how impossible it would have been for thee to 
receive a single spiritual blessing unless thou hadst been in 
Jesus_. On none of Adam's race can the love of God be fixed, 
unless they are seen to be in union with His Son. No exception has 
ever been made to the universal curse on those of the first Adam's 
seed who have no interest in the second Adam. Christ is the only 
Zoar in which God's Lots can find a shelter from the destruction 
of Sodom. Out of Him, the withering blast of the fiery furnace of 
God's wrath consumes every green herb, and it is only in Him that 
the soul can live. As when the prairie is on fire, men see the 
heavens wrapped in sheets of flame, and in hot haste they fly 
before the devouring element. They have but one hope. There is in 
the distance a lake of water. They reach it, they plunge into it, 
and are safe. Although the skies are molten with the heat, the sun 
darkened with the smoke, and the earth utterly consumed in the 
fire, they know that they are secure while the cooling flood 
embraces them. Christ Jesus is the only escape for a sinner 
pursued by the fiery wrath of God, and we would have the believer 
remember this. Our own works could never shelter us, for they have 
proved but refuges of lies. Had they been a thousand times more 
and better, they would have been but as the spider's web, too 
flail to hang eternal interests upon. There was but one name, one 
sacrifice, one blood, by which we could escape. All other attempts 
at salvation were a grievous failure. For, "though a man could 
scourge out of his body rivers of blood, and in neglect of himself 
could outlast Moses or Elias; though he could wear out his knees 
with prayer, and had his eyes nailed on heaven; though he could 
build hospitals for all the poor on earth, and exhaust the mines 
of India in alms; though he could walk like an angel of light, and 
with the glittering of an outward holiness dazzle the eyes of all 
beholders; nay (if it were possible to be conceived) though he 
should live for a thousand years in a perfect and perpetual 
observation of the whole law of God, if the only exception to his 
perfection were the very least deviation from the law, yet such a 
man as this could no more appear before the tribunal of God's 
justice, than stubble before a consuming fire." How, then, with 
thine innumerable sins, couldst thou escape the damnation of hell, 
much less become the recipient of bounties so rich and large? 
Blessed window of heaven, sweet Lord Jesus, let Thy Church for 
ever adore Thee, as the only channel by which mercies can flow to 
her. My soul, give Him continual praise, for without Him thou 
hadst been poorer than a beggar. Be thou mindful, O heir of 
heaven, that thou couldst not have had one ray of hope, or one 
word of comfort, if thou hadst not been in union with Christ 
Jesus! The crumbs which fall from thy table are more than grace 
itself would have given thee, hadst thou not been in Jesus beloved 
and approved.
     All thou hast, thou hast in Him: in Him chosen, in Him 
redeemed, in Him justified, in Him accepted. Thou art risen in 
Him, but without Him thou hadst died the second death. Thou art in 
Him raised up to the heavenly places, but out of Him thou wouldst 
have been damned eternally. Bless Him, then. Ask the angels to 
bless Him. Rouse all ages to a harmony of praise for His 
condescending love in taking poor guilty nothings into oneness 
with His all-adorable person. This is a blessed means of promoting 
communion, if the sacred Comforter is pleased to take of the 
things of Christ, and reveal them to us as ours, but only ours as 
we are in Him. Thrice-blessed Jesus, let us never forget that we 
are members of Thy mystical body, and that it is for this reason 
that we are blessed and preserved.
     _Meditate upon thee gracious acts which procured thy 
blessings_. Consider the ponderous labours which thy Lord endured 
for thee, and the stupendous sufferings by which He purchased the 
mercies which He bestows. What human tongue can speak forth the 
unutterable misery of His heart, or describe so much as one of the 
agonies which crowded upon His soul? How much less shall any 
finite comprehension arrive at an idea of the vast total of His 
woe! But all His sorrows were necessary for thy benefit, and 
without them not one of thine unnumbered mercies could have been 
bestowed. Be not unmindful that--

     "There's ne'er a gift His hand bestows,
        But cost His heart a groan."

     Look upon the frozen ground of Gethsemane, and behold the 
bloody sweat which stained the soil! Turn to the hall of Gabbatha, 
and see the victim of justice pursued by His clamorous foes! Enter 
the guard-room of the Praetorians, and view the spitting, and the 
plucking of the hair! and then conclude your review upon Golgotha, 
the mount of doom, where death consummated His tortures; and if, 
by divine assistance thou art enabled to enter, in some humble 
measure, into the depths of thy Lord's sufferings, thou wilt be 
the better prepared to hold fellowship with Him when next thou 
receivest His priceless gifts. In proportion to thy sense of their 
costliness will be thy capacity for enjoying the love which is 
centred in them.
     _Above all, and chief of all, never forget that Christ is 
thine_. Amid the profusion of His gifts, never forget that the 
chief gift is Himself, and do not forget that, after all, His 
gifts are but Himself. He clothes thee, but it is with Himself, 
with His own spotless righteousness and character. He washes thee, 
but His innermost self, His own heart's blood, is the stream with 
which the fountain overflows. He feeds thee with the bread of 
heaven, but be not unmindful that the bread is Himself, His own 
body which He gives to be the food of souls. Never be satisfied 
with a less communication than a whole Christ. A wife will not be 
put off with maintenance, jewels, and attire, all these will be 
nothing to her unless she can call her husband's heart and person 
her own. It was the Paschal lamb upon which the ancient Israelite 
did feast on that night that was never to be forgotten. So do thou 
feast on Jesus, and on nothing less than Jesus, for less than this 
will be food too light for thy soul's satisfaction. Oh, be careful 
to eat His flesh and drink His blood, and so receive Him into 
thyself in a real and spiritual manner, for nothing short of this 
will be an evidence of eternal life in thy soul!
     What more shall we add to the rules which we have here 
delivered? There remains but one great exhortation, which must not 
be omitted. _Seek the abundant assistance of the Holy Spirit_ to 
enable you to put into practice the things which we have said, for 
without His aid, all that we have spoken will but be tantalizing 
the lame with rules to walk, or the dying with regulations for the 
preservation of health. O thou Divine Spirit, while we enjoy the 
grace of Jesus, lead us into the secret abode of our Lord, that we 
may sup with Him, and He with us, and grant unto us hourly grace 
that we may continue in the company of our Lord from the rising to 
the setting of the sun! Amen.




                 THE WELL-BELOVED'S VINEYARD.

         AN ADDRESS TO A LITTLE COMPANY OF BELIEVERS,
           IN MR. SPURGEON'S OWN ROOM AT MENTONE.

     "My Well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill."--
Isaiah v. 1.


WE recognize at once that Jesus is here. Who but He can be meant 
by "My Well-beloved"? Here is a word of possession and a word of 
affection,--He is mine, and my Well-beloved. He is loveliness 
itself, the most loving and lovable of beings; and we personally 
love Him with all our heart, and mind, and soul, and strength: He 
is ours, our Beloved, our Well-beloved, we can say no less.
     The delightful relationship of our Lord to us is accompanied 
by words which remind us of our relationship to Him, "My Well-
beloved hath a vineyard," and what vineyard is that but our heart, 
our nature, our life? We are His: and we are His for the same 
reason that any other vineyard belongs to its owner. He made us a 
vineyard. Thorns and briars were all our growth naturally, but He 
bought us with a price, He hedged us about, and set us apart for 
Himself, and then He planted and cultivated us. All within us that 
can bring forth good fruit is of His creating, His tending, and 
His preserving; so that if we be vineyards at all we must be _His_ 
vineyards. We gladly agree that it shall be so. I pray that I may 
not have a hair on my head that does not belong to Christ, and you 
all pray that your every pulse and breath may be the Lord's.
     This happy afternoon I want you to note that this vineyard is 
said to be upon "a very fruitful hill." I have been thinking of 
the advantages of my own position towards the Lord, and lamenting 
with great shamefacedness that I am not bringing forth such fruit 
to Him as my position demands. Considering our privileges, 
advantages, and opportunities, I fear that many of us have need to 
feel great searchings of heart. Perhaps to such the text may be 
helpful, and it will not be without profit to any one of us, if 
the Lord will bless our meditation upon it.
     I. Our first thought, in considering these words, is that our 
position as the Lord's vineyard is a very favourable one: "My 
Well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill." No people 
could be better placed for serving Christ than we are. I hardly 
think that any man is better situated for glorifying God than I 
am. I do not think that any women could be in better positions for 
serving Christ than some of you, dear sisters, now occupy. Our 
heavenly Father has placed us just where He can do the most for 
us, and where we can do the most for Him. Infinite wisdom has 
occupied itself with carefully selecting the soil, and site, and 
aspect of every tree in the vineyard. We differ greatly, and need 
differing situations in order to fruitfulness: the place which 
would suit one might be too trying for another. Friend, the Lord 
has planted you in the right spot: your station may not be the 
best in itself, but it is the best for you. We are in the best 
possible position for some present service at this moment; the 
providence of God has put us on a vantage ground for our immediate 
duty: "My Well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill."
     Let us think of _the times in which we live_ as calling upon 
us to be very fruitful when we compare them with the years gone 
by. Time was when we could not have met thus happily in our own 
room: if we had been taken in the act of breaking bread, or 
reading God's Word, we should have been haled off to prison, and 
perhaps put to death. Our forefathers scarcely dared to lift up 
their voices in a psalm of praise, lest the enemy should be upon 
them. Truly, the lines have fallen unto us in pleasant places; 
yea, we have a goodly heritage, in a very fruitful hill.
     We do not even live in times when error is so rampant as to 
be paramount. There is too much of it abroad; but taking a broad 
view of things, I venture to say that there never was a time when 
the truth had a wider sway than it has now, or when the gospel was 
more fully preached, or when there was more spiritual activity. 
Black clouds of error hover over us; but at the same time we 
rejoice that, from John o' Groat's House to the Land's End, Christ 
is preached by ten thousand voices, and even in the dark parts of 
the earth the name of Jesus is shining like a candle in the house. 
If we had the pick of the ages in which to live, we could not have 
selected a better time for fruitbearing than that which is now 
occurrent: this age is "a very fruitful hill."
     That this is the case some of us know positively, _because we 
have been fruitful._ Look back, brothers and sisters, upon times 
when your hearts were warm, and your zeal was fervent, and you 
served the Lord with gladness. I join with you in those happy 
memories. Then we could run with the swiftest, we could fight with 
the bravest, we could work with the strongest, we could suffer 
with the most patient. The grace of God has been upon certain of 
us in such an unmistakable manner that we have brought forth all 
the fruits of the Spirit. Perhaps to-day we look back with deep 
regret because we are not so fruitful as we once were: if it be 
so, it is well that our regrets should multiply, but we must 
change each one of them into a hopeful prayer. Remember, the vine 
may have changed, but the soil is the same. We have still the same 
motives for being fruitful, and even more than we used to have. 
Why are we not more useful? Has some spiritual phylloxera taken 
possession of the vines, or have we become frost-bitten, or sun-
burnt? What is it that withholds the vintage? Certainly, if we 
were fruitful once, we ought to be more fruitful now. The fruitful 
hill is not exhausted; what aileth us that our grapes are so few?
     We are planted on a fruitful hill, _for we are called to work 
which of all others is the most fruitful_. Blessed and happy is 
the man who is called to the Christian ministry; for this service 
has brought more glory to Christ than any other. You, beloved 
friends, are not called to be rulers of nations, nor inventors of 
engines, nor teachers of sciences, nor slayers of men; but we are 
soul-winners, our work is to lead men to Jesus. Ours is, of all 
the employments in the world, the most fruitful in benefits to men 
and glory to God. If we are not serving God in the gospel of His 
Son with all our might and ability, then we have a heavy 
responsibility resting upon us. "Our Well-beloved hath a vineyard 
in a very fruitful hill:" there is not a richer bit of soil 
outside Immanuel's land than the holy ministry for souls. Certain 
of us are teachers, and gather the young about us while we speak 
of Jesus. This also is choice soil. Many teachers have gathered a 
grand vintage from among the little ones, and have not been a whit 
behind pastors and evangelists in the glory of soul-winning. Dear 
teachers, your vines are planted in a very fruitful hill. But I do 
not confine myself to preachers and teachers; for all of us, as we 
have opportunities of speaking for the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
privately talking to individuals, have also a fertile soil to grow 
in. If we do not glorify God by soul-winning, we shall be greatly 
blamable, since of all forms of service it is most prolific in 
praise of God.
     And what is more, _the very circumstances with which we are 
surrounded_ all tend to make our position exceedingly favourable 
for fruit-bearing. In this little company we have not one friend 
who is extremely poor; but if such were among us, I should say the 
same thing. Christ has gathered some of His choicest clusters from 
the valley of poverty. Many eminent saints have never owned a foot 
of land, but lived upon their weekly wage, and found scant fare at 
that. Yes, by the grace of God, the vale of poverty has blossomed 
as the rose. It so happens, however, that the most of us here have 
a competence, we have all that we need, and something over to give 
to the poor and to the cause of God. Surely we ought to be 
fruitful in almsgiving, in caring for the sick, and in all manner 
of sweet and flagrant influences. "Give me neither poverty nor 
riches," is a prayer that has been answered for most of us; and if 
we do not now give honour unto God, what excuse can we make for 
our barrenness? I am speaking to some who are singularly healthy, 
who are never hindered by aches and pains; and to others who have 
been prospered in business for twenty years at a stretch: yours is 
great indebtedness to your Lord: in your case, "My Well-beloved 
hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill." Give God your strength 
and your wealth, my brother, while they last: see that all His 
care of thee is not thrown away. Others of us seldom know many 
months together of health, but have often had to suffer sorely in 
body; this ought to make us fruitful, for there is much increase 
from the tillage of affliction. Has not the Master obtained the 
richest of all fruit from bleeding vines? Do not His heaviest 
bunches come from vines which have been sharply cut and pruned 
down to the ground? Choice flavours, dainty juices, and delicious 
aromas come mostly from the use of the keen-edged knife of trial. 
Some of us are at our best for fruitbearing when in other respects 
we are at our worst. Thus I might truly say that, whatever our 
circumstances may be, whether we are poor or rich, in health or in 
affliction, each one of our cases has its advantages, and we are 
planted "in a very fruitful hill."
     Furthermore, when I look at our spiritual condition_, I must 
say for myself, and I think for you also, "My Well-beloved hath a 
vineyard in a very fruitful hill." For what has God done for us? 
To change the question,--what has God not done for us? What more 
could He say than to us He hath said? What more could He do than 
to us He hath done? He hath dealt with us like a God. He has loved 
us up from the pit, He has loved us up to the cross, and up to the 
gates of heaven; He has quickened us, forgiven us, and renewed us; 
He dwells in us, comforts us, instructs us, upholds us, preserves 
us, guides us, leads us, and He will surely perfect us. If we are 
not fruitful, to His praise, how shall we excuse ourselves? Where 
shall we hide our guilty heads? Shall yonder sea suffice to lend 
us briny tears wherewith to weep over our ingratitude?
     II. I go a step further, by your leave, and say that our 
position, as the Lord's vineyard, is favourable to the production 
of the fruit which He loves best. I believe that my own position 
is the most favourable for the production of the fruit that the 
Lord loves best in me, and that your position is the same. What is 
this fruit?
     First, it is _faith_. Our Lord is very delighted to see faith 
in His people. The trust which clings to Him with childlike 
confidence is pleasant to His loving heart. Our position is such 
that faith ought to be the easiest thing in the world to us. Look 
at the promises He has given us in His Word: can we not believe 
them? Look at what the Father has done for us in the gift of His 
dear Son: can we not trust Him after that? Our daily experience 
all goes to strengthen our confidence in God. Every mercy asks, 
"Will you not trust Him?" Every want that is supplied cries, "Can 
you not trust Him?" Every sorrow sent by the great Father tests 
our faith, and drives us to Him on whom we repose, and so 
strengthens and confirms our confidence in God. Mercies and 
miseries alike operate for the growth of faith. Some of us have 
been called upon to trust God on a large scale, and that necessity 
has been a great help towards fruit-bearing. The more troubles we 
have, the more is our vine digged about, and the more nourishment 
is laid to its roots. If faith does not ripen under trial, when 
will it ripen? Our afflictions fertilize the soil wherein faith 
may grow.
     Another choice fruit is _love_. Jesus delights in love. His 
tender heart delights to see its love returned. Am I not of all 
men most bound to love the Lord? I speak for each brother and 
sister here, is not that your language? Do you not all say, "Lives 
there a person beneath yon blue sky who ought to love Jesus more 
than I should do?" Each sister soliloquizes, "Sat there ever a 
woman in her chamber who had more reason for loving God than I 
have?" No, the sin which has been forgiven us should make us love 
our Saviour exceeding much. The sin which has been prevented in 
other cases should make us love our Preserver much. The help which 
God has sent us in hours of need, the guidance which He has given 
in times of difficulty, the joy which He has poured into us in 
days of fellowship, and the quiet He has breathed upon us in 
seasons of trial,--all ought to make us love Him. Along our life-
road, reasons for loving God are more numerous than the leaves 
upon the olives. He has hedged us about with His goodness, even as 
the mountains and the sea are round our present resting-place. 
Look backward as far as time endures, and then look far beyond 
that, into the eternity which has been, and you will see the 
Lord's great love set upon us: all through time and eternity 
reasons have been accumulating which constrain us to love our 
Lord. Now turn sharply round, and gaze before you, and all along 
the future faith can see reasons for loving God, golden milestones 
on the way that is yet to be traversed, all calling for our loving 
delight in God.
     Christ is also very pleased with the fruit of _hope_, and we 
are so circumstanced that we ought to produce much of it. The aged 
ought to look forward, for they cannot expect to see much more on 
earth. Time is short, and eternity is near; how precious is a good 
hope through grace! We who are not yet old ought to be exceedingly 
hopeful; and the younger folk, who are just beginning the 
spiritual life, should abound in hope most fresh and bright. If 
any man has expectations greater than I have, I should like to see 
him. We have the greatest of expectations. Have you never felt 
like Mercy in her dream, when she laughed and when Christiana 
asked her what made her laugh, she said that she had had a vision 
of things yet to be revealed?
     Select any fruit of the Spirit you choose, and I maintain 
that we are favourably circumstanced for producing it; we are 
planted upon a very fruitful hill. What a fruitful hill we are 
living in as regards _labour for Christ! _Each one of us may find 
work for the Master; there are capital opportunities around us. 
There never was an age in which a man, consecrated to God, might 
do so much as he can at this time. There is nothing to restrain 
the most ardent zeal. We live in such happy times that, if we 
plunge into a sea of work, we may swim, and none can hinder us. 
Then, too, our labour is made, by God's grace, to be so pleasant 
to us. No true servant of Christ is weary _of_ the work, though he 
may be weary _in_ the work: it is not the work that he ever 
wearies of, for he wishes that he could do ten times more. Then 
our Lord makes our work to be successful. We bring one soul to 
Jesus, and that one brings a hundred. Sometimes, when we are 
fishing for Jesus, there may be few fish, but, blessed be His 
name, most of them enter the net; and we have to live praising and 
blessing God for all the favour with which He regards our labour 
of love. I do think I am right in saying that, for the bearing of 
the fruit which Jesus loves best, our position is exceedingly 
favourable.
     III. And now, this afternoon, at this table, our position 
here is favourable even now to our producing immediately, and upon 
the spot, the richest, ripest, rarest fruit for our Well-beloved. 
Here, at the communion-table, we are at the centre of the truth, 
and at the well-head of consolation. Now we enter the holy of 
holies, and come to the most sacred meeting-place between our 
souls and God.
     Viewed from this table, _the vineyard slopes to the south_, 
for everything looks towards Christ, our Sun. This bread, this 
wine, all set our souls aslope towards Jesus Christ, and He shines 
full upon our hearts, and minds, and souls, to make us bring forth 
much fruit. Are we not planted on a very fruitful hill?
     As we think of His passion for our sake, we feel that_ a wall 
is set about us to the north_, to keep back every sharp blast that 
might destroy the tender grapes. No wrath is dreaded now, for 
Jesus has borne it for us; behold the tokens of His all-sufficient 
sacrifice! No anger of the Lord shall come to our restful spirits, 
for the Lord saith, "I have sworn that I will not be wroth with 
thee, nor rebuke thee." Here, on this table, are the pledges of 
His love unspeakable, and these, like a high wall, keep out the 
rough winds. Surely, we are planted on a very fruitful hill.
     Moreover, _the Well-beloved Himself is among us_. He has not 
let us out to husbandmen, but He Himself doth undertake to care 
for us; and that He is here we are sure, for here is His flesh, 
and here is His blood. You see the outward tokens, may you feel 
the unseen reality; for we believe in His real presence, though 
not in the gross corporeal sense with which worldly spirits blind 
themselves. The King has come into His garden: let us entertain 
Him with our fruits. He who for this vineyard poured out a bloody 
sweat, is now surveying the vines; shall they not at this instant 
give forth a goodly smell? The presence of our Lord makes this 
assembly a very fruitful hill: where He sets His feet, all good 
things flourish.
     Around this table, _we are in a place where others have 
fruited well_. Our literature contains no words more precious than 
those which have been spoken at the time of communion. Perhaps you 
know and appreciate the discourses of Willison, delivered on 
sacramental occasions. Rutherford's communion sermons have a 
sacred unction upon them. The poems of George Herbert, I should 
think, were most of them inspired by the sight of Christ in this 
ordinance. Think of the canticles of holy Bernard, how they flame 
with devotion. Saints and martyrs have been nourished at this 
table of blessing. This hollowed ordinance, I am sure, is a spot 
where hopes grow bright, and hearts grow warm, resolves become 
firm, and lives become fruitful, and all the clusters of our 
soul's fruit ripen for the Lord.
     Blessed be God, _we are where we have ourselves often grown_. 
We have enjoyed our best times when celebrating this sacred 
Eucharist. God grant it may be so again! Let us, in calm 
meditation and inward thought, now produce from our hearts sweet 
fruits of love, and zeal, and hope, and patience; let us yield 
great clusters like those of Eshcol, all for Jesus, and for Jesus 
only. Even now, let us give ourselves up to meditation, gratitude, 
adoration, communion, rapture; and let us spend the rest of our 
lives in glorifying and magnifying the ever-blessed name of our 
Well-beloved whose vineyard we are.

     "While such a scene of sacred joys
     Our raptured eyes and souls employs,
     Here we could sit, and gaze away
     A long, an everlasting day.

     "Well, we shall quickly pass the night,
     To the fair coasts of perfect light;
     Then shall our joyful senses rove
     O'er the dear object of our love.

     "There shall we drink full draughts of bliss,
     And pluck new life from heavenly trees.
     Yet now and then, dear Lord, bestow
     A drop of heaven on worms below."




               REDEEMED SOULS FREED FROM FEAR.

            A TALK WITH A FEW FRIENDS AT MENTONE.

     "Fear not: for I have redeemed thee."--Isaiah xliii. 1.


I WAS lamenting this morning my unfitness for my work, and 
especially for the warfare to which I am called. A sense of 
heaviness came over me, but relief came very speedily, for which I 
thank the Lord. Indeed, I was greatly burdened, but the Lord 
succoured me. The first verse read at the Sabbath morning service 
exactly met my case. It is in Isaiah xliii. 1: "But now thus saith 
the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and He that formed thee, O 
Israel, Fear not." I said to myself, "I am what God created me, 
and I am what He formed me, and therefore I must, after all, be 
the right man for the place wherein He has put me." We may not 
blame our Creator, nor suspect that He has missed His mark in 
forming an instrument for His work. Thus new comfort comes to us. 
Not only do the operations of grace in the spiritual world yield 
us consolation, but we are even comforted by what the Lord has 
done in creation. We are told to cease from our fears; and we do 
so, since we perceive that it is the Lord that made us, and not we 
ourselves, and He will justify His own creating skill by 
accomplishing through us the purposes of His love. Pray, I beseech 
you, for me, the weakest of my Lord's servants, that I may be 
equal to the overwhelming task imposed upon me.
     The next sentence of the chapter is usually most comforting 
to my soul, although on this one occasion the first sentence was a 
specially reviving cordial to me. The verse goes on to say,--

     "Fear not: for I have redeemed thee."

     Let us think for a few minutes of the wonderful depth of 
consolation which lies in this fact. We have been redeemed by the 
Lord Himself, and this is a grand reason why we should never again 
be subject to fear. Oh, that the logic of this fact could be 
turned into practice, so that we henceforth rejoiced, or at least 
felt the peace of God!
     These words may be spoken, first of all, of those frequent 
occasions in which the Lord has redeemed His people out of 
_trouble_. Many a time and oft might our Lord say to each one of 
us, "I have redeemed thee." Out of six, yea, six thousand trials 
He has brought us forth by the right hand of His power. He has 
released us from our afflictions, and brought us forth into a 
wealthy place. In the remembrance of all these redemptions the 
Lord seems to say to us, "What I have done before, I will do 
again. I have redeemed thee, and I will still redeem thee. I have 
brought thee from under the hand of the oppressor; I have 
delivered thee from the tongue of the slanderer; I have borne thee 
up under the load of poverty, and sustained thee under the pains 
of sickness; and I am able still to do the same: wherefore, then, 
dost thou fear? Why shouldst thou be afraid, since already I have 
again and again redeemed thee? Take heart, and be confident; for 
even to old age and to death itself I will continue to be thy 
strong Redeemer."
     I suppose there would be a reference here to the great 
redemption out of Egypt. This word is addressed to the people of 
God under captivity in Babylon, and we know that the Lord referred 
to the Egyptian redemption; for He says in the third verse, "I 
gave Egypt for thy ransom." Egypt was a great country, and a rich 
country, for we read of "all the treasures of Egypt", but God gave 
them for His chosen: He would give all the nations of the earth 
for His Israel. This was a wonderful stay to the people of God: 
they constantly referred to Egypt and the Red Sea, and made their 
national song out of it. In all Israel's times of disaster, and 
calamity, and trial, they joyfully remembered that the Lord had 
redeemed them when they were a company of slaves, helpless and 
hopeless, under a tyrant who cast their firstborn children into 
the Nile, a tyrant whose power was so tremendous that all the 
armies of the world could not have wrought their deliverance from 
his iron hand. The very nod of Pharaoh seemed to the inhabitants 
of Egypt to be omnipotent; he was a builder of pyramids, a master 
of all the sciences of peace and the arts of war. What could the 
Israelites have done against him? Jehovah came to their relief in 
their dire extremity. His plagues followed each other in quick 
succession. The dread volleys of the Lord's artillery confounded 
His foes. At last He smote all the firstborn of Egypt, the chief 
of all their strength. Then was Egypt glad that Israel departed, 
and the Lord brought forth His people with silver and gold. All 
the chivalry of Egypt was overthrown and destroyed at the Red Sea, 
and the timbrels of the daughters of Israel sounded joyously upon 
its shores. This redemption out of Egypt is so remarkable that it 
is remembered even in heaven. The Old Testament song is woven into 
that of the New Covenant; for there they "sing the song of Moses 
the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb." The first 
redeemption was so wonderful a type and prophecy of the other that 
it is no alloy to the golden hymn of eternal glory, but readily 
melts into the same celestial chant. Other types may cease to be 
remembered, but this was so much a fact as well as a type that it 
shall be had in memory for ever and ever. Every Israelite ought to 
have had confidence in God after what He had done for the people 

in redeeming them out of Egypt. To every one of the seed of Jacob 
it was a grand argument to enforce the precept, "Fear not."
     But I take it that the chief reference of these words are to 
that redemption which has been wrought out for us by Him who loved 
us, and washed us from our sins by His own blood. Let us think of 
it for a minute or two before we break the bread and drink of the 
cup of communion.
     The remembrance of this transcendent redemption ought to 
comfort us in all times of _perplexity_. When we cannot see our 
way, or cannot make out what to do, we need not be at all troubled 
concerning it; for the Lord Jehovah can see a way out of every 
intricacy. There never was a problem so hard to solve as that 
which is answered in redemption. Herein was the tremendous 
difficulty--How can God be just, and yet the Saviour of sinners? 
How can He fulfil His threatenings, and yet forgive sin? If that 
problem been left to angels and men, they could never worked it 
out throughout eternity; but God has solved it through freely 
delivering up His own Son. In the glorious sacrifice of Jesus we 
see the justice of God magnified; for He laid sin on the blessed 
Lord, who had become one with His chosen. Jesus identified Himself 
with His people, and therefore their sin was laid upon Him, and 
the sword of the Lord awoke against Him. He was not taken 
arbitrarily to be a victim, but He was a voluntary Sufferer. His 
relationship amounted to covenant oneness with His people, and "it 
behoved Christ to suffer." Herein is a wisdom which must be more 
than equal to all minor perplexities. Hear this, then, O poor soul 
in suspense! The Lord says, "I have redeemed thee. I have already 
brought thee out of the labyrinth in which thou wast lost by sin, 
and therefore I will take thee out of the meshes of the net of 
temptation, and lead thee through the maze of trial; I will bring 
the blind by a way that they know not, and lead them in paths 
which they have not known. I will bring again from Bashan, I will 
bring up My people from the depths of the sea." Let us commit our 
way unto the Lord. Mine is a peculiarly difficult one, but I know 
that my Redeemer liveth, and He will lead me by a right way. He 
will be our Guide even unto death; and after death He will guide 
us through those tracks unknown of the mysterious region, and 
cause us to rest with Him for ever.
     So also, if at any time we are in great _poverty_, or in 
great straitness of means for the Lord's work, and we are, 
therefore, afraid that we shall never get our needs supplied, let 
us cast off such fears as we listen to the music of these words: 
"Fear not: for I have redeemed thee." God Himself looked down from 
heaven, and saw that there was no man who could give to Him a 
ransom for his brother, and each man on his own part was 
hopelessly bankrupt; and then, despite our spiritual beggary, He 
found the means of our redemption. What then? Let us hear the use 
which the Holy Spirit makes of this fact: "He that spared not His 
own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with 
Him also freely give us all things?" We cannot have a want which 
the Lord will not supply. Since God has given us Jesus, He will 
give us, not some things, but "all things." Indeed, all things are 
ours in Christ Jesus. No necessity of his life can for a single 
moment be compared to that dread necessity which the Lord has 
already supplied. The infinite gift of God's own Son is a far 
greater one than all that can be included in the term "all 
things": wherefore, it is a grand argument to the poor and needy, 
"Fear not: for I have redeemed thee." Perplexity and poverty are 
thus effectually met.
     We are at times troubled by a sense of our personal 
_insignificance_. It seems too much to hope that God's infinite 
mind should enter into our mean affairs. Though David said, "I am 
poor and needy, yet the Lord thinketh upon me," we are not always 
quite prepared to say the same. We make our sorrows great under 
the vain idea that they are too small for the Lord to notice. I 
believe that our greatest miseries spring from those little 
worries which we hesitate to bring to our heavenly Father. Our 
gracious God puts an end to all such thoughts as these by saying 
"Fear not for I have redeemed thee." You are not of such small 
account as you suppose. The Lord would never be wasteful of His 
sacred expenditure.
     He bought you with a price, and therefore He sets great store 
by you. Listen to what the Lord says: "Since thou wast precious in 
My sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: 
therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life." It 
is amazing that the Lord should think so much of us as to give 
Jesus for us. "What is man that Thou art mindful of him?" Yet 
God's mind is filled with thoughts of love towards man. Know ye 
not that His only-begotten Son entered this world, and became a 
man? The man Christ Jesus has a name at which every knee shall 
bow, and He is so dear to the Father that, for His sake, His 
chosen ones are accepted, and are made to enjoy the freest access 
to Him. We sing truly,--

     "So near, so very near to God,
        Nearer we cannot be,
     For in the person of His Son
        We are as near as He."

     And now the very hairs of our head are all numbered, and the 
least burden we may roll upon the Lord. Those cares which we ought 
not to have may well cease, for "He careth for us." He that 
redeemed us never forgets us: His wounds have graven us upon the 
palms of His hands, and written our names deep in His side. Jesus 
stoops to our level, for He stooped to bear the cross to redeem 
us. Do not, therefore, be again afraid because of your 
insignificance. "Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, 
My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from 
my God? Hast thou not known? Hast thou not heard, that the 
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, 
fainteth not, neither is weary? There is no searching of His 
understanding. He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have 
no might He increaseth strength." The Lord's memory is toward the 
little in Israel. He carrieth the lambs in His bosom.
     We are liable to fret a little when we think of our 
_changeableness_. If you are at all like me, you are very far from 
being always alike; I am sometimes lifted up to the very heavens, 
and then I go down to the deeps; I am at one time bright with joy 
and confidence, and at another time dark as midnight with doubts 
and fears. Even Elijah, who was so brave, had his fainting fits. 
We are to be blamed for this, and yet the fact remains: our 
experience is as an April day, when shower and sunshine take their 
turns. Amid our mournful changes we rejoice to hear the Lord's own 
voice, saying, "Fear not: for I have redeemed thee." Everything is 
not changeful wave; there is rock somewhere. Redemption is a fact 
accomplished.

     "The Cross, it standeth fast. Hallelujah!"

     The price is paid, the ransom accepted. This is done, and can 
never be undone. Jesus says, "I have redeemed thee." Change of 
feeling within does not alter the fact that the believer has been 
bought with a price, and made the Lord's own by the precious blood 
of Jesus. The Lord God has already done so much for us that our 
salvation is sure in Christ Jesus. Will He begin to build, and 
fail to finish? Will He lay the foundation in the everlasting 
covenant? Will He dedicate the walls with the infinite sacrifice 
of the Lamb of God? Will He give up the choicest treasure He ever 
had, the chosen of God and precious, to be the corner-stone, and 
then not finish the work He has begun? It is impossible. If He has 
redeemed us, He has, in that act, given us the pledge of all 
things.
     See how the gifts of God are bound to this redemption. "I 
have redeemed thee. I have called thee." "For whom He did 
foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of 
His Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. 
Moreover whom He did predestinate, them He also called: and whom 
He called, them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He 
also glorified." Here is a chain in which each link is joined to 
all the rest, so that it cannot be separated. If God had only gone 
so far as to make a promise, He would not have drawn back from it; 
if God had gone as far as to swear an oath by Himself, He would 
not have failed to keep it; but when He went beyond promise and 
oath, and in very deed the sacrifice was slain, and the covenant 
was ratified: why, then it would be blasphemous to imagine that He 
would afterwards disannul it, and turn from His solemn pledge. 
There is no going back on the part of God, and consequently His 
redemption will redeem, and in redeeming it will secure us all 
things. "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" With the 
blood-mark upon us we may well cease to fear. How can we perish? 
How can we be deserted in the hour of need? We have been bought 
with too great a price for our Redeemer to let us slip. Therefore, 
let us march on with confidence, hearing our Redeemer say to us, 
"When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou 
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall 
the flame kindle upon thee." Concerning His redeemed, the Lord 
will say to the enemy, "Touch not Mine anointed, and do My 
prophets no harm." The stars in their courses fight for the 
ransomed of the Lord. If their eyes were opened, they would see 
the mountain full of horses of fire and chariots of fire round 
about them. Oh, how my weary heart prizes redeeming love! If it 
were not for this, I would lay me down, and die. Friends forsake 
me, foes surround me, I am filled with contempt, and tortured with 
the subtlety which I cannot baffle; but as the Lord of all brought 
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the 
sheep, by the blood of the everlasting covenant, so by the blood 
of His covenant doth He loose His prisoners, and sustain the 
hearts of those who tremble at His Word. "O my soul, thou hast 
trodden down strength," for the Lord hath said unto thee, "Fear 
not: for I have redeemed thee."




           JESUS, THE GREAT OBJECT OF ASTONISHMENT.

               A COMMUNION ADDRESS AT MENTONE.

     "Behold, My Servant shall deal prudently, He shall be exalted 
and extolled, and be very high. As many were astonied at Thee; His 
visage was so marred more than any man, and His form more than the 
sons of men; so shall He sprinkle many nations; the kings shall 
shut their mouths at Him: for that which had not been told them 
shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they 
consider."--Isaiah lii. 13-15.


OUR Lord Jesus Christ bore from of old the name of "Wonderful", 
and the word seems all too poor to set forth His marvellous person 
and character. He says of Himself, in the language of the 
prophet,--"Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given Me 
are for signs and for wonders." He is a fountain of astonishment 
to all who know Him, and the more they know of Him, the more are 
they "astonied" at Him. It is an astonishing thing that there 
should have been a Christ at all: the Incarnation is the miracle 
of miracles; that He who is the Infinite should become an infant, 
that He who made the worlds should be wrapt in swaddling-bands, 
remains a fact out of which, as from a hive, new wonders 
continually fly forth. In His complex nature He is so mysterious, 
and yet so manifest, that doubtless all the angels of heaven were 
and are astonished at Him. O Son of God, and Son of man, when 
Thou, the Word, wast made flesh, and dwelt among us, and Thy 
saints beheld Thy glory, it was but natural that many should be 
astonished at Thee!
     Our text seems to say that our Lord was, first,_ a great 
wonder in His griefs_; and, secondly, that He was _a great wonder 
in His glory_.
     I. He was a great wonder in his griefs: "As many were 
astonied at Thee; His visage was so marred more than any man, and 
His form more than the sons of men."
     His visage was marred: no doubt His countenance bore the 
signs of a matchless grief. There were ploughings on His brow as 
well as upon His back; suffering, and brokenness of spirit, and 
agony of heart, had told upon that lovely face, till its beauty, 
though never to be destroyed, was "so" marred that never was any 
other so spoiled with sorrow. But it was not His face only, His 
whole form was marred more than the sons of men. The contour of 
His bodily manhood showed marks of singular assaults of sorrow, 
such as had never bowed another form so low. I do not know whether 
His gait was stooping, or whether His knees tottered, and His walk 
was feeble; but there was evidently a something about Him which 
gave Him the appearance of premature age, since to the Jews He 
looked older than He was, for when He was little more than thirty 
they said unto Him, "Thou art not yet fifty years old." I cannot 
conceive that He was deformed or ungainly; but despite His natural 
dignity, His worn and emaciated appearance marked Him out as "the 
Man of sorrows", and to the carnal eye His whole natural and 
spiritual form had in it nothing which evoked admiration; even as 
the prophet said, "When we shall see Him, there is no beauty that 
we should desire Him." The marring was not of that lovely face 
alone, but of the whole fabric of His wondrous manhood, so that 
many were astonied at Him.
     Our astonishment, when in contemplation we behold our 
suffering Lord, will arise from the consideration of what His 
natural beauty must have been, enshrined as He was from the first 
within a perfect body. Conceived without sin, and so born of a 
pure virgin without taint of hereditary sin, I doubt not that He 
was the flower and glow of manhood as to His form, and from His 
early youth He must have been a joy to His mother's eye. Great 
masters of the olden time expended all their skill upon the holy 
child Jesus, but it is not for the colours of earth to depict the 
Lord from heaven. That "holy thing" which was born of Mary was 
"seen of angels," and it charmed their eyes. Must such loveliness 
be marred? His every look was pure, His every thought was holy, 
and therefore the expression of His face must have been heavenly, 
and yet it must be marred. Poverty must mark it; hunger, and 
thirst, and weariness, must plough it; heart-griefs must seam and 
scar it; spittle must distain it; tears must scald it; smiting 
must bruise it; death must make it pale and bloodless. Well does 
Bernard sing--

     "O sacred Head, once wounded,
        With grief and pain weigh'd down,
     How scornfully surrounded
        With thorns, Thine only crown;
     How pale art Thou with anguish,
        With sore abuse and scorn!
     How does that visage languish,
        Which once was bright as morn!"

     The second astonishment to us must be that he could be so 
marred who had nothing in His character to mar His countenance. 
Sin is a sad disfigurement to faces which in early childhood were 
surpassingly attractive. Passion, if it be indulged in, soon sets 
a seal of deformity upon the countenance. Men that plunge into 
vice bear upon their features the traces of their hearts' volcanic 
fires. We most of us know some withered beings, whose beauty has 
been burned up by the fierce fires of excess, till they are a 
horror to look upon, as if the mark of Cain were set upon them. 
Every sin makes its line on a fair face. But there was no sin in 
the blessed Jesus, no evil thought to mar His natural perfectness. 
No redness of eyes ever came to Him by tarrying long at the wine; 
no unhallowed anger ever flushed His cheek; no covetousness gave 
to His eye a wolfish glance; no selfish care lent to His features 
a sharp and anxious cast. Such an unselfish, holy life as His 
ought to have rendered Him, if it had been possible, more 
beautiful every day. Indulging such benevolence, abiding in such 
communion with God, surely the face of Christ must, in the natural 
order of things, have more and more astonished all sympathetic 
observers with its transcendent charms. But sorrow came to engrave 
her name where sin had never made a stroke, and she did her work 
so effectually that His visage was more marred than that of any 
man, although the God of mercy knows there have been other visages 
that have been worn with pain and anguish past all recognition. I 
need not repeat even one of the many stories of human woe: that of 
our Lord surpasses all.
     Remember that the face of our Well-beloved, as well as all 
His form, must have been an accurate index of His soul. 
Physiognomy is a science with much truth in it when it deals with 
men of truth. Men weaned from simplicity know how to control their 
countenances; the crafty will appear to be honest, the hardened 
will seem to sympathize with the distressed, the revengeful will 
mimic good-will. There are some who continually use their 
countenance as they do their speech, to conceal their feelings; 
and it is almost a point of politeness with them never to show 
themselves, but always to go masked among their fellows.
     But the Christ had learned no such arts. He was so sincere, 
so transparent, so child-like and true, that whatever stirred 
within Him was apparent to those about Him, so far as they were 
capable of understanding His great soul. We read of Him that He 
was "moved with compassion." The Greek word means that He 
experienced a wonderful emotion of His whole nature, He was 
thrilled with it, and His disciples saw how deeply He felt for the 
people, who were as sheep without a shepherd. Though He did not 
commit Himself to men, He did not conceal Himself, but wore His 
heart upon His sleeve, and all could see what He was, and knew 
that He was full of grace and truth. We are, therefore, not 
surprised, when we devoutly consider our Lord's character, that 
His visage and form should indicate the inward agonies of His 
tender spirit; it could not be that His face should be untrue to 
His heart. The ploughers made deep furrows upon His soul as well 
as upon His back, and His heart was rent with inward convulsions, 
which could not but affect His whole appearance. Those eyes saw 
what those around Him could not see; those shoulders bore a 
constant burden which others could not know; and, therefore, His 
countenance and form betrayed the fact. O dear, dear Saviour, when 
we think of Thee, and of Thy majesty and purity, we are again 
astonished that woes should come upon Thee so grievously as to mar 
Thy visage and Thy form!
     Now think, dear friends, what were the causes of this 
marring. It was not old age that had wrinkled His brow, for He was 
still in the prime of life, neither was it a personal sickness 
which had caused decay; much less was it any congenital weakness 
and disease, which at length betrayed itself, for in His flesh 
there was no possibility of impurity, which would, in death, have 
led to corruption. It was occasioned, first, by His constant 
sympathy with the suffering. There was a heavy wear and tear 
occasioned by the extraordinary compassion of His soul. In three 
years it had told upon Him most manifestly, till His visage was 
marred more than that of any other man. To Him there was a kind of 
sucking up into Himself of all the suffering of those whom He 
blessed. He always bore upon Him the burden of mortal woe. We read 
of Christ healing all that were sick, "that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our 
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." Yes, He took those 
infirmities and sicknesses in some mystical way to Himself, just 
as I have heard of certain trees, which scatter health, because 
they themselves imbibe the miasma, and draw up into themselves 
those noxious vapours which otherwise would poison mankind. Thus, 
without being themselves polluted, they disinfect the atmosphere 
around them. This, our Saviour did, but the cost was great to Him. 
You can imagine, living as He did in the midst of one vast 
hospital, how constantly He must have seen sights that grieved and 
pained Him. Moreover, with a nature so pure and loving, He must 
have been daily tortured with the sin, and hypocrisy, and 
oppression which so abounded in His day. In a certain sense, He 
was always laying down His life for men, for He was spent in their 
service, tortured by their sin, and oppressed with their sorrow. 
The more we look into that marred visage, the more shall we be 
astonished at the anguish which it indicated.
     Do not wonder that He was more marred than any man, for He 
was more sensitive than other men. No part of Him was callous, He 
had no seared conscience, no blunted sensibility, no drugged and 
deadened nerve. His manhood was in its glory, in the perfection in 
which Adam was when God made him in His own image, and therefore 
He was ill-housed in such a fallen world. We read of Christ that 
He was "grieved for the hardness of their hearts," "He marvelled 
because of their unbelief," "He sighed deeply in His spirit," "He 
groaned in the spirit, and was troubled." This, however, was only 
the beginning of the marring.
     His deepest griefs and most grievous marring came of _His 
substitutionary work_, while bearing the penalty of our sin. One 
word recalls much of His woe: it is, "Gethsemane." Betrayed by 
Judas, His trusted friend, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, 
"He that eateth bread with Me hath lifted up his heel against Me;" 
deserted even by John, for all the disciples forsook Him and fled; 
not one of all the loved ones with Him: He was left alone. He had 
washed their feet, but they could not watch with Him one hour; and 
in that garden He wrestled with our deadly foe, till His sweat was 
as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground, and as 
Hart puts it, He--

     "Bore all Incarnate God could bear,
     With strength enough, but none to spare."

     I do verily believe that verse to be true. Herein you see 
what marred His countenance, and His form, even while in life. The 
whole of His manhood felt that dreadful shock, when He and the 
prince of darkness, in awful duel, fought it out amidst the gloom 
of the olives on that cold midnight when our redemption began to 
be fully accomplished.
     The whole of His passion marred His countenance and His form 
with its unknown sufferings. I restrain myself, lest this 
meditation should grow too painful. They bound Him, they scourged 
Him, they mocked Him, they plucked off the hair from His face, 
they spat upon Him, and at last they nailed Him to the tree, and 
there He hung. His physical pain alone must have been very great, 
but all the while there was within His soul an inward torment 
which added immeasurably to His sufferings. His God forsook Him. 
"Eloi, Eloi, lama, sabachthani?" is a voice enough to rend the 
rocks, and assuredly it makes us all astonished when, in the 
returning light, we look upon His visage, and are sure that never 
face of any man was so marred before, and never form of any son of 
man so grievously disfigured. Weeping and wondering, astonied and 
adoring, we leave the griefs of our own dear Lord, and with loving 
interest turn to the brighter portion of His unrivalled story.

     "Behold your King! Though the moonlight steals
        Through the silvery sprays of the olive tree,
     No star-gemmed sceptre or crown it reveals,
        In the solemn shade of Gethsemane.
                Only a form of prostrate grief,
                Fallen, crushed, like a broken leaf!
     Oh, think of His sorrow, that we may know
     The depth of love in the depth of woe!

      "Behold your King, with His sorrow crowned,
        Alone, alone in the valley is He!
     The shadows of death are gathering round,
         And the cross must follow Gethsemane.
                Darker and darker the gloom must fall,
                Filled is the cup, He must drink it all!
     Oh, think of His sorrow, that we may know
     His wondrous love in His wondrous woe!"

     II. There is an equal astonishment at His glories. I doubt 
not, if we could see Him now, as He appeared to John in Patmos, we 
should feel that we must do exactly as the beloved disciple did, 
for He deliberately wrote, "When I saw Him, I fell at His feet as 
dead." His astonishment was so great that he could not endure the 
sight. He had doubtless longed often to behold that glorified face 
and form, but the privilege was too much for him. While we are 
encumbered with these frail bodies, it is not fit for us to behold 
our Lord, for we should die with excess of delight if we were 
suddenly to behold that vision of splendour. Oh, for those 
glorious days when we shall lie for ever at His feet, and see our 
exalted Lord!
     "_Behold, My servant shall deal prudently, He shall be 
exalted and extolled, and be very high_." Observe the three words, 
"exalted and extolled, and be very high;" language pants for 
expression. Our Lord is now _exalted_ in being lifted up from the 
grave, lifted up above all angels, and principalities, and powers. 
The Man Christ Jesus is the nearest to the eternal throne, ay, the 
Lamb is before the throne. "And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of 
the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, 
stood a Lamb as it had been slain." He is in His own state and 
person exalted, and then by the praise rendered Him he is 
_extolled_, for he is worshipped and adored by the whole universe. 
All praise goes up before Him now, so that men extol Him, while 
"God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name, which is 
above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the 
earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father." Deep were His sorrows, but 
as high are His joys. It is said that, around many of the lochs in 
Scotland, the mountains are as high as the water is deep; and so 
our Lord's glories are as immeasurable as were His woes. What a 
meditation is furnished by these two-fold and incalculable heights 
and depths! Our text says that He shall "_be very high_." It 
cannot tell us how high. It is inconceivable how great and 
glorious in all respects the Lord Jesus Christ is at this moment. 
Oh, that He may be very high in our esteem! He is not yet exalted 
and extolled in any of our hearts as He deserves to be. I would we 
loved Him a thousand times as much as we do, but our whole heart 
goeth after Him, does it not? Would we not die for Him? Would we 
not set Him on a throne as high as seven heavens, and then think 
that we had not done enough for Him, who is now our all in all, 
and more than all?
     You notice what is said, concerning the Christ, as the most 
astonishing thing of all: "_So shall He sprinkle many nations_." 
Now is it the glory of our risen Lord, at this moment, that His 
precious blood is to save many nations. Before the throne, men of 
all nations shall sing, "Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us 
unto God by Thy blood." Not the English nation alone shall be 
purified by His atoning blood, but many nations shall He sprinkle 
with His reconciling blood, even as Israel of old was sprinkled 
with the blood of sacrifice. We read in the tenth chapter of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, at the twenty-second verse, of "having our 
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience," and this is effected by 
that precious blood by which we have been once purged so 
effectually that we have no more consciousness of sins, but enter 
into perfect peace. The blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes 
of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctified to the purifying 
of the flesh, and much more doth the blood of Christ purge our 
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God.
     The sprinkling of the blood was meant also to confirm the 
covenant: thus Moses "sprinkled both the book and all the people, 
saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined 
unto you." Our Lord Himself said, "This is My blood of the new 
covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." But 
is it not a wonderful thing that He should die as a malefactor on 
the tree, amid scorn and ridicule, and yet that He is this day 
bringing nations into covenant with God? Once so despised, and 
now: so mighty! God has given Him "for a covenant of the people, 
for a light of the Gentiles." Many nations shall by Him be joined 
in covenant with the God of the whole earth. Do not fall into the 
erroneous idea that this world is like a great ship-wrecked 
vessel, soon to go to pieces on an iron-bound coast; but rather 
let us expect the conversion of the world to the Lord Jesus. As a 
reward for the travail of His soul, He shall cause many nations to 
"exult with joy", for so some read the passage; the peoples of the 
earth shall not only be astonished at His griefs, but they shall 
admire His glories, adore His perfections, and be filled with an 
amazement of joy at His coming and kingdom. I can conceive nothing 
in the future too great and glorious to result from the passion 
and death of our Divine Lord.
     Listen to this, "_Kings shall shut their mouths at Him_. 
They shall see such a King as they themselves have never been; 
they speak freely to their brother-kings, but they shall not dare 
to speak to Him, and as for speaking against Him, that will be 
altogether out of the question.

     "Kings shall fall down before Him,
        And gold and incense bring."

     "_For that which had not been told them shall they see_." 
Kings are often out of the reach of the gospel, they do not hear 
it, it is not told to them. They would despise the lowly preacher, 
and little gatherings of believers meeting together for worship; 
they would only listen to stately discourses, which do not touch 
the heart and conscience. The great ones of the earth are usually 
the least likely to know the things of God, for while the poor 
have the gospel preached unto them, princes are more likely to 
hear soft flatteries and fair speeches. The time shall come, 
however, when Caesar shall bow before a real Imperator, and 
monarchs shall behold the Prince of the kings of the earth. "For 
the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God." They shall see 
His majesty, of which they had not even been told.
     "_That which they had not heard shall they consider_." They 
shall be obliged, even on their thrones, to think about the 
kingdom of the King of kings, and they shall retire to their 
closets to confess their sins, and to put on sackcloth and ashes, 
and to give heed to the words of wisdom. "Be wise now, therefore, 
O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth." To-day, the 
humble listen to Christ, but by-and-by the mightiest of the mighty 
shall turn all their thoughts towards Him. He shall gather sheaves 
of sceptres beneath His arm, and crowns shall be strewn at His 
feet; and "He shall reign for ever and ever," and "of the increase 
of His government and peace there shall be no end." If we were 
astonished at the marring of His face, we shall be much more 
astonished at the magnificence of His glory. Upon His throne none 
shall question His supremacy, none shall doubt His loveliness; but 
His enemies shall weep and wail because of Him whom they pierced; 
while He shall be admired in all them that believe. Adorable Lord, 
we long for Thy glorious appearing! We beseech Thee tarry not!

     "Come, and begin Thy reign
        Of everlasting peace;
     Come, take the kingdom to Thyself,
        Great King of Righteousness!"




              BANDS OF LOVE; OR, UNION TO CHRIST.

     "I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I 
was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I 
laid meat unto them."--Hosea xi. 4.


SYSTEMATIC theologians have usually regarded union to Christ under 
three aspects, natural, mystical and federal, and it may be that 
these three terms are comprehensive enough to embrace the whole 
subject, but as our aim is simplicity, let us be pardoned if we 
appear diffuse when we follow a less concise method.
     1. The saints were from the beginning joined to Christ by 
bands of _everlasting love_. Before He took on Him their nature, 
or brought them into a conscious enjoyment of Himself, His heart 
was set upon their persons, and His soul delighted in them. Long 
ere the worlds were made, His prescient eye beheld His chosen, and 
viewed them with delight. Strong were the indissoluble bands of 
love which then united Jesus to the souls whom He determined to 
redeem. Not bars of brass, or triple steel, could have been more 
real and effectual bonds. True love, of all things in the 
universe, has the greatest cementing force, and will bear the 
greatest strain, and endure the heaviest pressure: who shall tell 
what trials the Saviour's love has borne; and how well it has 
sustained them? Never union was more true than this. As the soul 
of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David so that he loved David 
as his own soul, so was our glorious Lord united and joined to us 
by the ties of fervent, faithful love. Love has a most potent 
power in effecting and sustaining union, but never does it display 
its force so well as when we see it bringing the Creator into 
oneness with the creature, the divine into alliance with the 
human. This, then, is to be regarded as the day-spring of union--
the love of Christ embracing in its folds the whole of the elected 
family.
     2. There is, moreover, a _union of purpose_ as well as of 
love. By the first, we have seen that the elect are made one with 
Jesus by the act and will of the Son; by the second, they are 
joined to Him by the ordination and decree of the Father. These 
divine acts are co-eternal. The Son loved and chose His people to 
be His own bride, the Father made the same choice, and decreed the 
chosen ones for ever one with His all-glorious Son. The Son loved 
them, and the Father decreed them His portion and inheritance; the 
Father ordained them to be what the Son Himself did make them.
     In God's purpose they have been eternally associated as parts 
of one design. Salvation was the fore-ordained scheme whereby God 
would magnify Himself, and a Saviour was in that scheme from 
necessity associated with the persons chosen to be saved. The 
scope of the dispensation of grace included both; the circle of 
wisdom comprehended Redeemer and redeemed in its one 
circumference. They could not be dissociated in the mind and will 
of the all-planning Jehovah.

     "'Christ be My first elect,' He said,
     Then chose our souls in Christ, our Head."

     The same Book which contains the names of the heirs of life 
contains the name of their Redeemer. He could not be a Redeemer 
unless souls had been given Him to redeem, nor could they have 
been called the ransomed of the Lord, if He had not engaged to 
purchase them. Redemption, when determined upon by the God of 
heaven, included in it both Christ and His people; and hence, in 
the decree which fixed it, they were brought into a near and 
intimate alliance.
     The foresight of the Fall led the divine mind to provide for 
the catastrophe in which the elect would have perished, had not 
their ruin been prevented by gracious interposition. Hence 
followed as part of the divine arrangement other forms of union, 
which, besides their immediate object in salvation, had doubtless 
a further design of illustrating the condescending alliance which 
Jesus had formed with His chosen. The next and following points 
are of this character.
     3. _Jesus is one with His elect federally_. As every heir of 
flesh and blood has a personal interest in Adam, because he is the 
covenant head and representative of the race as considered under 
the law of works; so, under the law of grace, every redeemed soul 
is one with the Lord from heaven, since He is the Second Adam, the 
Sponsor and Substitute of the elect in the new covenant of love. 
The apostle Paul declares that Levi was in the loins of Abraham 
when Melchizedek met him: it is equally true that the believer was 
in the loins of Jesus Christ, the Mediator, when in old eternity 
the covenant settlements of grace were decreed, ratified, and made 
sure for ever. Thus, whatever Christ hath done, He hath wrought 
for the whole body of His Church. We were crucified in Him, and 
buried with Him (read Col. ii. 10-13), and to make it still more 
wonderful, we are risen with Him, and have even ascended with Him 
to the seats on high (Eph. ii. 6). It is thus that the Church has 
fulfilled the law, and is "accepted _in the Beloved_." It is thus 
that she is regarded with complacency by the just Jehovah, for He 
views her in Jesus, and does not look upon her as separate from 
her covenant Head. As the anointed Redeemer of Israel, Christ 
Jesus has nothing distinct from His Church, but all that He has He 
holds for her. Adam's righteousness was ours as long as he 
maintained it, and his sin was ours the moment that he committed 
it; and, in the same manner, all that the Second Adam is, or does, 
is ours as well as His, seeing that He is our Representative. Here 
is the foundation of the covenant of grace. This gracious system 
of representation and substitution, which moved Justin Martyr to 
cry out, "O blessed change! O sweet permutation!" this, I say, is 
the very groundwork of the gospel of our salvation, and is to be 
received with strong faith and rapturous joy. In every place the 
saints are perfectly one with Jesus.

     "One in the tomb, one when He rose,
     One when He triumph'd o'er His foes,
     One when in heaven He took His seat,
     While seraphs sang all hell's defeat.

     "This sacred tie forbids their fears,
     For all He is or has is theirs;
     With Him, their Head, they stand or fall,
     Their life, their Surety, and their all."

     4. For the accomplishment of the great works of atonement and 
perfect obedience, it was needful that the Lord Jesus should take 
upon Him "the likeness of sinful flesh." Thus, _He became one with 
us in our nature_, for in Holy Scripture all partakers of flesh 
and blood are regarded as of one family. By the fact of common 
descent from Adam, all men are of one race, seeing that "God hath 
made of one blood all nations that dwell upon the face of the 
earth." Hence, in the Bible, man is spoken of universally as "thy 
brother" (Lev. xix. 17; Job xxii. 6; Matt. v. 23, 24; Luke xvii. 
3; Rom. xiv. 10, &c., &c.); and "thy neighbour" (Exod. xx. 16; 
Lev. xix. 13-18; Matt. v. 43; Rom. xiii. 9; James ii. 8); to whom, 
on account of nature and descent, we are required to render 
kindness and goodwill. Now, although our great Melchizedek in His 
divinity is without father, without mother, without descent, 
having neither beginning of days nor end of life, and is both in 
essence and rank at an infinite remove from fallen manhood; yet as 
to His manhood He is to be reckoned as one of ourselves. He was 
born of a woman, He hung upon her breasts, and was dandled upon 
her knee; He grew from infancy to youth and thence to manhood, and 
in every stage He was a true and real partaker of our humanity. He 
is as certainly of the race of Adam as He is divine. He is God 
without fiction or metaphor, and He is man beyond doubt or 
dispute. The Godhead was not humanized, and so diluted; and the 
manhood was not transformed into divinity, and so rendered more 
than human. Never was any man more a portion of His kind than was 
the Son of man, the Man of sorrows and the Acquaintance of grief. 
He is man's Brother, for He bore the whole nature of man. "The 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." He who was very God of 
very God made Himself a little lower than the angels, and took 
upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of 
men.
     This was done with the most excellent design with regard to 
our redemption, inasmuch as it was necessary that, as _man_ had 
sinned, _man_ should suffer; but doubtless it had a further 
motive, the honouring of the Church, and the enabling of her Lord 
to sympathize with her. The apostle most sweetly remarks, 
"Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, 
He also Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death 
He might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the 
devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their 
lifetime subject to bondage" (Heb. ii. 14, 15); and again, "For we 
have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling 
of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, 
yet without sin" (Heb. iv. 15). Thus, in ties of blood, Jesus, the 
Son of man, is one with all the heirs of heaven: "For which cause 
He is not ashamed to call them brethren" (Heb. ii. 11). What 
reason we have here for the strongest consolation and delight, 
seeing that, "Both He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified 
are all of one." We can say of our Lord as poor Naomi said of 
bounteous Boaz, "The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next 
kinsmen." Overwhelmed by the liberality of our blessed Lord, we 
are often led to cry with Ruth, "Why have I found grace in thine 
eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a 
stranger?" and are we not ready to die with wonder when, in answer 
to such a question, He tells us that He is our Brother, bone of 
our bone, and flesh of our flesh?
     If, in all our straits and distresses, we would always 
treasure in our minds the remembrance of our Redeemer's manhood, 
we should never bemoan the absence of a sympathizing heart, since 
we should always have His abundant compassion for our consolation. 
He is no stranger, He is able to enter into the heart's 
bitterness, for He has Himself tasted the wormwood and the gall. 
Let us never doubt His power to sympathize with us in our 
infirmities and sorrows.
     There is one aspect of this subject of our natural union to 
Christ which it were improper to pass over in silence, for it is 
very precious to the believer. While the Lord Jesus takes upon 
Himself our nature (2 Peter i. 4), He restores in us that image of 
God (Gen. i. 27) which was blotted and defaced by the fall of 
Adam. He raises us from the degradation of sin to the dignity of 
perfection. So that, in a two-fold sense, the Head and members are 
of one nature, and not like that monstrous image which 
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream. The head was of fine gold, but 
the belly and the thighs were of brass, the legs of iron, and the 
feet, part of iron and part of clay. Christ's mystical body is no 
absurd combination of opposites; the Head is immortal, and the 
body is immortal, too, for thus the record stands, "Because I 
live, ye shall live also." "As is the heavenly, such are they also 
that are heavenly." "As we have borne the image of the earthy, we 
shall also bear the image of the heavenly:" and this shall in a 
few more years be more fully manifest to us, for "this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality." Such as is the Head, such is the body, and every 
member in particular;--a chosen Head, and chosen members; an 
accepted Head, and accepted members; a living Head, and living 
members. If the Head be of pure gold, all the parts of the body 
are of pure gold also. Thus is there a double union of nature as a 
basis for the closest communion.
     Pause here, and see if thou canst, without ecstatic 
amazement, contemplate the infinite condescension of the Son of 
God in exalting thy wretchedness into blessed union with His 
glory. Thou art so mean that, in remembrance of thy mortality, 
thou mayest say to corruption, "Thou art my father," and to the 
worm, "Thou art my sister;" and yet, in Christ, thou art so 
honoured that thou canst say to the Almighty, "Abba, Father," and 
to the Incarnate God, "Thou art my Brother and my Husband." 
Surely, if relationships to ancient and noble families make men 
think highly of themselves, we have whereof to glory over the 
heads of them all. Lay hold upon this privilege; let not a 
senseless indolence make thee negligent to trace this pedigree, 
and suffer no foolish attachment to present vanities to occupy thy 
thoughts to the exclusion of this glorious privilege, this 
heavenly honour of union with Christ.
     We must now retrace our steps to the ancient mountains, and 
contemplate this union in one of its earliest forms.
     5. _Christ Jesus is also joined unto His people in a mystical 
union_. Borrowing once more from the story of Ruth, we remark that 
Boaz, although one with Ruth by kinship, did not rest until he had 
entered into a nearer union still, namely, that of marriage; and 
in the same manner there is, superadded to the natural union of 
Christ with His people, a mystical union by which He assumes the 
position of Husband, while the Church is owned as His bride. In 
love He espoused her to Himself, as a chaste virgin, long before 
she fell under the yoke of bondage. Full of burning affection, He 
toiled like Jacob for Rachel, until the whole of her purchase-
money had been paid, and now, having sought her by His Spirit, and 
brought her to know and love Him, He awaits the glorious hour when 
their mutual bliss shall be consummated at the marriage-supper of 
the Lamb. Not yet hath the glorious Bridegroom presented His 
betrothed, perfected and complete, before the Majesty of heaven; 
not yet hath she actually entered upon the enjoyment of her 
dignities as His wife and queen; she is as yet a wanderer in a 
world of woe, a dweller in the tents of Kedar; but she is even now 
the bride, the spouse of Jesus, dear to His heart, precious in His 
sight, and united with His person. In love and tenderness, He says 
to her,--

     "Forget thee I will not, I cannot, thy name
     Engraved on My heart doth for ever remain:
     The palms of My hands whilst I look on I see
     The wounds I received when suffering for thee."

     He exercises towards her all the affectionate offices of 
Husband. He makes rich provision for her wants, pays all her 
debts, allows her to assume His name, and to share in all His 
wealth. Nor will He ever act otherwise to her. The word divorce He 
will never mention, for "He hateth putting away." Death must sever 
the conjugal tie between the most loving mortals, but it cannot 
divide the links of this immortal marriage. In heaven they marry 
not, but are as the angels of God; yet is there this one 
marvellous exception to the rule, for in heaven Christ and His 
Church shall celebrate their joyous nuptials. And this affinity, 
as it is more lasting, so is it more near than earthly wedlock. 
Let the love of husband be never so pure and fervent, it is but a 
faint picture of the flame that burns in the heart of Jesus. 
Passing all human union is that mystical cleaving unto the Church, 
for which Christ did leave His Father, and become one flesh with 
her.
     If this be the union which subsists between our souls and the 
person of our Lord, how deep and broad is the channel of our 
communion! This is no narrow pipe through which a thread-like 
stream may wind its way, it is a channel of amazing depth and 
breadth, along whose breadth and length a ponderous volume of 
living water may roll its strength. Behold, He hath set before us 
an open door; let us not be slow to enter. This city of communion 
hath many pearly gates, every several gate is of one pearl, and 
each gate is thrown open to the uttermost that we may enter, 
assured of welcome. If there were but one small loophole through 
which to talk with Jesus, it would be a high privilege to thrust a 
word of fellowship through the narrow door; how much we are 
blessed in having so large an entrance! Had the Lord Jesus been 
far away from us, with many a stormy sea between, we should have 
longed to send a messenger to Him to carry Him our love, and bring 
us tidings from His Father's house; but see His kindness, He has 
built His house next door to ours, nay, more, He takes lodgings 
with us, and tabernacles in poor humble hearts, that so He may 
have perpetual intercourse with us. Oh, how foolish must we be, if 
we do not live in habitual communion with Him! When the road is 
long, and dangerous, and difficult, we need not wonder that 
friends seldom meet each other; but when they live together, shall 
Jonathan forget his David? A wife may, when her husband is upon a 
journey, abide many days without holding converse with him; but 
she could never endure to be separated from him if she knew him to 
be in one of the chambers of their own house. Seek thy Lord, for 
He is near; embrace Him, for He is thy Brother; hold Him fast, for 
He is thine Husband; press Him to thine heart, for He is of thine 
own flesh.
     6. As yet we have only considered the acts of Christ for us, 
whereby He effects and proves His union to us; we must now come to 
_more personal and sensible forms of this great truth_.
     Those who are set apart for the Lord are in due time severed 
from the impure mass of fallen humanity, and are by sovereign 
grace engrafted into the person of the Lord Jesus. This, which we 
call _vital union_, is rather a matter of experience than of 
doctrine; it must be learned in the heart, and not by the head. 
Like every other work of the Spirit, the actual implantation of 
the soul into Christ Jesus is a mysterious and secret operation, 
and is no more to be understood by carnal reason than is the new 
birth of which it is an attendant. Nevertheless, the spiritual man 
discerns it as a most essential thing in the salvation of the 
soul, and he clearly sees how a living union to Christ is the sure 
consequence of the quickening influence of the Holy Spirit, and is 
indeed, in some respects, identical with it.
     When the Lord in mercy passed by and saw us in our blood, He 
first of all said, "Live"; and this He did _first_, because, 
without life, there can be no spiritual knowledge, feeling, or 
motion. Life is one of the absolutely essential things in 
spiritual matters; and until it be bestowed, we are incapable of 
partaking in the things of the kingdom. Now, the life which grace 
confers upon the saints at the moment of their quickening is none 
other than the life of Christ, which, like the sap from the stem, 
runs into us, the branches, and establishes a living connection 
between our souls and Jesus. Faith is the grace which perceives 
this union, and proceeds from it as its firstfruit. It is, to use 
a metaphor from the Canticles, the neck which joins the body of 
the Church to its all-glorious Head.

     "O Faith! thou bond of union with the Lord,
     Is not this office thine? and thy fit name,
     In the economy of gospel types,
     And symbols apposite--the Church's neck;
     Identifying her in will and work
     With Him ascended?"

     Faith lays hold upon the Lord Jesus with a firm and 
determined grasp. She knows His excellence and worth, and no 
temptation can induce her to repose her trust elsewhere; and 
Christ Jesus is so delighted with this heavenly grace, that He 
never ceases to strengthen and sustain her by the loving embrace 
and all-sufficient support of His eternal arms. Here, then, is 
established a living, sensible, and delightful union, which casts 
forth streams of love, confidence, sympathy, complacency, and joy, 
whereof both the bride and Bridegroom love to drink. When the eye 
is clear, and the soul can evidently perceive this oneness between 
itself and Christ, the pulse may be felt as beating for both, and 
the one blood may be known as flowing through the veins of each. 
Then is the heart made exceedingly glad, it is as near heaven as 
it ever can be on earth, and is prepared for the enjoyment of the 
most sublime and spiritual kind of fellowship. This union may be 
quite as true when we are troubled with doubts concerning it, but 
it cannot afford consolation to the soul unless it be indisputably 
proven and assuredly felt; then is it indeed a honeycomb dropping 
with sweetness, a precious jewel sparkling with light. Look well 
to this matter, ye saints of the Most High!




                   "I WILL GIVE YOU REST."

               A COMMUNION ADDRESS AT MENTONE.

          "I will give you rest."--Matthew xi. 28.


WE have a thousand times considered these words as an 
encouragement to the labouring and the laden; and we may, 
therefore, have failed to read them as a promise to ourselves. 
But, beloved friends, we have come to Jesus, and therefore He 
stands engaged to fufil this priceless pledge to us. We may now 
enjoy the promise; for we have obeyed the precept. The faithful 
and true Witness, whose word is truth, promised us rest if we 
would come to Him; and, therefore, since we have come to Him, and 
are always coming to Him, we may boldly say, "O Thou, who art our 
Peace, make good Thy word to us wherein Thou hast said, 'I will 
give you rest.'"
     By faith, I see our Lord standing in our midst, and I hear 
Him say, with voice of sweetest music, first to all of us 
together, and then to each one individually, "I will give you 
rest." May the Holy Spirit bring to each of us the fulness of the 
rest and peace of God! For a few minutes only shall I need your 
attention; and we will begin by asking the question,--
     I. What must these words mean?
     A dear friend prayed this morning that, while studying the 
Scriptures, we might be enabled to read between the lines, and 
beneath the letter of the Word. May we have holy insight thus to 
read our Lord's most gracious language!
     _This promise must mean rest to all parts of our spiritual 
nature_. Our bodies cannot rest if the head is aching, or the feet 
are full of pain; if one member is disturbed, the whole frame is 
unable to rest; and so the higher nature is one, and such intimate 
sympathies bind together all its faculties and powers, that every 
one of them must rest, or none can be at ease, Jesus gives real, 
and, consequently, universal rest to every part of our spiritual 
being.
     _The heart_ is by nature restless as old ocean's waves; it 
seeks an object for its affection; and when it finds one beneath 
the stars, it is doomed to sorrow. Either the beloved changes, and 
there is disappointment; or death comes in, and there is 
bereavement. The more tender the heart, the greater its unrest. 
Those in whom the heart is simply one of the largest valves are 
undisturbed, because they are callous; but the sensitive, the 
generous, the unselfish, are often found seeking rest and finding 
none. To such, the Lord Jesus says, "Come unto Me, and I will give 
you rest." Look hither, ye loving ones, for here is a refuge for 
your wounded love! You may delight yourselves in the Well-beloved, 
and never fear that He will fail or forget you. Love will not be 
wasted, however much it may be lavished upon Jesus. He deserves it 
all, and he requites it all. In loving Him, the heart finds a 
delicious content. When the head lies in His bosom, it enjoys an 
ease which no pillow of down could bestow. How Madame Guyon rested 
amid severe persecutions, because her great love to Jesus filled 
her soul to the brim! O aching heart, O breaking heart, come 
hither, for Jesus saith, "I will give you rest."
     _The conscience_, when it is at all alive and awake, is much 
disturbed because the holy law of God has been broken by sin. Now, 
conscience once aroused is not easily quieted. Neither unbelief 
nor superstition can avail to lull it to sleep; it defies these 
opiates of falsehood, and frets the soul with perpetual annoyance. 
Like the troubled sea, it cannot rest; but constantly casts up 
upon the shore of memory the mire and dirt of past transgressions 
and iniquities. Is this your case? Then Jesus says, "I will give 
you rest." If, at any time, fears and apprehensions arise from an 
awakened conscience, they can only be safely and surely quieted by 
our flying to the Crucified. In the blessed truth of a 
substitution, accepted of God, and fully made by the Lord Jesus, 
our mind finds peace. Justice is honoured, and law is vindicated, 
in the sacrifice of Christ. Since God is satisfied, I may well be 
so. Since the Father has raised Jesus from the dead, and set Him 
at His own right hand, there can be no question as to His 
acceptance; and, consequently, all who are in Him are accepted 
also. We are under no apprehension now as to our being condemned; 
Jesus gives us rest, by enabling us to utter the challenge, "Who 
is he that condemneth?" and to give the reassuring answer, "Christ 
hath died."
     _The intellect_ is another source of unrest; and in these 
times it operates with special energy towards labour and travail 
of mind. Doubts, stinging like mosquitoes, are suggested by almost 
every page of the literature of the day. Most men are drifting, 
like vessels which have no anchors, and these come into collision 
with us. How can we rest? This scheme of philosophy eats up the 
other; this new fashion of heresy devours the last. Is there any 
foundation? Is anything true? Or is it all romance, and are we 
doomed to be the victims of an ever-changing lie? O soul, seek not 
a settlement by learning of men; but come and learn of Jesus, and 
thou shalt find rest! Believe Jesus, and let all the Rabbis 
contradict. The Son of God was made flesh, He lived, He died, He 
rose again, He lives, He loves; this is true, and all that He 
teaches in His Word is assured verity; the rest may blow away, 
like chaff before the wind. A mind in pursuit of truth is a dove 
without a proper resting-place for the sole of its foot, till it 
finds its rest in Jesus, the true Noah.
     Next, _these words mean rest about all things_. He who is 
uneasy about anything has not found rest. A thousand thorns and 
briars grow on the soil of this earth, and no man can happily 
tread life's ways unless his feet are shod with that preparation 
of the gospel of peace which Jesus gives. In Christ, we are at 
rest as to our duties; for He instructs and helps us in them. In 
Him, we are at rest about our trials; for He sympathizes with us 
in them. With His love, we are restful as to the movements of 
Providence; for His Father loves us, and will not suffer anything 
to harm us. Concerning the past, we rest in His forgiving love; as 
to the present, it is bright with His loving fellowship; as to the 
future, it is brilliant with His expected Advent. This is true of 
the little as well as of the great. He who saves us from the 
battle-axe of Satanic temptation, also extracts the thorn of a 
domestic trial. We may rest in Jesus as to our sick child, as to 
our business trouble, or as to grief of any kind. He is our 
Comforter in all things, our Sympathizer in every form of 
temptation. Have you such all-covering rest? If not, why not? 
Jesus gives it; why do you not partake of it? Have you something 
which you could not bring to Him? Then, fly from it; for it is no 
fit thing for a believer to possess. A disciple should know 
neither grief nor joy which he could not reveal to his Lord.
     _This rest_, we may conclude, _must be a very wonderful one_, 
since Jesus gives it. His hands give not by pennyworths and 
ounces; he gives golden gifts, in quantity immeasurable. It is 
Jesus who gives the peace of God which passeth all understanding. 
It is written, "Great peace have they which love Thy law;" what 
peace must they have who love God's Son! There are periods when 
Jesus gives us a heavenly Elysium of rest; we cannot describe the 
divine repose of our hearts at such times. We read, in the 
Gospels, that when Jesus hushed the storm, "there was a great 
calm," not simply "a calm", but a great calm, unusual, absolute, 
perfect, memorable. It reminds us of the stillness which John 
describes in the Revelation: "I saw four angels standing on the 
four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, 
that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on 
any tree;" not a ripple stirred the waters, not a leaf moved on 
the trees.
     Assuredly, our Lord has given a blessed rest to those who 
trust Him, and follow Him. They are often unable to inform others 
as to their deep peace, and the reasons upon which it is founded; 
but they know it, and it brings them an inward wealth compared 
with which the fortune of an ungodly millionaire is poverty 
itself. May we all know to the full, by happy, personal 
experience, the meaning of our Saviour's promise, "I will give you 
rest"!
     II. But now, in the second: place, let us ask,--Why should we 
have this rest?
     The first answer is in our text. We should enjoy this rest 
_because Jesus gives it_. As He gives it, we ought to take it. 
Because He gives it, we _may_ take it. I have known some 
Christians who have thought that it would be presumption on their 
part to take this rest; so they have kept fluttering about, like 
frightened birds, weary with their long flights, but not daring to 
fold their tired wings, and rest. If there is any presumption in 
the case, let us not be so presumptuous as to think that we know 
better than our Lord. He gives us rest: for that reason, if for no 
other, let us take it, promptly and gratefully. "Rest in the Lord, 
and wait patiently for Him." Say with David, "My heart is fixed, O 
God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise."

     "Now rest, my long-divided heart,
     Fix'd on this blissful centre, rest."

     Next, we should take the rest that Jesus gives, _because it 
will refresh us_. We are often weary; sometimes we are weary in 
God's work, though I trust we are never weary of it. There are 
many things to cause us weariness: sin, sorrow, the worldliness of 
professors, the prevalence of error in the Church, and so on. 
Often, we are like a tired child, who can hold up his little head 
no longer. What does he do? Why, he just goes to sleep in his 
mother's arms! Let us be as wise as the little one; and let us 
rest in our loving Saviour's embrace. The poet speaks of--

     "Tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep;"

     and so it is. Sometimes, the very best thing a Christian man 
can do is, literally, to go to sleep. When he wakes, he will be so 
refreshed, that he will seem to be in a new world. But 
spiritually, there is no refreshing like that which comes from the 
rest which Christ gives. As Isaiah said, "This is the rest 
wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest: and this is the 
refreshing." Dr. Bonar's sweet hymn, which is so suitable for a 
sinner coming to Christ for the first time, is just as appropriate 
for a weary saint returning to his Saviour's arms; for he, too, 
can sing,--

     "I heard the voice of Jesus say,
        'Come unto Me, and rest;
     Lay down, thou weary one, lay down
        Thy head upon My breast.'
     I came to Jesus as I was,
        Weary, and worn, and sad:
     I found in Him a resting-place,
        And He has made me glad."

     Another reason why we should have this rest is, that _it will 
enable us to concentrate all our faculties_. Many, who might be 
strong servants of the Lord, are very weak, because their energies 
are not concentrated upon one object. They do not say with Paul, 
"This one thing I do." We are such poor creatures that we cannot 
occupy our minds with more than one subject, at a time. Why, even 
the buzzing of a fly, or the trumpeting of a mosquito, would be 
quite sufficient to take our thoughts away from our present holy 
service! As long as we have any burden resting on our shoulders, 
we cannot enjoy perfect rest; and as long as there is any burden 
on our conscience or heart, we cannot have rest of soul. How are 
we to be freed from these burdens? Only by yielding ourselves 
wholly to the Great Burden-Bearer, who says, "Come unto Me, and, I 
will give you rest." Possessing this rest, all our faculties will 
be centred and focussed upon one object, and with undivided hearts 
we shall seek God's glory.
     Having obtained this rest, _we shall be able to testify for 
our Lord_. I remember, when I first began to teach in a Sunday-
school, that I was speaking one day to my class upon the words, 
"He that believeth on Me hath everlasting life." I was rather 
taken by surprise when one of the boys said to me, "Teacher, have 
_you_ got everlasting life?" I replied, "I hope so." The scholar 
was not satisfied with my answer, so he asked another question, 
"But, teacher, don't you _know?_" The boy was right; there can be 
no true testimony except that which springs from assured 
conviction of our own safety and joy in the Lord. We speak that we 
do know; we believe, and therefore speak. Rest of heart, through 
coming to Christ, enables us to invite others to Him with great 
confidence, for we can tell them what heavenly peace He has given 
to us. This will enable us to put the gospel very attractively, 
for the evidence of our own experience will help others to trust 
the Lord for themselves. With the beloved apostle John, we shall 
be able to say to our hearers, "That which was from the beginning, 
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we 
have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; 
(for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear 
witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the 
Father, and was manifested unto us;) that which we have seen and 
heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with 
us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son 
Jesus Christ."
     Once more, _this rest is necessary to our growth_. The lily 
in the garden is not taken up and transplanted two or three times 
a day; that would be the way to prevent all growth. But it is kept 
in one place, and tenderly nurtured. It is by keeping it quite 
still that the gardener helps it to attain to perfection. A child 
of God would grow much more rapidly if he would but rest in one 
place instead of being always on the move. "In returning and rest 
shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength." Martha was cumbered about much serving; but Mary sat at 
Jesus' feet. It is not difficult to tell which of them would be 
the more likely to grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.
     This is a tempting theme, but I must not linger over it, as 
we must come to the communion. I will give only one more answer to 
the question, "Why should we have this rest?" _It will prepare us 
for heaven_. I was reading a book, the other day, in which I met 
with this expression,--"The streets of heaven begin on earth." 
That is true; heaven is not so far away as some people think. 
Heaven is the place of perfect holiness, the place of sinless 
service, the place of eternal glory; and there is nothing that 
will prepare us for heaven like this rest that Jesus gives. Heaven 
must be in us before we are in heaven; and he who has this rest 
has heaven begun below. Enoch was virtually in heaven while he 
walked with God on the earth, and he had only to continue that 
holy walk to find himself actually in heaven. This world is part 
of our Lord's great house, of which heaven is the upper story. 
Some of us may hear the Master's call, "Come up higher," sooner 
than we think; and then, with we rest _in_ Christ, there we shall 
rest _with_ Christ, The more we have of this blessed rest now, the 
better shall we be prepared for the rest that remaineth to the 
people of God, that eternal "keeping of a Sabbath" in the Paradise 
above.
     III. I have left myself only a minute for the answers to my 
third question,--How can we obtain this rest?
     First, by _coming to Christ_. He says, "Come unto Me, . . . 
and I will give you rest." I trust that all in this little company 
have come to Christ by faith; now let us come to Him in blessed 
fellowship and communion at His table. Let us keep on coming to 
Him, as the apostle says, "to whom coming," continually coming, 
and never going away. When we wake in the morning, let us come to 
Christ in the act of renewed communion with Him; all the day long, 
let us keep on coming to Him even while we are occupied with the 
affairs of this life; and at night, let our last waking moments be 
spent in coming to Jesus. Let us come to Christ by searching the 
Scriptures, for we shall find Him there on almost every page. Let 
us come to Christ in our thoughts, desires, aspirations wishes; so 
shall the promise of the text be fulfilled to us, "I will give you 
rest."
      Next, we obtain rest by _yielding to Christ_. "Take My yoke 
upon you, . . . and ye shall find rest unto your souls." Christ 
bids us wear _His_ yoke; not make one for ourselves. He wants us 
to share the yoke with Him, to be His true yoke-fellow. It is 
wonderful that He should be willing to be yoked with us; the only 
greater wonder is that we should be so unwilling to be yoked with 
Him. In taking His yoke upon us what joy we shall enter upon our 
eternal rest! Here we find rest unto our souls; a further rest 
beyond that which He gives us when we come to Him. We first rest 
in Jesus by faith, and then we rest in Him by obedience. The first 
rest He gives through His death; the further rest we find through 
copying His life.
     Lastly, we secure this rest by _learning of Christ_. "Learn 
of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest 
unto your souls." We are to be workers with Christ, taking His 
yoke upon us; and, at the same time, we are to be scholars in 
Christ's school, learning of Him. We are to learn _of_ Christ, and 
to learn _Christ_; He is both Teacher and lesson. His gentleness 
of heart fits Him to teach, and makes Him the best illustration of 
His own teaching. If we can become as He is, we shall rest as He 
does. The lowly in heart will be restful of heart. Now, as we come 
to the table of communion, may we find to the full that rest of 
which we have been speaking, for the Great Rest-Giver's sake! 
Amen.




                      THE MEMORABLE HYMN.

     "And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount 
of Olives."--Matthew xxvi. 30.


THE occasion on which these words were spoken was the last meal of 
which Jesus partook in company with His disciples before He went 
from them to His shameful trial and His ignominious death. It was 
His farewell supper before a bitter parting, and yet they needs 
must sing. He was on the brink of that great depth of misery into 
which He was about to plunge, and yet He would have them sing "an 
hymn." It is wonderful that He sang, and in a second degree it is 
remarkable that they sang. We will consider both singular facts.
     I. Let us dwell a while on the fact that Jesus sang at such a 
time as this. What does He teach us by it? Does He not say to each 
of us, His followers "_My religion is one of happiness and joy;_ 
I, your Master, by My example would instruct you to sing even when 
the last solemn hour is come, and all the glooms of death are 
gathering around you? Here, at the table, I am your Singing-
master, and set you lessons in music, in which My dying voice 
shall lead you: notwithstanding all the griefs which overwhelm My 
heart, I will be to you the Chief Musician, and the Sweet Singer 
of Israel"? If ever there was a time when it would have been 
natural and consistent with the solemnities of the occasion for 
the Saviour to have bowed His head upon the table, bursting into a 
flood of tears; or, if ever there was a season when He might have 
fittingly retired from all company, and have bewailed His coming 
conflict in sighs and groans, it was just then. But no; that brave 
heart will sing "an hymn." Our glorious Jesus plays the man beyond 
all other men. Boldest of the sons of men, He quails not in the 
hour of battle, but tunes His voice to loftiest psalmody. The 
genius of that Christianity of which Jesus is the Head and 
Founder, its object, spirit, and design, are happiness and joy, 
and they who receive it are able to sing in the very jaws of 
death.
     This remark, however, is quite a secondary one to the next: 
_our Lord's complete fulfilment of the law is even more worthy of 
our attention_. It was customary, when the Passover was held, to 
sing, and this is the main reason why the Saviour did so. During 
the Passover, it was usual to sing the hundred and thirteenth, and 
five following Psalms, which were called the "_Hallel_." The first 
commences, you will observe, in our version, with "Praise ye the 
Lord!" or, "Hallelujah!" The hundred and fifteenth, and the three 
following, were usually sung as the closing song of the Passover. 
Now, our Saviour would not diminish the splendour of the great 
Jewish rite, although it was the last time that He would celebrate 
it. No; there shall be the holy beauty and delight of psalmody; 
none of it shall be stinted; the "Hallel" shall be full and 
complete. We may safely believe that the Saviour sang through, or 
probably chanted, the whole of these six Psalms; and my heart 
tells me that there was no one at the table who sang more devoutly 
or more cheerfully than did our blessed Lord. There are some parts 
of the hundred and eighteenth Psalm, especially, which strike us 
as having sounded singularly grand, as they flowed from His 
blessed lips. Note verses 22, 23, 24. Particularly observe those 
words, near the end of the Psalm, and think you hear the Lord 
Himself singing them, "God is the Lord, which hath shewed us 
light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the 
altar. Thou art my God, and I will praise Thee: Thou art my God, I 
will exalt Thee. O give thanks unto the Lord; for He is good: for 
His mercy endureth for ever."
      Because, then, it was the settled custom of Israel to recite 
or sing these Psalms, our Lord Jesus Christ did the same; for He 
would leave nothing unfinished. Just as, when He went down into 
the waters of baptism, He said, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil all 
righteousness," so He seemed to say, when sitting at the table, 
"Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness; therefore let us 
sing unto the Lord, as God's, people in past ages have done." 
Beloved, let us view with holy wonder the strictness of the 
Saviour's obedience to His Father's will, and let us endeavour to 
follow in His steps, in all things, seeking to be obedient to the 
Lord's Word in the little matters as well as in the great ones.
     May we not venture to suggest another and deeper reason? Did 
not the singing of "an hymn" at the supper show _the holy 
absorption of the Saviour's soul in His Father's will?_ If, 
beloved, you knew that at--say ten o'clock to-night--you would be 
led away to be mocked, and despised, and scourged, and that to-
morrow's sun would see you falsely accused, hanging, a convicted 
criminal, to die upon a cross, do you think that you could sing 
tonight, after your last meal? I am sure you could not, unless 
with more than earth born courage and resignation your soul could 
say, "Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the 
altar." You would sing if your spirit were like the Saviour's 
spirit; if, like Him, you could exclaim, "Not as I will, but as 
Thou wilt;" but if there should remain in you any selfishness, any 
desire to be spared the bitterness of death, you would not be able 
to chant the "Hallel" with the Master. Blessed Jesus, how wholly 
wert Thou given up! how perfectly consecrated! so that, whereas 
other men sing when they are marching to their joys, Thou didst 
sing on the way to death; whereas other men lift up their cheerful 
voices when honour awaits them, Thou hadst a brave and holy sonnet 
on Thy lips when shame, and spitting, and death were to be Thy 
portion.
     This singing of the Saviour also teaches us _the whole-
heartedness of the Master in the work which He was about to do_. 
The patriot-warrior sings as he hastens to battle; to the strains 
of martial music he advances to meet the foeman; and even thus the 
heart of our all-glorious Champion supplies Him with song even in 
the dreadful hour of His solitary agony. He views the battle, but 
He dreads it not; though in the contest His soul will be 
"exceeding sorrowful even unto death," yet before it, He is like 
Job's war-horse, "he saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he 
smelleth the battle afar off." He has a baptism to be baptized 
with, and He is straitened until it be accomplished. The Master 
does not go forth to the agony in the garden with a cowed and 
trembling spirit, all bowed and crushed in the dust; but He 
advances to the conflict like a man who has his full strength 
about him--taken out to be a victim (if I may use such a figure), 
not as a worn-out ox that has long borne the yoke, but as the 
firstling of the bullock, in the fulness of His strength. He goes 
forth to the slaughter, with His glorious undaunted spirit fast 
and firm within Him, glad to suffer for His people's sake and for 
His Father's glory.

     "For as at first Thine all-pervading look
     Saw from Thy Father's bosom to th' abyss,
        Measuring in calm presage
        The infinite descent;
     So to the end, though now of mortal pangs
     Made heir, and emptied of Thy glory a while,
        With unaverted eye
        Thou meetest all the storm."

     Let us, O fellow-heirs of salvation, learn to sing when our 
suffering time comes, when our season for stern labour approaches; 
ay, let us pour forth a canticle of deep, mysterious, melody of 
bliss, when our dying hour is near at hand! Courage, brother! The 
waters are chilly; but fear will not by any means diminish the 
terrors of the river. Courage, brother! Death is solemn work; but 
playing the coward will not make it less so. Bring out the silver 
trumpet; let thy lips remember the long-loved music, and let the 
notes be clear and shrill as thou dippest thy feet in the Jordan: 
"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I 
will fear no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff 
they comfort me." Dear friends, let the remembrance of the 
melodies of that upper room go with you tomorrow into business; 
and if you expect a great trial, and are afraid you will not be 
able to sing after it, then sing before it comes. Get your holy 
praise-work done before affliction mars the tune. Fill the air 
with music while you can. While yet there is bread upon the table, 
sing, though famine may threaten; while yet the child runs 
laughing about the house, while yet the flush of health is in your 
own cheek, while yet your goods are spared, while yet your heart 
is whole and sound, lift up your song of praise to the Most High 
God; and let your Master, the singing Saviour, be in this your 
goodly and comfortable example.
     There is much more that might be said concerning our Lord's 
sweet swan-song, but there is no need to crowd one thought out 
with another; your leisure will be well spent in meditation upon 
so fruitful a theme.
     II. We will now consider the singing of the disciples. _They_ 
united in the "Hallel"--like true Jews, they joined in the 
national song. Israel had good cause to sing at the Passover, for 
God had wrought for His people what He had done for no other 
nation on the face of the earth. Every Hebrew must have felt his 
soul elevated and rejoiced on the Paschal night. He was "a citizen 
of no mean city", and the pedigree which he could look back upon 
was one, compared with which kings and princes were but of 
yesterday.
     Remembering the fact commemorated by the Paschal supper, 
Israel might well rejoice. They sang of their nation in bondage, 
trodden beneath the tyrannical foot of Pharaoh; they began the 
Psalm right sorrowfully, as they thought of the bricks made 
without straw, and of the iron furnace; but the strain soon 
mounted from the deep bass, and began to climb the scale, as they 
sang of Moses the servant of God, and of the Lord appearing to him 
in the burning bush. They remembered the mystic rod, which became 
a serpent, and which swallowed up the rods of the magicians; their 
music told of the plagues and wonders which God had wrought upon 
Zoan; and of that dread night when the first-born of Egypt fell 
before the avenging sword of the angel of death, while they 
themselves, feeding on the lamb which had been slain for them, and 
whose blood was sprinkled upon the lintel and upon the side-posts 
of the door, had been graciously preserved. Then the song went up 
concerning the hour in which all Egypt was humbled at the feet of 
Jehovah, whilst as for His people, He led them forth like sheep, 
by the hand of Moses and Aaron, and they went by the way of the 
sea, even of the Red Sea. The strain rose higher still as they 
tuned the song of Moses, the servant of God, and of the Lamb. 
Jubilantly they sang of the Red Sea, and of the chariots of 
Pharaoh which went down into the midst thereof, and the depths 
covered them till there was not one of them left. It was a 
glorious chant indeed when they sang of Rahab cut in pieces, and 
of the dragon wounded at the sea, by the right hand of the Most 
High, for the deliverance of the chosen people.
     But, beloved, if I have said that Israel could so properly 
sing, _what shall I say of those of us who are the Lord's 
spiritually redeemed?_ We have been emancipated from a slavery 
worse than that of Egypt: "with a high hand and with an 
outstretched arm," hath God delivered us. The blood of Jesus 
Christ, the Lamb of God's Passover, has been sprinkled on our 
hearts and consciences. By faith we keep the Passover, for we have 
been spared; we have been brought out of Egypt; and though our 
sins did once oppose us, they have all been drowned in the Red Sea 
of the atoning blood of Jesus: "the depths have covered them, 
there is not one of them left." If the Jew could sing a "great 
Hallel", our "Hallel" ought to be more glowing still; and if every 
house in "Judea's happy land" was full of music when the people 
ate the Paschal feast, much more reason have we for filling every 
heart with sacred harmony tonight, while we feast upon Jesus 
Christ, who was slain, and has redeemed us to God by His blood.
     III. The time has now come for me to say how earnestly I 
desire you to "sing an hymn."
     I do not mean to ask you to use your voices, but let your 
hearts be brimming with the essence of praise. Whenever we repair 
to the Lord's table, which represents to us the Passover, we ought 
not to come to it as to a funeral. Let us select solemn hymns, but 
not dirges. Let us sing softly, but none the less joyfully. These 
are no burial feasts; those are not funeral cakes which lie upon 
this table, and yonder fair white linen cloth is no winding-sheet. 
"This is My body," said Jesus, but the body so represented was no 
corpse, we feed upon a living Christ. The blood set forth by 
yonder wine is the fresh life-blood of our immortal King. We view 
not our Lord's body as clay-cold flesh, pierced with wounds, but 
as glorified at the right hand of the Father. We hold a happy 
festival when we break bread on the first day of the week. We come 
not hither trembling like bondsmen, cringing on our knees as 
wretched serfs condemned to eat on their knees; we approach as 
freemen to our Lord's banquet, like His apostles, to recline at 
length or sit at ease; not merely to eat bread which may belong to 
the most sorrowful, but to drink wine which belongs to men whose 
souls are glad. Let us recognize the rightness, yea, the duty of 
cheerfulness at this commemorative supper; and, therefore, let us 
"sing an hymn."
     Being satisfied on this point, perhaps you ask, "_What hymn 
shall we sing?_" Many sorts of hymns were sung in the olden time: 
look down the list, and you will scarcely find one which may not 
suit us now.
     One of the earliest of earthly songs was _the war-song_. They 
sang of old a song to the conqueror, when he returned from the 
battle. "Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten 
thousands." Women took their timbrels, and rejoiced in the dance 
when the hero returned from the war. Even thus of old did the 
people of God extol Him for His mighty acts, singing aloud with 
the high-sounding cymbals: "Sing unto the Lord, for He hath 
triumphed gloriously . . . The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is 
His name." My brethren, let us lift up a war-song to-night! Why 
not? "Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from 
Bozrah? this that is glorious in His apparel, travelling in the 
greatness of His strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty 
to save." Come, let us praise our Emmanuel, as we see the head of 
our foe in His right hand; as we behold Him leading captivity 
captive, ascending up on high, with trumpets' joyful sound, let us 
chant the paean; let us shout the war-song, "_Io Triumphe!_" 
Behold, He comes, all glorious from the war: as we gather at this 
festive table, which reminds us both of His conflict and of His 
victory, let us salute Him with a psalm of gladsome triumph, which 
shall be but the prelude of the song we expect to sing when we get 
up--

     "Where all the singers meet."

     Another early, form of song was _the pastoral_. When he 
shepherds sat down amongst the sheep, they tuned their pipes, and 
warbled forth soft and sweet airs in harmony with rustic quietude. 
All around was calm and still; the sun was brightly shining, and 
the birds were making melody among the leafy branches. Shall I 
seem fanciful if I say, let us unite in a pastoral to-night? 
Sitting round the table, why should we not sing, "The Lord is my 
Shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green 
pastures: He leadeth me beside the still waters"? If there be a 
place beneath the stars where one might feel perfectly at rest and 
ease, surely it is at the table of the Lord. Here, then, let us 
sing to our great Shepherd a pastoral of delight. Let the bleating 
of sheep be in our ears as we remember the Good Shepherd who laid 
down His life for His flock.
     You need not to be reminded that the ancients were very fond 
of _festive songs_. When they assembled at their great festivals, 
led by their chosen minstrels, they sang right joyously, with 
boisterous mirth. Let those who will speak to the praise of wine, 
my soul shall extol the precious blood of Jesus; let who will laud 
corn and oil, the rich produce of the harvest, my heart shall sing 
of the Bread which came down from heaven, whereof, if a man 
eateth, he shall never hunger. Speak ye of royal banquets, and 
minstrelsy fit for a monarch's ear? Ours is a nobler festival, and 
our song is sweeter far. Here is room at this table tonight for 
all earth's poesy and music, for the place deserves songs more 
lustrous with delight, more sparkling with gems of holy mirth, 
than any of which the ancients could conceive.

     "Now for a tune of lofty praise
     To great Jehovah's equal Son!
     Awake, my voice, in heavenly lays
     Tell the loud wonders He hath done!"

     The _love-song_ we must not forget, for that is peculiarly 
the song of this evening. "Now will I sing unto my Well-beloved a 
song." His love to us is an immortal theme; and as our love, 
fanned by the breath of heaven, bursts into a vehement flame, we 
may sing, yea, and we will sing among the lilies, a song of loves.
     In the Old Testament, we find many Psalms called by the 
title, "_A Song of Degrees_." This "Song of Degrees" is supposed 
by some to have been sung as the people ascended the temple steps, 
or made pilgrimages to the holy place. The strain often changes, 
sometimes it is dolorous, and anon it is gladsome; at one season, 
the notes are long drawn out and heavy, at another, they are 
cheerful and jubilant. We will sing a "Song of Degrees" to-night. 
We will mourn that we pierced the Lord, and we wilt rejoice in 
pardon bought with blood. Our strain must vary as we talk of sin, 
feeling its bitterness, and lamenting it, and then of pardon, 
rejoicing in its glorious fulness.
     David wrote a considerable number of Psalms which he 
entitled, "_Maschil_," which may be called in English, 
"instructive Psalms." Where, beloved, can we find richer 
instruction than at the table of our Lord? He who understands the 
mystery of incarnation and of substitution, is a master in 
Scriptural theology. There is more teaching in the Saviour's body 
and in the Saviour's blood than in all the world besides. O ye who 
wish to learn the way to comfort, and how to tread the royal road 
to heavenly wisdom, come ye to the cross, and see the Saviour 
suffer, and pour out His heart's blood for human sin!
     Some of David's Psalms are called, "_Michtam_", which means 
"golden Psalm." Surely we must sing one of these. Our psalms must 
be golden when we sing of the Head of the Church, who is as much 
fine gold. More precious than silver or gold is the inestimable 
price which He has paid for our ransom. Yes, ye sons of harmony, 
bring your most melodious anthems here, and let your Saviour have 
your golden psalms!
     Certain Psalms in the Old Testament are entitled, "_Upon 
Shoshannim_," that is, "Upon the lilies." O ye virgin souls, whose 
hearts have been washed in blood, and have been made white and 
pure, bring forth your instruments of song:--

     "Hither, then, your music bring,
     Strike aloud each cheerful string!"

     Let your hearts, when they are in their best state, when they 
are purest, and most cleansed from earthly dross, give to Jesus 
their glory and their excellence.
     Then there are other Psalms which are dedicated "To the sons 
of Korah." If the guess be right, the reason why we get the title, 
"_To the sons of Korah_"--"a song of loves"--must be this: that 
when Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up, the sons of 
Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up, too; but the sons of Korah 
perished not. Why they were not destroyed, we cannot tell. Perhaps 
it was that sovereign grace spared those whom justice might have 
doomed; and "the sons of Korah" were ever after made the sweet 
singers of the sanctuary; and whenever there was a special "song 
of loves", it was always dedicated to them. Ah! we will have one 
of those songs of love to-night, around the table, for we, too, 
are saved by distinguishing grace. We will sing of the heavenly 
Lover, and the many waters which could not quench His love.

     "Love, so vast that nought can bound;
     Love, too deep for thought to sound
     Love, which made the Lord of all
     Drink the wormwood and the gall.

     "Love, which led Him to the cross,
     Bearing there unutter'd loss;
     Love, which brought Him to the gloom
     Of the cold and darksome tomb.

     "Love, which made Him hence arise
     Far above the starry skies,
     There with tender, loving care,
     All His people's griefs to share.

     "Love, which will not let Him rest
     Till His chosen all are blest;
     Till they all for whom He died
     Live rejoicing by His side."

     We have not half exhausted the list, but it is clear that, 
sitting at the Lord's table, we shall have no lack of suitable 
psalmody. Perhaps no one hymn will quite meet the sentiments of 
all; and while we would not write a hymn for you, we would pray 
the Holy Spirit to write now the spirit of praise upon your 
hearts, that, sitting here, you may "after supper" sing "an hymn."
     IV. For one or two minutes let us ask--"what shall the tune 
be?" It must be a strange one, for if we are to sing "an hymn" to-
night, around the table, the tune must have all the parts of 
music. Yonder believer is heavy of heart through manifold sorrows, 
bereavements, and watchings by the sick. He loves his Lord, and 
would fain praise Him, but his soul refuses to use her wings. 
Brother, we will have a tune in which you can join, and you shall 
lead the bass. You shall sing of your fellowship with your Beloved 
in His sufferings; how He, too, lost a friend; how He spent whole 
nights in sleeplessness; how His soul was exceeding sorrowful. But 
the tune must not be all bass, or it would not suit some of us to-
night, for we can reach the highest note. We have seen the Lord, 
and our spirit has rejoiced in God our Saviour. We want to lift 
the chorus high; yea, there are some true hearts here who are at 
times so full of joy that they will want special music written for 
them. "Whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the 
body, I cannot tell:" said Paul, and so have said others since, 
when Christ has been with them. Ah! then they have been obliged to 
mount to the highest notes, to the very loftiest range of song.
     Remember, beloved, that the same Saviour who will accept the 
joyful shoutings of the strong, will also receive the plaintive 
notes of the weak and weeping. You little ones, you babes in 
grace, may cry, "Hosanna," and the King will not silence you; and 
you strong men, with all your power of faith, may shout, 
"Hallelujah!" and your notes shall be accepted, too.
     Come, then, let us have a tune in which we can all unite; but 
ah! we cannot make one which will suit the dead--the dead, I mean, 
"in trespasses and sins"--and there are some such here. Oh, may 
God open their mouths, and unloose their tongues; but as for those 
of us who are alive unto God, let us, as we come to the table, all 
contribute our own share of the music, and so make up a song of 
blended harmony, with many parts, one great united song of praise 
to Jesus our Lord!
     We should not choose a tune for the communion table which is 
not very _soft_. These are no boisterous themes with which we have 
to deal when we tarry here. A bleeding Saviour, robed in a vesture 
dyed with blood--this is a theme which you must treat with loving 
gentleness, for everything that is coarse is out of place. While 
the tune is soft, it must also be _sweet_. Silence, ye doubts; be 
dumb, ye fears; be hushed, ye cares! Why come ye here? My music 
must be sweet and soft when I sing of Him. But oh! it must also be 
_strong_; there must be a full swell in my praise. Draw out the 
stops, and let the organ swell the diapason! In fulness let its 
roll of thundering harmony go up to heaven; let every note be 
sounded at its loudest. "Praise ye Him upon the cymbals, upon the 
high-sounding cymbals; upon the harp with a solemn sound." Soft, 
sweet, and strong, let the music be.
     Alas! you complain that your soul is out of tune. Then ask 
the Master to tune the heart-strings. Those "Selahs" which we find 
so often in the Psalms, are supposed by many scholars to mean, 
"Put the harpstrings in tune:" truly we require many "Selahs", for 
our hearts are constantly unstrung. Oh, that to-night the Master 
would enable each one of us to offer that tuneful prayer which we 
so often sing,--

     "Teach me some melodious sonnet,
        Sung by flaming tongues above:
     Praise the mount--oh, fix me on it,
        Mount of God's unchanging love!"

     V. We close by enquiring,--who shall sing this hymn?
     Sitting around the Father's board, we will raise a joyful 
song, but who shall do it? "I will," saith one; "and we will," say 
others. What is the reason why so many are willing to join? The 
reason is to be found in the verse we were singing just now,--

     "When He's the subject of the song,
        Who can refuse to sing?"

     What! a Christian silent when others are praising his Master? 
No; he must join in the song. Satan tries to make God's people 
dumb, but he cannot, for the Lord has not a tongue-tied child in 
all His family. They can all speak, and they can all cry, even if 
they cannot all sing, and I think there are times when they can 
all sing; yea, they must, for you know the promise, "Then shall 
the tongue of the dumb sing." Surely, when Jesus leads the tune, 
if there should be any silent ones in the Lord's family, they must 
begin to praise the name of the Lord. After Giant Despair's head 
had been cut off, Christiana and Mr. Greatheart, and all the rest 
of them, brought out the best of their provisions, and made a 
feast, and Mr. Bunyan says that, after they had feasted, they 
danced. In the dance there was one remarkable dancer, namely, Mr. 
Ready-to-Halt. Now, Mr. Ready-to-Halt usually went upon crutches, 
but for once he laid them aside. "And," says Bunyan, "I warrant 
you he footed it well!" This is quaintly showing us that, 
sometimes, the very sorrowful ones, the Ready-to-Halts, when they 
see Giant Despair's head cut off, when they see death, hell, and 
sin led in triumphant captivity at the wheels of Christ's 
victorious chariot, feel that even they must for once indulge in a 
song of gladness. So, when I put the question to-night, "Who will 
sing?" I trust that Ready-to-Halt will promise, "I will."
     You have not much comfort at home, perhaps; by very hard work 
you earn that little. Sunday is to you a day of true rest, for you 
are worked very cruelly all the week. Those cheeks of yours, poor 
girl, are getting very pale, and who knows but what Hood's 
pathetic lines may be true of you?--

     "Stitch, stitch, stitch,
        In poverty, hunger, and dirt,
     Sewing at once, with a double thread,
        A shroud as well as a shirt."

     But, my sister, you may surely rejoice to-night in spite of 
all this. There may be little on earth, but there is much in 
heaven. There may be but small comfort for you here apart from 
Christ; but oh! when, by faith, you mount into His glory, your 
soul is glad. You shall be as rich as the richest to-night if the 
Holy Spirit shall but bring you to the table, and enable you to 
feed upon your Lord and Master. Perhaps you have come here to-
night when you ought not to have done so. The physician would have 
told you to keep to your bed, but you persisted in coming up to 
the house where the Lord has so often met with you. I trust that 
we shall hear your voice in the song. There appear to have been in 
David's day many things to silence the praise of God, but David 
was one who would sing. I like that expression of his, where the 
devil seems to come up, and put his hand on his mouth, and say, 
"Be quiet." "No," says David, "I will sing." Again the devil tries 
to quiet him, but David is not to be silenced, for three times he 
puts it, "I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord." 
May the Lord make you resolve this night that you will praise the 
Lord Jesus with all your heart!
     Alas! there are many of you here to-night whom I could not 
invite to this feast of song, and who could not truly come if you 
were invited. Your sins are not forgiven; your souls are not 
saved; you have not trusted Christ; you are still in nature's 
darkness, still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of 
iniquity. Must it always be so? Will you destroy yourselves? Have 
you made a league with death, and a covenant with hell? Mercy 
lingers! Longsuffering continues! Jesus waits! Remember that He 
hung upon the cross for sinners such as you are, and that if you 
believe in Him now, you shall be saved. One act of faith, and all 
the sin you have committed is blotted out. A single glance of 
faith's eye to the wounds of the Messiah, and your load of 
iniquity is rolled into the depths of the sea, and you are 
forgiven in a moment!
     "Oh!" says one, "would God I could believe!" Poor soul, may 
God help thee to believe now! God took upon Himself our flesh; 
Christ was born among men, and suffered on account of human guilt, 
being made to suffer "the Just for the unjust, that He might bring 
us to God." Christ was punished in the room, place, and stead of 
every man and woman who will believe on Him. If you believe on 
Him, He was punished for you; and you will never be punished. Your 
debts are paid, your sins are forgiven. God cannot punish you, for 
He has punished Christ instead of you, and He will never punish 
twice for one offence. To believe is to trust. If you will now 
trust your soul entirely with Him, you are saved, for He loved 
you, and gave Himself for you. When you know this, and feel it to 
be true, then come to the Lord's table, and join with us, when, 
after supper we sing our hymn,--

     "'It is finished!'--Oh, what pleasure
        Do these charming words afford!
     Heavenly blessings without measure
        Flow to us from Christ the Lord:
                'It is finished!'
      Saints, the dying words record.

     "Tune your harps anew, ye seraphs,
        Join to sing the pleasing theme;
     All on earth, and all in heaven,
        Join to praise Immanuel's name!
                Hallelujah!
        Glory to the bleeding Lamb!"




                 JESUS ASLEEP ON A PILLOW

     "And He was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a 
pillow: and they awake Him, and say unto Him, Master, carest Thou 
not that we perish? And He arose, and rebuked the wind, and said 
unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was 
a great calm."--Mark iv. 38, 39.


OUR Lord took His disciples with Him into the ship to teach them a 
practical lesson. It is one thing to talk to people about our 
oneness with them, and about how they should exercise faith in 
time of danger, and about their real safety in apparent peril; but 
it is another, and a far better thing, to go into the ship with 
them, to let them feel all the terror of the storm, and then to 
arise, and rebuke the wind, and say unto the sea, "Peace, be 
still." Our Lord gave His disciples a kind of Kindergarten lesson, 
an acted sermon, in which the truth was set forth visibly before 
them. Such teaching produced a wonderful effect upon their lives. 
May we also be instructed by it!
     In our text there are two great calms; the first is, _the 
calm in the Saviour's heart_, and the second is, _the calm which 
He created_ with a word upon the storm-tossed sea.
     I. Within the Lord where was a great calm, and that is why 
there was soon a great calm around Him; for what is in God comes 
out of God. Since there was a calm in Christ for Himself, there 
was afterwards a calm outside for others. What a wonderful inner 
calm it was! "He was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a 
pillow."
     He had _perfect confidence in God_ that all was well. The 
waves might roar, the winds might rage, but He was not at all 
disquieted by their fury. He knew that the waters were in the 
hollow of His Father's hand, and that every wind was but the 
breath of His Father's mouth; and so He was not troubled; nay, He 
had not even a careful thought, He was as much at ease as on a 
sunny day. His mind and heart were free from every kind of care, 
for amid the gathering tempest He deliberately laid Himself down, 
and slept like a weary child. He went to the hinder part of the 
ship, most out of the gash of the spray; He took a pillow, and put 
it under His head, and with fixed intent disposed Himself to 
slumber. It was His own act and deed to go to sleep in the storm; 
He had nothing for which to keep awake, so pure and perfect was 
His confidence in the great Father. What an example this is to us! 
We have not half the confidence in God that we ought to have, not 
even the best of us. The Lord deserves our unbounded belief, our 
unquestioning confidence, our undisturbed reliance. Oh, that we 
rendered it to Him as the Saviour did!
     There was also mixed with His faith in the Father _a sweet 
confidence in His own Sonship_. He did not doubt that He was the 
Son of the Highest. I may not question God's power to deliver, but 
I may sometimes question my right to expect deliverance; and if 
so, my comfort vanishes. Our Lord had no doubts of this kind. He 
had long before heard that word, "This is My beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased;" He had so lived and walked with God that the 
witness within Him was continuous, so He had no question about the 
Father's love to Him as His own Son. "Rocked in the cradle of the 
deep," His Father keeping watch over Him,--what could a child do 
better than go to sleep in such a happy position? And so He does. 
You and I, too, want a fuller assurance of our sonship if we would 
have greater peace with God. The devil knows that, and therefore 
he will come to us with his insinuating suggestion, "If thou be 
the son of God." If we have the Spirit of adoption in us, we shall 
put the accuser to rout at once, by opposing the Witness within to 
his question from without. Then shall we be filled with a great 
calm, because we have confidence in our Father, and assurance of 
our sonship.
     Then _He had a sweet way-_--this blessed Lord of ours--_of 
leaving all with God_. He takes no watch, He makes no fret; but He 
goes to sleep. Whatever comes, He has left all in the hands of the 
great Caretaker; and what more is needful? If a watchman were set 
to guard my house, I should be foolish if I also sat up for fear 
of thieves. Why have a watchman if I cannot trust him to watch? 
"Cast thy burden upon the Lord;" but when thou hast done so, leave 
it with the Lord, and do not try to carry it thyself. That is to 
make a mock of God, to have the name of God, but not the reality, 
of God. Lay down every care, even as Jesus did when He went calmly 
to the hinder part of the ship, and quietly took a pillow, and 
went to sleep.
     But I think I hear someone say, "I could do that if mine were 
solely care about myself." Yes, perhaps you could; and yet you 
cannot cast upon God your burden of care about your children. But 
your Lord trusted the Father with those dear to Him. Do you not 
think that Christ's disciples were as precious to Him as our 
children are to us? If that ship had been wrecked, what would have 
become of Peter? What would have become of "that disciple whom 
Jesus loved"? Our Lord regarded with intense affection those whom 
He had chosen and called, and who had been with Him in His 
temptation, yet He was quite content to leave them all in the care 
of His Father, and go to sleep.
     You answer, "Yes, but there is a still wider circle of people 
watching to see what will happen to me, and to the cause of Christ 
with which I am connected. I am obliged to care, whether I will or 
no." Is your case, then, more trying than your Lord's? Do you 
forget that "there were also with Him many other little ships"? 
When the storm was tossing His barque, their little ships were 
even more in jeopardy; and He cared for them all. He was the Lord 
High Admiral of the Lake of Gennesaret that night. The other ships 
were a fleet under His convoy, and His great heart went out to 
them all. Yet He went to sleep, because He had left in His 
Father's care even the solicitudes of His charity and sympathy. 
We, my brethren, who are much weaker than He, shall find strength 
in doing the same.
     Having left everything with His Father, _our Lord did the 
very wisest thing possible_. He did just what the hour demanded. 
"Why," say you, "He went to sleep!" That was the best thing Jesus 
could do; and sometimes it is the best thing we can do. Christ was 
weary and worn; and when anyone is exhausted, it is his duty to go 
to sleep if he can. The Saviour must be up again in the morning, 
preaching and working miracles, and if He does not sleep, He will 
not be fit for His holy duty; it is incumbent upon Him to keep 
Himself in trim for His service. Knowing that the time to sleep 
has come, the Lord sleeps, and does well in sleeping. Often, when 
we have been fretting and worrying, we should have glorified God 
far more had we literally gone to sleep. To glorify God by sleep 
is not so difficult as some might think; at least, to our Lord it 
was natural. Here you are worried, sad, wearied; the doctor 
prescribes for you; his medicine does you no good; but oh! if you 
enter into full peace with God, and go to sleep, you will wake up 
infinitely more refreshed than by any drug. The sleep which the 
Lord giveth to His beloved is balmy indeed. Seek it as Jesus 
sought it. Go to bed, brother, and you will better imitate your 
Lord than by putting yourself into ill humour, and worrying other 
people.
     There is a spiritual sleep in which we ought to imitate 
Jesus. How often I have worried my poor brain about my great 
church, until I have come to my senses, and then I have said to 
myself, "How foolish you are! Can you not depend upon God? Is it 
not far more His cause than yours?" Then I have taken my load in 
prayer, and left it with the Lord. I have said, "In God's name, 
this matter shall never worry me again," and I have left my urgent 
care with Him, and ended it for ever. I have so deliberately given 
up many a trying case into the Lord's care that, when any of my 
friends have said to me, "What about so and so?" I have simply 
answered, "I do not know, and I am no longer careful to know. The 
Lord will interpose in some way or other, but I will trouble no 
more about it." No mischief has ever come through any matter which 
I have left in the divine keeping. The staying of my hand has been 
wisdom. "Stand still, and see the salvation of God," is God's own 
precept. Here let us follow Jesus. Having a child's confidence in 
the great Father, He retires to the stern of the ship, selects a 
pillow, deliberately lies down upon it, and goes to sleep; and 
though the ship is filling with water, and rolls and pitches, He 
sleeps on. Nothing can break the peace of His tranquil soul. Every 
sailor on board reels to and fro, and staggers like a drunken man, 
and is at his wits' end; but Jesus is neither at his wits' end, 
nor does He stagger, for He rests in perfect innocence, and 
undisturbed confidence. His heart is happy in God, and therefore 
doth He remain in repose. Oh, for grace to copy Him!
     II. But here notice, dear friends, The difference between the 
Master and His disciples; for while He was in a great calm, they 
were in a great storm. Here see their failure. They were just as 
we are, and we are often just as they were.
     _They gave way to fear_. They were sorely afraid that the 
ship would sink, and that they would all perish. In thus yielding 
to fear, _they forgot the solid reasons for courage which lay near 
at hand; _for, in truth, they were safe enough. Christ is on board 
that vessel, and if the ship goes down, He will sink with them. 
The heathen mariner took courage during a storm from the fact that 
Caesar was on board the ship that was tossed by stormy winds; and 
should not the disciples feel secure with Jesus on board? Fear 
not, ye carry Jesus and His cause! Jesus had come to do a work, 
and His disciples might have known that He could not perish with 
that work unaccomplished. Could they not trust Him? They had seen 
Him multiply the loaves and fishes, and cast out devils, and heal 
all manner of sicknesses; could they not trust Him to still the 
storm? Unreasonable unbelief! Faith in God is true prudence, but 
to doubt God is irrational. It is the height of absurdity and 
folly to question omnipotent love.
     And _the disciples were so unwise as to do the Master a very 
ill turn_. He was sadly weary, and sorely needed sleep; but they 
hastened to Him, and aroused Him in a somewhat rough and 
irreverent manner. They were slow to do so, but their fear urged 
them; and therefore they awoke Him, uttering ungenerous and 
unloving words: "Master, carest Thou not that we perish?" Shame on 
the lips that asked so harsh a question! Did they not upon 
reflection greatly blame themselves? He had given them no cause 
for such hard speeches; and, moreover, it was unseemly in them to 
call Him "Master," and then to ask Him, "Carest Thou not that we 
perish?" Is He to be accused of such hard-heartednesses to let His 
faithful disciples perish when He has power to deliver them? Alas, 
we, too, have been guilty of like offences! I think I have known 
some of Christ's disciples who have appeared to doubt the wisdom 
or the love of their Lord. They did not quite say that He was 
mistaken, but they said that He moved in a mysterious way; they 
did not quite complain that He was unkind to them, but they 
whispered that they could not reconcile His dealings with His 
infinite love. Alas, Jesus has endured much from our unbelief! May 
this picture help us to see our spots, and may the love of our 
dear Lord remove them!
     III. I have spoken to you of the Master's calm and of the 
disciples' failure; now let us think of the great calm which Jesus 
created. "There was a great calm."
     _His voice produced it_. They say that if oil be poured upon 
the waters they will become smooth, and I suppose there is _some_ 
truth in the statement; but there is all truth in this, that if 
God speaks, the storm subsides into a calm, so that the waves of 
the sea are still. It only needs our Lord Jesus to speak in the 
heart of any one of us, and immediately the peace of God, which 
passeth all understanding, will possess us. No matter how drear 
your despondency, nor how dread your despair, the Lord can at once 
create a great calm of confidence. What a door of hope this opens 
to any who are in trouble! If I could speak a poor man rich, and a 
sick one well, I am sure I would do so at once; but Jesus is 
infinitely better than I am, and therefore I know that He will 
speak peace to the tried and troubled heart.
     Note, too, _that this calm came at once_. "Jesus arose, and 
rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the 
wind ceased, and there was a great calm." As soon as Jesus spoke, 
all was quiet. I have met with a very large number of persons in 
trouble of mind, and I have seen a few who have slowly come out 
into light and liberty; but more frequently deliverance has come 
suddenly. The iron gate has opened of its own accord, and the 
prisoner has stepped into immediate freedom. "The snare is broken, 
and we are escaped." What a joy it is to know that rest is so near 
even when the tempest rages most furiously!
     Note, also, that _the Saviour coupled this repose with 
faith_, for He said to the disciples as soon as the calm came, 
"Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no faith?" Faith 
and the calm go together. If thou believest, thou shalt rest; if 
thou wilt but cast thyself upon thy God, surrendering absolutely 
to His will, thou shalt have mercy, and joy, and light. Even if we 
have no faith, the Lord will sometimes give us the blessing that 
we need, for He delights to do more for us than we have any right 
to expect of Him; but usually the rule of His kingdom is, 
"According to your faith be it unto you."
     _This great calm is very delightful_, and concerning this I 
desire to bear my personal testimony. I speak from my own 
knowledge when I say that it passeth all understanding. I was 
sitting, the other night, meditating on God's mercy and love, when 
suddenly I found in my own heart a most delightful sense of 
perfect peace. I had come to Beulah-land, where the sun shines 
without a cloud. "There was a great calm." I felt as mariners 
might do who have been tossed about in broken water, and all on a 
sudden, they cannot tell why, the ocean becomes as unruffled as a 
mirror, and the sea-birds come and sit in happy circles upon the 
water. I felt perfectly content, yea, undividedly happy. Not a 
wave of trouble broke upon the shore of my heart, and even far out 
to sea in the deeps of my being all was still. I knew no 
ungratified wish, no unsatisfied desire. I could not discover a 
reason for uneasiness, or a motive for fear. There was nothing 
approaching to fanaticism in my feelings, nothing even of 
excitement: my soul was waiting upon God, and delighting herself 
alone in Him. Oh, the blessedness of this rest in the Lord! What 
an Elysium it is! I must be allowed to say a little upon this 
purple island in the sea of my life: it was none other than a 
fragment of heaven. We often talk about our great spiritual 
storms, why should we not speak of our great calms? If ever we get 
into trouble, what a noise we make of it! Why should we not sing 
of our deliverances?
     Let us survey our mercies. Every sin that we have ever 
committed is forgiven. "The blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin." The power of sin within us is broken; 
it "shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law 
but under grace." Satan is a vanquished enemy; the world is 
overcome by our Lord Jesus, and death is abolished by Him. All 
providence works for our good. Eternity has no threat for us, it 
bears within its mysteries nothing but immortality and glory. 
Nothing can harm us. The Lord is our shield, and our exceeding 
great reward. Wherefore, then, should we fear? The Lord of hosts 
is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. To the believer, peace 
is no presumption: he is warranted in enjoying "perfect peace"--a 
quiet which is deep, and founded on truth, which encompasses all 
things, and is not broken by any of the ten thousand disturbing 
causes which otherwise might prevent our rest. "Thou wilt keep him 
in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee; because he trusteth 
in Thee." Oh, to get into that calm, and remain in it till we come 
to that world where there is no more sea!
     A calm like that which ruled within our Saviour should we be 
happy enough to attain to it, will give us in our measure the 
power to make outside matters calm. He that hath peace can make 
peace. We cannot work miracles, and yet the works which Jesus did 
shall we do also. Sleeping His sleep, we shall awake in His rested 
energy, and treat the winds and waves as things subject to the 
power of faith, and therefore to be commanded into quiet. We shall 
speak so as to console others: our calm shall work marvels in the 
little ships whereof others are captains. We, too, shall say, 
"Peace! Be still." Our confidence shall prove contagious, and the 
timid shall grow brave: our tender love shall spread itself, and 
the contentious shall cool down to patience. Only the matter must 
begin within ourselves. We cannot create a calm till we are in a 
calm. It is easier to rule the elements than to govern the 
unruliness of our wayward nature. When grace has made us masters 
of our fears, so that we can take a pillow and fall asleep amid 
the hurricane, the fury of the tempest is over. He giveth peace 
and safety when He giveth His beloved sleep.




                   REAL CONTACT WITH JESUS.

     "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched Me: for I perceive 
that virtue is gone out of Me."--Luke viii. 46.


OUR Lord was very frequently in the midst of a crowd. His 
preaching was so plain and so forcible that He always attracted a 
vast company of hearers; and, moreover, the rumour of the loaves 
and fishes no doubt had something to do with increasing His 
audiences, while the expectation of beholding a miracle would be 
sure to add to the numbers of the hangers-on. Our Lord Jesus 
Christ often found it difficult to move through the streets, 
because of the masses who pressed upon Him. This was encouraging 
to Him as a preacher, and yet how small a residuum of real good 
came of all the excitement which gathered around His personal 
ministry! He might have looked upon the great mass, and have said, 
"What is the chaff to the wheat?" for here it was piled up upon 
the threshing-floor, heap upon heap; and yet, after His decease, 
His disciples might have been counted by a few scores, for those 
who had spiritually received Him were but few. Many were called, 
but few were chosen. Yet, wherever one was blessed, our Saviour 
took note of it; it touched a chord in His soul. He never could be 
unaware when virtue had gone out of Him to heal a sick one, or 
when power had gone forth with His ministry to save a sinful one. 
Of all the crowd that gathered round the Saviour upon the day of 
which our text speaks, I find nothing said about one of them 
except this solitary "somebody" who had touched Him. The crowd 
came, and the crowd went; but little is recorded of it all. Just 
as the ocean, having advanced to full tide, leaves but little 
behind it when it retires again to its channel, so the vast 
multitude around the Saviour left only this one precious deposit--
one "somebody" who had touched Him, and had received virtue from 
Him.
     Ah, my Master, it may be so again this evening! These Sabbath 
mornings, and these Sabbath evenings, the crowds come pouring in 
like a mighty ocean, filling this house, and then they all retire 
again; only here and there is a "somebody" left weeping for sin, a 
"somebody" left rejoicing in Christ, a "somebody" who can say, "I 
have touched the hem of His garment, and I have been made whole." 
The whole of my other hearers are not worth the "somebodies." The 
many of you are not worth the few, for the many are the pebbles, 
and the few are the diamonds; the many are the heaps of husks, and 
the few are the precious grains. May God find them out at this 
hour, and His shall be all the praise!
     Jesus said, "Somebody hath touched Me," from which we observe 
that, _in the use of means and ordinances, we should never be 
satisfied unless we get into personal contact with Christ_, so 
that we touch Him, as this woman touched His garment. Secondly, 
_if we can get into such personal contact, we shall have a bless-
ing:_ "I perceive that virtue is gone out of Me;" and, thirdly, 
_if we do get a blessing, Christ will know it;_ however obscure 
our case may be, He will know it, and He will have us let others 
know it; He will speak, and ask such questions as will draw us 
out, and manifest us to the world.
     I. First, then, in the use of all means and ordinances, let 
it be our chief aim and object to come into personal contact with 
the Lord Jesus Christ.
     Peter said, "The multitude throng Thee, and press Thee," and 
that is true of the multitude to this very day; but of those who 
come where Christ is in the assembly of His saints, a large 
proportion only come because it is their custom to do so. Perhaps 
they hardly know why they go to a place of worship. They go 
because they always did go, and they think it wrong not to go. 
They are just like the doors which swing upon their hinges; they 
take no interest in what is done, at least only in the exterior 
parts of the service; into the heart and soul of the business they 
do not enter, and cannot enter. They are glad if the sermon is 
rather short, there is so much the less tedium for them. They are 
glad if they can look around and gaze at the congregation, they 
find in that something to interest them; but getting near to the 
Lord Jesus is not the business they come upon. They have not 
looked at it in that light. They come and they go; they come and 
they go; and it will be so till, by-and-by, they will come for the 
last time, and they will find out in the next world that the means 
of grace were not instituted to be matters of custom, and that to 
have heard Jesus Christ preached, and to have rejected Him, is no 
trifle, but a solemn thing for which they will have to answer in 
the presence of the great Judge of all the earth.
     Others there are who come to the house of prayer, and try to 
enter into the service, and do so in a certain fashion; but it is 
only self-righteously or professionally. They may come to the 
Lord's table; perhaps they attend to baptism; they may even join 
the church. They are baptized, yet not by the Holy Spirit; they 
take the Lord's supper, but they take not the Lord Himself; they 
eat the bread, but they never eat His flesh; they drink the wine, 
but they never drink His blood; they have been buried in the pool, 
but they have never been buried with Christ in baptism, nor have 
they risen again with Him into newness of life. To them, to read, 
to sing, to kneel, to hear, and so on, are enough. They are 
content with the shell, but the blessed spiritual kernel, the true 
marrow and fatness, these they know nothing of. These are the 
many, go into what church or meeting-house you please. They are in 
the press around Jesus, but they do not touch Him. They come, but 
they come not into contact with Jesus. They are outward, external 
hearers only, but there is no inward touching of the blessed 
person of Christ, no mysterious contact with the ever-blessed 
Saviour, no stream of life and love flowing from Him to them. It 
is all mechanical religion. Of vital godliness, they know nothing.
     But, "somebody," said Christ, "somebody hath touched Me," and 
that is the soul of the matter. O my hearer, when you are in 
prayer alone, never be satisfied with having prayed; do not give 
it up till you have touched Christ in prayer; or, if you have not 
got to Him, at any rate sigh and cry until you do! Do not think 
you have prayed, but try again. When you come to public worship, I 
beseech you, rest not satisfied with listening to the sermon, and 
so on, as you all do with sufficient attention; to that I bear you 
witness;--but do not be content unless you get at Christ the 
Master, and touch Him. At all times when you come to the communion 
table, count it to have been no ordinance of grace to you unless 
you have gone right through the veil into Christ's own arms, or at 
least have touched His garment, feeling that the first object, the 
life and soul of the means of grace, is to touch Jesus Christ 
Himself; and except "somebody" hath touched Him, the whole has 
been a mere dead performance, without life or power.
     The woman in our text was not only amongst those who were in 
the crowd, but she touched Jesus; and therefore, beloved, let me 
hold her up to your example in some respects, though I would to 
God that in other respects you might excel her.
     Note, first, she felt that it was of no use being in the 
crowd, of no use to be in the same street with Christ, or near to 
the place where Christ was, but _she must get at Him; she must 
touch Him_. She touched Him, you will notice, under _many 
difficulties_. There was a great crowd. She was a woman. She was 
also a woman enfeebled by a long disease which had drained her 
constitution, and left her more fit to be upon a bed than to be 
struggling in the seething tumult. Yet, notwithstanding that, so 
intense was her desire, that she urged on her way, I doubt not 
with many a bruise, and many an uncouth push, and at last, poor 
trembler as she was, she got near to the Lord. Beloved, it is not 
always easy to get at Jesus. It is very easy to kneel down to 
pray, but not so easy to reach Christ in prayer. There is a child 
crying, it is your own, and its noise has often hindered you when 
you were striving to approach Jesus; or a knock will come at the 
door when you most wish to be retired. When you are sitting in the 
house of God, your neighbour in the seat before you may 
unconsciously distract your attention. It is not easy to draw near 
to Christ, especially coming as some of you do right away from the 
counting-house, and from the workshop, with a thousand thoughts 
and cares about you. You cannot always unload your burden outside, 
and come in here with your hearts prepared to receive the gospel. 
Ah! it is a terrible fight sometimes, a real foot-to-foot fight 
with evil, with temptation, and I know not what. But, beloved, do 
fight it out, do fight it out; do not let your seasons for prayer 
be wasted, nor your times for hearing be thrown away; but, like 
this woman, be resolved, with all your feebleness, that you will 
lay hold upon Christ. And oh! if you be resolved about it, if you 
cannot get to Him, He will come to you, and sometimes, when you 
are struggling against unbelieving thoughts, He will turn and say, 
"Make room for that poor feeble one, that she may come to Me, for 
My desire is to the work of My own hands; let her come to Me, and 
let her desire be granted to her."
     Observe, again, that this woman touched Jesus _very 
secretly_. Perhaps there is a dear sister here who is getting near 
to Christ at this very moment, and yet her face does not betray 
her. It is so little contact that she has gained with Christ that 
the joyous flush, and the sparkle of the eye, which we often see 
in the child of God, have not yet come to her. She is sitting in 
yonder obscure corner, or standing in this aisle, but though her 
touch is secret, it is true. Though she cannot tell another of it, 
yet it is accomplished. She has touched Jesus. Beloved, that is 
not always the nearest fellowship with Christ of which we talk the 
most. Deep waters are still. Nay, I am not sure but what we 
sometimes get nearer to Christ when we think we are at a distance 
than we do when we imagine we are near Him, for we are not always 
exactly the best judges of our own spiritual state, and we may be 
very close to the Master, and yet for all that we may be so 
anxious to get closer that we may feel dissatisfied with the 
measure of grace which we have already received. To be satisfied 
with self, is no sign of grace; but to long for more grace, is 
often a far better evidence of the healthy state of the soul. 
Friend, if thou canst not come to the table to-night publicly, 
come to the Master in secret. If thou darest not tell thy wife, or 
thy child, or thy father, that thou art trusting in Jesus, it need 
not be told as yet. Thou mayest do it secretly, as he did to whom 
Jesus said, "When thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee." 
Nathanael retired to the shade that no one might see him; but 
Jesus saw him, and marked his prayer, and He will see thee in the 
crowd, and in the dark, and not withhold His blessing.
     This woman also came into contact with Christ _under a very 
deep sense of unworthiness_. I dare say she thought, "If I touch 
the Great Prophet, it will be a wonder if He does not strike me 
with some sudden judgment," for she was a woman ceremonially un-
clean. She had no right to be in the throng. Had the Levitical law 
been strictly carried out, I suppose she would have been confined 
to her house; but there she was wandering about, and she must 
needs go and touch the holy Saviour. Ah! poor heart, you feel to-
night that you are not fit to touch the skirts of the Master's 
robe, for you are so unworthy. You never felt so undeserving 
before as you do to-night. In the recollection of last week and 
its infirmities, in the remembrance of the present state of your 
heart, and all its wanderings from God, you feel as if there never 
was so worthless a sinner in the house of God before. "Is grace 
for me?" say you. "Is Christ for me?" Oh! yes, unworthy one. Do 
not be put off without it. Jesus Christ does not save the worthy, 
but the unworthy. Your plea must not be righteousness, but guilt. 
And you, too, child of God, though you are ashamed of yourself, 
Jesus is not ashamed of you; and though you feel unfit to come, 
let your unfitness only impel you with the greater earnestness of 
desire. Let your sense of need make you the more fervent to 
approach the Lord, who can supply your need.
     Thus, you see, the woman came under difficulties, she came 
secretly, she came as an unworthy one, but still she obtained the 
blessing.
     I have known many staggered with that saying of Paul's, "He 

that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation 
to himself." Now, understand that this passage does not refer to 
the unworthiness of those persons who come to the Lord's table; 
for it does not say, "He that eateth and drinketh _being 
unworthy_." It is not an adjective; it is an adverb: "He that 
eateth and drinketh unworth_ily_," that is to say, he who shall 
come to the outward and visible sign of Christ's presence, and 
shall eat of the bread in order to obtain money being a member of 
the church, knowing himself to be a hypocrite, or who shall do it 
jestingly, trifling with the ordinance: such a person would be 
eating and drinking unworthily, and he will be condemned. The 
sense of the passage is, not "damnation", as our version reads it, 
but "condemnation." There can be no doubt that members of the 
church, coming to the Lord's table in an unworthy manner, do 
receive condemnation. They are condemned for so doing, and the 
Lord is grieved. If they have any conscience at all, they ought to 
feel their sin; and if not, they may expect the chastisements of 
God to visit them. But, O sinner, as to coming to Christ,--which 
is a very different thing from coming to the Lord's table,--as to 
coming to Christ, the more unworthy you feel yourself to be, the 
better. Come, thou filthy one, for Christ can wash thee. Come, 
thou loathsome one, for Christ can beautify thee. Come utterly 
ruined and undone, for in Jesus Christ there is the strength and 
salvation which thy case requires.
     Notice, once again, that _this woman touched the Master very 
tremblingly, and it was only a hurried touch, but still it was the 
touch of faith_. Oh, beloved, to lay hold on Christ! Be thankful 
if you do but get near Him for a few minutes. "Abide with me," 
should be your prayer; but oh, if He only give you a glimpse, be 
thankful! Remember that a touch healed the woman. She did not 
embrace Christ by the hour together. She had but a touch, and she 
was healed; and oh, may you have a sight of Jesus now, my beloved! 
Though it be but a glimpse, yet it will gladden and cheer your 
souls. Perhaps you are waiting on Christ, desiring His company, 
and while you are turning it over in your mind you are asking, 
"Will He ever shine upon me? Will He ever speak loving words to 
me? Will He ever let me sit at His feet? Will He ever permit me to 
lean my head upon His bosom?" Come and try Him. Though you should 
shake like an aspen leaf, yet come. They sometimes come best who 
come most tremblingly, for when the creature is lowest then is the 
Creator highest, and when in our own esteem we are less than 
nothing and vanity, then is Christ the more fair and lovely in our 
eyes. One of the best ways of climbing to heaven is on our hands 
and knees. At any rate, there is no fear of falling when we are in 
that position, for--

     "He that is down need fear no fall."

     Let your lowliness of heart, your sense of utter nothingness, 
instead of disqualifying you, be a sweet medium for leading you to 
receive more of Christ. The more empty I am, the more room is 
there for my Master. The more I lack, the more He will give me. 
The more I feel my sickness, the more shall I adore and bless Him 
when He makes me whole.
     You see, the woman did really touch Christ, and so I come 
back to that. Whatever infirmity there was in the touch, it was a 
real touch of faith. She did reach Christ Himself. She did not 
touch Peter; that would have been of no use to her, any more than 
it is for the parish priest to tell you that you are regenerate 
when your life soon proves that you are not. She did not touch 
John or James; that would have been of no more good to her than it 
is for you to be touched by a bishop's hands, and to be told that 
you are confirmed in the faith, when you are not even a believer, 
and therefore have no faith to be confirmed in. She touched the 
Master Himself; and, I pray you, do not be content unless you can 
do the same. Put out the hand of faith, and touch Christ. Rest on 
Him. Rely on His bloody sacrifice, His dying love, His rising 
power, His ascended plea; and as you rest in Him, your vital 
touch, however feeble, will certainly give you the blessing your 
soul needs.
     This brings us to the second part of our discourse, upon 
which I will say only a little.
     II. The woman in the crowd did touch Jesus, and, having done 
so, she received virtue from Him.
     The healing energy streamed at once through the finger of 
faith into the woman. In Christ, there is healing for all 
spiritual diseases. There is a speedy healing, a healing which 
will not take months nor years, but which is complete in one 
second. There is in Christ a sufficient healing, though your 
diseases should be multiplied beyond all bounds. There is in 
Christ an all-conquering power to drive out every ill. Though, 
like this woman, you baffle physicians, and your case is reckoned 
desperate beyond all parallel, yet a touch of Christ will heal 
you. What a precious, glorious gospel I have to preach to sinners! 
If they touch Jesus, no matter though the devil himself were in 
them, that touch of faith would drive the devil out of them. 
Though you were like the man into whom there had entered a legion 
of devils, the word of Jesus would cast them all into the deep, 
and you should sit at His feet, clothed, and in your right mind. 
There is no excess or extravagance of sin which the power of Jesus 
Christ cannot overcome. If thou canst believe, whatever thou 
mayest have been, thou shalt be saved. If thou canst believe, 
though thou hast been lying in the scarlet dye till the warp and 
woof of thy being are ingrained therewith, yet shall the precious 
blood of Jesus make thee white as snow. Though thou art become 
black as hell itself, and only fit to be cast into the pit, yet if 
thou trustest Jesus, that simple faith shall give to thy soul the 
healing which shall make thee fit to tread the streets of heaven, 
and to stand before Jehovah-Rophi's face, magnifying the Lord that 
healeth thee.
     And now, child of God, I want you to learn the same lesson. 
Very likely, when you came in here, you said,--"Alas! I feel very 
dull; my spirituality is at a very low ebb; the place is hot, and 
I do not feel prepared to hear; the spirit is willing, but the 
flesh is weak; I shall have no holy enjoyment to-day!" Why not? 
Why, the touch of Jesus could make you live if you were dead, and 
surely it will stir the life that is in you, though it may seem to 
you to be expiring! Now, struggle hard, my beloved, to get at 
Jesus! May the Eternal Spirit come and help you, and may you yet 
find that your dull, dead times can soon become your best times. 
Oh! what a blessing it is that God takes the beggar up from the 
dunghill! He does not raise us when He sees us already up, but 
when He finds us lying on the dunghill, then He delights to lift 
us up, and set us among princes. Or ever you are aware, your soul 
may become like the chariots of Ammi-nadib. Up from the depths of 
heaviness to the very heights of ecstatic worship you may mount as 
in a single moment if you can but touch Christ crucified. View Him 
yonder, with streaming wounds, with thorn-crowned head, as in all 
the majesty of His misery, He expires for you!
     "Alas!" say you, "I have a thousand doubts tonight." Ah! but 
your doubts will soon vanish when you draw nigh to Christ. He 
never doubts who feels the touch of Christ, at least, not while 
the touch lasts, for observe this woman! She felt in her body that 
she was made whole, and so shall you, if you will only come into 
contact with the Lord. Do not wait for evidences, but come to 
Christ for evidences. If you cannot even dream of a good thing in 
yourselves, come to Jesus Christ as you did at the first. Come as 
if you never had come at all. Come to Jesus as a sinner, and your 
doubts shall flee away.
     "Ay!" saith another, "but my sins come to my remembrance, my 
sins since conversion." Well, return to Jesus, when your guilt 
seems to return. The fountain is still open, and that fountain, 
you will remember, is not only open for sinners, but for saints; 
for what saith the Scripture--"There shall be a fountain opened 
_for the house of David and for the inhabitants of Jerusalem_,"--
that is, for you, churchmembers, for you, believers in Jesus? The 
fountain is still open. Come, beloved, come to Jesus anew, and 
whatever be your sins, or doubts, or heaviness, they shall all 
depart as soon as you can touch your Lord.
     III. And now the last point is--and I will not detain you 
long upon it--if somebody shall touch Jesus, the Lord will know 
it.
     I do not know your names; a great number of you are perfect 
strangers to me. It matters nothing; your name is "somebody", and 
Christ will know you. You are a total stranger, perhaps, to 
everybody in this place; but if you get a blessing, there will be 
two who will know it,--you will, and Christ will. Oh! if you 
should look to Jesus this day, it may not be registered in our 
church-book, and we may not hear of it; but still it will be 
registered in the courts of heaven, and they will set all the 
bells of the New Jerusalem a-ringing, and all the harps of angels 
will take a fresh lease of music as soon as they know that you are 
born again.

     "With joy the Father doth approve
        The fruit of His eternal love;
     The Son with joy looks down and sees
        The purchase of His agonies;
     The Spirit takes delight to view
        The holy soul He formed anew;
     And saints and angels join to sing
        The growing empire of their King."

     "Somebody!" I do not know the woman's name; I do not know who 
the man is, but--"Somebody!"--God's electing love rests on thee, 
Christ's redeeming blood was shed for thee, the Spirit has wrought 
a work in thee, or thou wouldst not have touched Jesus; and all 
this Jesus knows.
     It is a consoling thought that Christ not only knows the 
great children in the family, but He also knows the little ones. 
This stands fast: "The Lord knoweth them that are His," whether 
they are only brought to know Him now, or whether they have known 
Him for fifty years. "The Lord knoweth them that are His," and if 
I am a part of Christ's body, I may be but the foot, but the Lord 
knows the foot; and the head and the heart in heaven feel acutely 
when the foot on earth is bruised. If you have touched Jesus, I 
tell you that amidst the glories of angels, and the everlasting 
hallelujahs of all the blood-bought, He has found time to hear 
your sigh, to receive your faith, and to give you an answer of 
peace. All the way from heaven to earth there has rushed a mighty 
stream of healing virtue, which has come from Christ to you. Since 
you have touched Him, the healing virtue has touched you.
     Now, _as Jesus knows of your salvation, He wishes other 
people to know of it_, and that is why He has put it into my heart 
to say,--Somebody has touched the Lord. Where is that somebody? 
Somebody, where are you? Somebody, where are you? You have touched 
Christ, though with a feeble finger, and you are saved. Let us 
know it. It is due to us to let us know. You cannot guess what joy 
it gives us when we hear of sick ones being healed by our Master. 
Some of you, perhaps, have known the Lord for months, and you have 
not yet come forward to make an avowal of it; we beg you to do so. 
You may come forward tremblingly, as this woman did; you may 
perhaps say, "I do not know what I should tell you." Well, you 
must tell us what she told the Lord; she told Him all the truth. 
We do not want anything else. We do not desire any sham experi-
ence. We do not want you to manufacture feelings like somebody 
else's that you have read of in a book. Come and tell us what you 
have felt. We shall not ask you to tell us what you have not felt, 
or what you do not know. But, if you have touched Christ, and you 
have been healed, I ask it, and I think I may ask it as your duty, 
as well as a favour to us, to come and tell us what the Lord hath 
done for your soul.
     And you, believers, when you come to the Lord's table, if you 
draw near to Christ, and have a sweet season, tell it to your 
brethren. Just as when Benjamin's brethren went down to Egypt to 
buy corn, they left Benjamin at home, but they took a sack for 
Benjamin, so you ought always to take a word home for the sick 
wife at home, or the child who cannot come out. Take home food for 
those of the family who cannot come for it. God grant that you may 
have always something sweet to tell of what you have 
experimentally known of precious truth, for while the sermon may 
have been sweet in itself, it comes with a double power when you 
can add, "and there was a savour about it which I enjoyed, and 
which made my heart leap for joy"!
     Whoever you may be, my dear friend, though you may be nothing 
but a poor "somebody", yet if you have touched Christ, tell others 
about it, in order that they may come and touch Him, too; and the 
Lord bless you, for Christ's sake! Amen.




               CHRIST AND HIS TABLE-COMPANIONS

     "And when the hour was come, He sat down, and the twelve 
apostles with Him."--Luke xxii. 14.


THE outward ordinances of the Christian religion are but two, and 
those two are exceedingly simple, yet neither of them has escaped 
human alteration; and, alas! much mischief has been wrought, and 
much of precious teaching has been sacrificed, by these miserable 
perversions. For instance, the ordinance of baptism as it was 
administered by the apostles betokened the burial of the believer 
with Christ, and his rising with his Lord into newness of life. 
Men must needs exchange immersion for sprinkling, and the 
intelligent believer for an unconscious child, and so the 
ordinance is slain. The other sacred institution, the Lord's 
supper, like believers' baptism, is simplicity itself. It consists 
of bread broken, and wine poured out, these viands being eaten and 
drunk at a festival--a delightful picture of the sufferings of 
Christ for us, and of the fellowship which the saints have with 
one another and with Him. But this ordinance, also, has been 
tampered with by men. By some, the wine has been taken away 
altogether, or reserved only for a priestly caste; and the simple 
bread has been changed into a consecrated host. As for the table, 
the very emblem of fellowship in all nations--for what expresses 
fellowship better than surrounding a table, and eating and 
drinking together?--this, forsooth, must be put away, and an altar 
must be erected, and the bread and wine which were to help us to 
remember the Lord Jesus are changed into an "unbloody sacrifice", 
and so the whole thing becomes an unscriptural celebration instead 
of a holy institution for fellowship. Let us be warned by these 
mistakes of others never either to add to or take from the Word of 
God so much as a single jot or tittle. Keep upon the foundation of 
the Scriptures, and you stand safely, and have an answer for those 
who question you; yea, and an answer which you may render at the 
bar of God; but once allow your own whim, or fancy, or taste, or 
your notion of what is proper and right, to rule you, instead of 
the Word of God, and you have entered upon a dangerous course, and 
unless the grace of God prevent, boundless mischief may ensue. The 
Bible is our standard authority; none may turn from it. The wise 
man says, in Ecclesiastes, "I counsel thee to keep the King's 
commandment;" we would repeat his advice, and add to it the sage 
precept of the mother of our Lord, at Cana, when she said, "What-
soever He saith unto you, do it."
     We shall now ask you in contemplation to gaze upon the first 
celebration of the Lord's supper. You perceive at once that there 
was no altar in that large upper room. There was a table, a table 
with bread and wine upon it, but no altar; and Jesus did not 
kneel,--there is no sign of that,--but He sat down, I doubt not, 
after the Oriental mode of sitting, that is to say, by a partial 
reclining, He sat down with His apostles. Now, He who ordained 
this supper knew how it ought to be observed, and as the first 
celebration of it was the model for all others, we may be assured 
that the right way of coming to this communion is to assemble 
around a table, and to sit or recline while we eat and drink 
together of bread and wine in remembrance of our Lord.
     While we see the Saviour sitting down with His twelve 
apostles, let us enquire, first, _what did this make them? _Then, 
secondly, _what did this imply?_ And, thirdly, _what further may 
we legitimately infer from it?_
     I. First, then, we see the Great Master, the Lord, the King 
in Zion, sitting down at the table to eat and drink with His 
twelve apostles,--what did this make them?
     Note what they were at first. By His first calling of them 
they became His _followers_, for He said unto them, "Follow Me." 
That is to say, they were convinced, by sundry marks and signs, 
that He was the Messias, and they, therefore, became His 
followers. Followers may be at a great distance from their leader, 
and enjoy little or no intercourse with him, for the leader may be 
too great to be approached by the common members of his band. In 
the case of the disciples, their following was unusually close, 
for their Master was very condescending, but still their inter-
course was not always of the most intimate kind at first, and 
therefore it was not at the first that He called them to such a 
festival as this supper. They began with following, and this is 
where we must begin. If we cannot enter as yet into closer 
association with our Lord, we may, at least, know His voice by His 
Spirit, and follow Him as the sheep follow the shepherd. The most 
important way of following Him is to trust Him, and then 
diligently to imitate His example. This is a good beginning, and 
it will end well, for those who walk with Him to-day shall rest 
with Him hereafter; those who tread in His footsteps shall sit on 
His throne.
     Being His followers, they came next to be His _disciples_. A 
man may have been a follower for a while, and yet may not have 
reached discipleship. A follower may follow blindly, and hear a 
great deal which he does not understand; but when he becomes a 
disciple, his Master instructs him, and leads him into truth. To 
explain, to expound, to solve difficulties, to clear away doubts, 
and to make truth intelligible, is the office of a teacher amongst 
his disciples. Now, it was a very blessed thing for the followers 
to become disciples, but still disciples are not necessarily so 
intimate with their Master as to sit and eat with him. Socrates 
and Plato knew many in the Academy whom they did not invite to 
their homes. My brethren, if Jesus had but called us to be His 
disciples, and no more we should have had cause for great 
thankfulness; if we had been allowed to sit at His feet, and had 
never shared in such an entertainment as that before us, we ought 
to have been profoundly grateful; but now that He has favoured us 
with a yet higher place, let us never be unfaithful to our 
discipleship. Let us daily learn of Jesus, let us search the Bible 
to see what it was that He taught us, and then by the aid of His 
Holy Spirit let us scrupulously obey. Yet is there a something 
beyond.
     Being the Lord's disciples, the chosen ones next rose to 
become His _servants_, which is a step in advance, since the 
disciple may be but a child, but the servant has some strength, 
has received some measure of training, and renders somewhat in 
return. Their Master gave them power to preach the gospel, and to 
execute commissions of grace, and happy were they to be called to 
wait upon such a Master, and aid in setting up His kingdom. My 
dear brethren and sisters, are you all Christ's servants 
consciously? If so, though the service may at times seem heavy 
because your faith is weak, yet be very thankful that you are 
servants at all, for it is better to serve God than to reign over 
all the kingdoms of this world. It is better to be the lowest 
servant of Christ than to be the greatest of men, and remain 
slaves to your own lusts, or be mere men-pleasers. His yoke is 
easy, and His burden is light. The servant of such a Master should 
rejoice in his calling; yet is there something beyond.
     Towards the close of His life, our Master revealed the yet 
nearer relation of His disciples, and uttered words like these: 
"Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knoweth not 
what his lord doeth, but I have called you _friends_, for all 
things that I have heard of My Father I have made known unto you." 
This is a great step in advance. The friend, however humble, 
enjoys much familiarity with his friend. The friend is told what 
the servant need not know. The friend enjoys a communion to which 
the mere servant, disciple, or follower has not attained. May we 
know this higher association, this dearer bond of relationship! 
May we not be content without the enjoyment of our Master's 
friendship! "He that hath friends must show himself friendly;" and 
if we would have Christ's friendship, we must befriend His cause, 
His truth, and His people. He is a Friend that loveth at all 
times; if you would enjoy His friendship, take care to abide in 
Him.
     Now note that, on the night before His Passion, our Lord led 
His friends a step beyond ordinary friendship. The mere follower 
does not sit at table with his leader; the disciple does not claim 
to be a fellow-commoner with his master; the servant is seldom 
entertained at the same table with his lord; the befriended one is 
not always invited to be a guest; but here the Lord Jesus made His 
chosen ones to be _His table-companions;_ He lifted them up to sit 
with Him at the same table, to eat of the same bread, and drink of 
the same cup with Himself. From that position He has never 
degraded them; they were representative men, and where the Lord 
placed them, He has placed all His saints permanently. All the 
Lord's believing people are sitting, by sacred privilege and 
calling, at the same table with Jesus, for truly, our fellowship 
is with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ. He has come into 
our hearts, and He sups with us, and we with Him; we are His 
table-companions, and shall eat bread with Him in the kingdom of 
God.
     Table-companions, then, that is the answer to the question, 
"What did this festival make the apostles?" This festival shows 
all the members of the Church of Christ to be, through divine 
grace, table-companions with one another, and with Christ Jesus 
their Lord.
     II. So now we shall pass on, in the second place, to ask, 
what did this table-companionship imply?
     It implied, first of all, _mutual fidelity_. This solemn 
eating and drinking together was a pledge of faithfulness to one 
another. It must have been so understood, or otherwise there would 
have been no force in the complaint: "He that eateth bread with Me 
hath lifted up his heel against Me." Did not this mean that, 
_because_ Judas had eaten bread with his Lord, he was bound not to 
betray Him, and so to lift up his heel against Him? This was the 
seal of an implied covenant; having eaten together, they were 
under bond to be faithful to one another. Now, as many of you as 
are really the servants and friends of Christ may know that the 
Lord Jesus, in eating with you at His table, pledges Himself to be 
faithful to you. The Master never plays the Judas,--the Judas is 
among the disciples. There is nothing traitorous in the Lord; He 
is not only able to keep that which we have committed to Him, but 
He is faithful, and will do it. He will be faithful, not only as 
to the great and main matter, but also to every promise He has 
made. Know ye then, assuredly, that your Master would not have 
asked you to His table to eat bread with Him if He intended to 
desert you. He has received you as His honoured guests, and fed 
you upon His choicest meat, and thereby He does as good as say to 
you, "I will never leave you, come what may, and in all times of 
trial, and depression, and temptation, I will be at your right 
hand, and you shall not be moved, and to the very last you shall 
prove My faithfulness and truth."
     But, beloved, you do not understand this supper unless you 
are also reminded of the faithfulness that is due from you to your 
Lord, for the feast is common, and the pledge mutual. In eating 
with Him, you plight your troth to the Crucified, Beloved, how 
have you kept your pledge during the past year? You have eaten 
bread with Him, and I trust that in your hearts you have never 
gone so far aside as to lift up your heel against Him, but have 
you always honoured Him as you should? Have you acted as guests 
should have done? Can you remember His love to you, and put your 
love to Him side by side with it, without being ashamed? From this 
time forth, may the Holy Ghost work in our souls a jealous 
fidelity to the Well-beloved which shall not permit our hearts to 
wander from Him, or suffer our zeal for His glory to decline!
     Again, remember that there is in this solemn eating and 
drinking together a pledge of fidelity between the disciples 
themselves, as well as between the disciples and their Lord. Judas 
would have been a traitor if he had betrayed Peter, or John, or 
James: so, when ye come to the one table, my brethren, ye must 
henceforth be true to one another. All bickerings and jealousies 
must cease, and a generous and affectionate spirit must rule in 
every bosom. If you hear any speak against those you have communed 
with, reckon that, as you have eaten bread with them, you are 
bound to defend their reputations. If any railing accusation be 
raised against any brother in Christ, reckon that his character is 
as dear to you as your own. Let a sacred Freemasonry be maintained 
among us, if I may liken a far higher and more spiritual union to 
anything which belongs to common life. Ye are members one of 
another, see that ye love each other with a pure heart fervently. 
Drinking of the same cup, eating of the same bread, you set forth 
before the world a token which I trust is not meant to be a lie. 
As it truly shows Christ's faithfulness to you, so let it as 
really typify your faithfulness to Christ, and to one another.
     In the next place, eating and drinking together was a token 
of _mutual confidence_. They, in sitting there together, 
voluntarily avowed their confidence in each other. Those disciples 
trusted their Master, they knew He would not mislead or deceive 
them. They trusted each other also, for when they were told that 
one of them would betray their Lord, they did not suspect each 
other, but each one said, "Lord, is it I?" They had much 
confidence in one another, and the Lord Jesus, as we have seen, 
had placed great confidence in them by treating them as His 
friends. He had even trusted them with the great secret of His 
coming sufferings, and death. They were a trustful company who sat 
at that supper-table. Now, beloved, when you gather around this 
table, come in the spirit of implicit trustfulness in the Lord 
Jesus. If you are suffering, do not doubt His love, but believe 
that He works all things for your good. If you are vexed with 
cares, prove your confidence by leaving them entirely in your 
Redeemer's hands. It will not be a festival of communion to you if 
you come here with suspicions about your Master. No, show your 
confidence as you eat of the bread with Him. Let there also be a 
brotherly confidence in each other. Grievous would it be to see a 
spirit of suspicion and distrust among you. Suspicion is the death 
of fellowship. The moment one Christian imagines that another 
thinks hardly of him, though there may not be the slightest truth 
in that thought, yet straightway the root of bitterness is 
planted. Let us believe in one another's sincerity, for we may 
rest assured that each of our brethren deserves to be trusted more 
than we do. Turn your suspicions within, and if you must suspect, 
suspect your own heart; but when you meet with those who have 
communed with you at this table, say within yourself, "If such can 
deceive me, and alas I they may, then will I be content to be im-
posed upon rather than entertain perpetual mistrust of my fellow-
Christians."
     A third meaning of the assembling around the table is this, 
_hearty fraternity_. Our Lord, in sitting down at the table with 
His disciples, showed Himself to be one with them, a Brother 
indeed. We do not read that there was any order of priority by 
which their seats were arranged. Of course, if the Grand 
Chamberlain at Rome had arranged the table, he would have placed 
Peter at the right hand of Christ, and the other apostles in 
graduated positions according to the dignity of their future 
bishoprics, but all that we know about their order is this, that 
John sat next to the Saviour, and leaned upon His bosom, and that 
Peter sat a good way off,--we feel sure he did, because it is said 
that he "beckoned" unto John; if he had sat next to him, he would 
have whispered to him, but he beckoned to him, and so he must have 
been some way down the table, if, indeed, there was any "_down_" 
or "_up_" in the arrangement of the guests. We believe the fact 
was, that they sat there on a sacred equality, the Lord Jesus, the 
EIder Brother, among them, and all else arranged according to 
those words, "One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren." Let us feel, then, in coming to the table again at this 
time, that we are linked in ties sacred relationship with Jesus 
Christ, who is exalted in heaven, and that through Him our 
relationship with our fellow-Christians is very near and intimate.
     Oh, that Christian brotherhood were more real! The very word 
"brother" has come to be ridiculed as a piece of hypocrisy, and 
well it may, for it is mostly used as a cant phrase, and in many 
cases means very little. But it ought to mean something. You have 
no right to come to that table unless you really feel that those 
who are washed in Jesus' blood have a claim upon the love of your 
heart, and the activity of your benevolence. What! are ye to live 
together for ever in heaven, and will ye show no affection for one 
another here below? It is your Master's new command that ye love 
one another; will ye disregard it? He has given this as the badge 
of Christians: "By this shall all men know that ye are My 
disciples,"--not if ye wear a gold cross, but--"if ye have love 
one to another." That is the Christian's badge of his being, in 
very truth, a disciple of Jesus Christ. Here, at this table, we 
find fraternity. Whosoever eateth of this sacred supper declares 
himself to be one of a brotherhood in Christ, a brotherhood 
striving for the same cause, having sincere sympathy, being 
members of each other, and all of them members of the body of 
Christ. God make this to be a fact throughout Christendom even 
now, and how will the world marvel as it cries, "See how these 
Christians love one another!"
     But this table means more yet: it signifies _common 
enjoyment_. Jesus eats, and they eat, the same bread. He drinks, 
and they drink, of the same cup. There is no distinction in the 
viands. What meaneth this? Doth it not say to us that the joy of 
Christ is the joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be 
full"? The very joy that delights Christ is that which He prepares 
for His people. You, if you are a true believer, have sympathy in 
Christ's joy, you delight to see His kingdom come, the truth 
advanced, sinners saved, grace glorified, holiness promoted, God 
exalted; this also is His delight. But my dear brethren and 
fellow-professors, are you sure that your chief joy is the same as 
Christ's? Are you certain that the mainstay of your life is the 
same as that which was His meat and His drink, namely, to do the 
will of the heavenly Father? If not, I am afraid you have no 
business at this table; but if it be so, and you come to the 
table, then I pray that you may share the joy of Christ. May you 
joy in Him as He joys in you, and so may your fellowship be sweet!
     Lastly, on this point, the feast at the one table indicated 
_familiar affection_. It is the child's place to sit at the table 
with its parents, for there affection rules. It is the place of 
honour to sit at the table: "Martha served, but Lazarus was one of 
them that sat at the table." But the honour is such as love and 
not fear suggests. Men at the table often reveal their minds more 
fully than elsewhere. If you want to understand a man, you do not 
go to see him at the Stock Exchange, or follow him into the 
market; for there he keeps himself to himself; but you go to his 
table, and there he unbosoms himself. Now, the Lord Jesus Christ 
sat at the table with His disciples. 'Twas a meal; 'twas a meal of 
a homely kind; intimate intercourse ruled the hour. Oh, brethren 
and sisters, I am afraid we have come to this table sometimes, and 
Christ, and then it has been an empty formality and nothing more. 
I thank God that, coming to this table every Sabbath-day, as some 
of us do, and have done for many years, we have yet for the most 
part enjoyed the nearest communion with Christ here that we have 
ever known, and have a thousand times blessed His name for this 
ordinance. Still, there is such a thing as only eating the bread 
and drinking the wine, and losing all the sacred meaning thereof. 
Do pray the Lord to reveal Himself to you. Ask that it may not be 
a dead form to you, but that now in very deed you may give to 
Christ your heart, while He shall show to you His hands and His 
side, and make known to you His agonies and death, wherewith He 
redeemed you from the wrath to come. All this, and vastly more, is 
the teaching of the table at which Jesus sat with the twelve. I 
have often wondered why the Church of Rome does not buy up all 
those pictures by one of its most renowned painters, Leonardo da 
Vinci, in which our Lord is represented as sitting at the table 
with His disciples, for these are a contradiction of the Popish 
doctrine on this subject. As long as that picture remains on the 
wall, and as long as copies of it are spread everywhere, the 
Church of Rome stands convicted of going against the teaching of 
the earlier Church by setting up an altar when she confesses her-
self that aforetime it was not considered to be an altar of 
sacrifice but a table of fellowship, at which the Lord did not 
kneel, nor stand as an officiating priest, but at which He and His 
disciples sat. We, at least, have no rebukes to fear from 
antiquity, for we follow, and mean to follow, the primitive 
method. Our Lord has given us commandment to do this until He 
comes,--not to alter it, but just to "do this," and nothing else, 
in the same manner until He shall come.
     III. We will draw to a close by asking--What further may be 
inferred from this sitting of Christ with his disciples at the 
table?
     I answer: first, _there may be inferred from it the equality 
of all the saints_. There were here twelve apostles. Their 
apostleship, however, is not concerned in the matter. When the 
Lord's supper was celebrated after all the apostles had gone to 
heaven, was there to be any alteration because the apostles had 
gone? Not at all. Believers are to do this in remembrance of their 
Lord _until He shall come_. There was no command for a change when 
the first apostles were all gone from the Church: No, it was to be 
the same still,--bread and wine and the surrounding of the table, 
until the Lord came. I gather, then, the equality of all saints. 
There is a difference in office, there was a difference in 
miraculous gift, and there are great differences in growth of 
grace; but still, in the household of God, all saints, whether 
apostles, pastors, teachers, deacons, elders, or private members, 
being all equal, eat at one table. There is but one bread, there 
is but one juice of the vine here.
     It is only in the Church of God that those words, so wild 
politically, can ever be any more than a dream, "Liberty, 
Equality, and Fraternity." There you have them, where Jesus is; 
not in a republic, but in the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, where all rule and dominion are vested in Him, and 
all of us willingly acknowledge Him as our glorious Head, and all 
we are brethren. Never fall into the idea that older believers 
were of a superior nature to ourselves. Do not talk of _Saint_ 
Paul, and _Saint_ Matthew, and _Saint_ Mark, unless you are 
prepared to speak of _Saint_ William and _Saint_ Jane sitting over 
yonder, for if they be in Christ they are as truly saints as those 
first saints were, and I ween there may be some who have attained 
even to higher saintship than many whom tradition has canonized. 
The heights of saintship are by grace open to us all, and the Lord 
invites us to ascend. Do not think that what the Lord wrought in 
the early saints cannot be wrought in you. It is because you think 
so that you do not pray for it, and because you do not pray for it 
you do not attain it. The grace of God sustained the apostles; 
that grace is not less to-day than it was then. The Lord's arm is 
not shortened; His power is not straitened. If we can but believe, 
and be as earnest as those first saints were, we shall subdue 
kingdoms yet, and the day shall come when the gods of Hindooism, 
and the falsehoods of Mohammed, and the lies of Rome, shall as 
certainly be overthrown as were the ancient philosophies and the 
classic idolatries of Greece and Rome by the teaching of the first 
ministers of Christ. There is the same table for you, and the same 
food is there in emblem, and grace can make you like those holy 
men, for you are bought with the same blood, and quickened by the 
same Spirit. Believe only, for all things are possible to him that 
believeth.
     Another inference, only to be hinted at, is this, _that the 
wants of the Church in all ages will be the same, and the supplies 
for the Church's wants will never vary_. There will be the table 
still, and the table with the same viands upon it,--bread still, 
nothing more than bread for food; wine still, nothing less than 
wine for drink. The Church will always want the same food, the 
same Christ, the same gospel. Out on ye, traitors, who tell us 
that we are to shape our gospel to suit this enlightened 
nineteenth century! Out on ye, false-hearts, who would have us 
tone down the everlasting truth that shall outlive the sun, and 
moon, and stars, to suit your boasted culture, which is but 
varnished ignorance! No, that truth which of old was mighty 
through God to the pulling down of strongholds, is mighty still, 
and we will maintain it to the death; the Church wants the 
doctrines of grace to-day as much as when Paul, or Augustine, or 
Calvin preached them; the Church wants justification by faith, the 
substitutionary atonement, and regeneration, and divine 
sovereignty to be preached from her pulpits as much as in days of 
yore, and by God's grace she shall have them, too.
     Lastly, there is in this truth, that Christ has brought all 
His disciples into the position of table-companions, _a prophecy 
that this shall be the portion of all His people for ever_. In 
heaven there cannot be less of privilege than on earth. It cannot 
be that in the celestial state believers will be degraded from 
what they have been below. What were they, then, below? Table-
companions. What shall they be in heaven above? Table-companions 
still, and blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of 
God. "Many shall come from the east and from the west, and shall 
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of 
God," and the Lord Jesus shall be at the head of the table. Now, 
what will His table of joy be? Set your imagination to work, and 
think what will be His festival of soul when His reward shall be 
all before Him, and His triumph all achieved. Have ye imagined it? 
Can ye conceive it? Whatever it is, you shall share in it. I 
repeat those words, whatever it is, the least believer shall share 
in it. You, poor working-woman, oh, what a change for you, to sit 
among princes, near to your Lord Jesus, all your toil and want for 
ever ended! And you, sad child of suffering, scarcely able to come 
up to the assembly of God's people, and going back, perhaps, to 
that bed of languishing again, you shall have no pains there, but 
you shall be for ever with the Lord, and the joy of Christ shall 
be your joy for ever and ever! Oh, can you not realize those words 
of Dr. Watts,--
     
     "Yes, and before we rise
        To that immortal state,
     The thoughts of such amazing bliss
        Should constant joys create"?

     In the anticipation of the joy that shall be yours, forget 
your present troubles, rise superior to the difficulties of the 
hour, and if you cannot rejoice in the present, yet rejoice in the 
future, which shall so soon be your own.
     We finish with this word of deep regret,--regret that many 
here cannot understand what we have been talking about, and have 
no part in it. There are some of you who must not come to the 
table of communion because you do not love Christ. You have not 
trusted Him; you have no part in Him. There is no salvation in 
sacraments. Believe me, they are but delusions to those who do not 
come to Christ with their heart. You must not come to the outward 
sign if you have not the thing signified. Here is the way of 
Salvation: believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved. To believe in Him is to trust Him; to use an old word, it 
is recumbency; it is leaning on Him, resting on Him. Here I lean, 
I rest my whole weight on this support before me; do so with 
Christ in a spiritual sense: lean on Him. You have a load of sin, 
lean on Him, sin and all. You are all unworthy, and weak, and 
perhaps miserable; then cast on Him the weakness, the un-
worthiness, the misery and all. Take Him to be all in all to you, 
and when you have thus trusted Him, you will have become His 
follower; go on by humility to be His disciple, by obedience to be 
His servant, by love to be His friend, and by communion to be His 
table-companion.
     The Lord so lead you, for Jesus' sake! Amen.




             A WORD FROM THE BELOVED'S OWN MOUTH.

             "And ye are clean."--John xiii. 10.


AS Gideon's fleece was full of dew so that he could wring out the 
moisture, so will a text sometimes be when the Holy Spirit deigns 
to visit His servants through its words. This utterance of our 
Saviour to His disciples has been as a wafer made with honey to 
our taste, and we doubt not it may prove equally as sweet to 
others.
     Observe carefully, dear friends, what _the eulogium_ is which 
is here passed upon the Lord's beloved disciples: "Ye are clean." 
This is the primeval blessing, so soon lost by our first parents. 
This is the virtue, the loss of which shut man out of Paradise, 
and continues to shut men out of heaven. The want of cleanness in 
heart and hands condemns sinners to banishment from God, and 
defiles all their offerings. To be clean before God is the desire 
of every penitent, and the highest aspiration of the most advanced 
believer. It is what all the ceremonies and ablutions of the law 
can never bestow and what Pharisees with all their pretensions 
cannot attain. To be clean is to be as the angels are, as 
glorified saints are, yea, as the Father Himself is.
     Acceptance with the Lord, safety, happiness, and every 
blessing, always go with cleanness of heart, and he that hath it 
cannot miss of heaven. It seems too high a condition to be 
ascribed to mortals, yet, by the lips of Him who could not err, 
the disciples were said, without a qualifying word, or adverb of 
degree, to be "clean"; that is to say, they were perfectly 
justified in the sight of eternal equity, and were regarded as 
free from every impurity. Dear friends, is this blessing yours? 
Have you ever believed unto righteousness? Have you taken the Lord 
Jesus to be your complete cleansing, your sanctification, your 
redemption? Has the Holy Spirit ever sealed in your peaceful 
spirit the gracious testimony, "ye are clean"? The assurance is 
not confined to the apostles, for ye also are "complete in Him," 
"perfect in Christ Jesus," if ye have indeed by faith received the 
righteousness of God. The psalmist said, "Wash me, and I shall be 
whiter than snow;" if you have been washed, you are even to that 
highest and purest degree clean before the Lord, and clean now. 
Oh, that all believers would live up to their condition and 
privilege; but alas! too many are pining as if they were still 
miserable sinners, and forgetting that they are in Christ Jesus 
forgiven sinners, and therefore ought to be happy in the Lord. 
Remember, beloved believer, that, as one with Christ, you are not 
with sinners in the gall of bitterness, but with the saints in the 
land which floweth with milk and honey.
     Your cleanness is not a thing of degrees, it is not a 
variable or vanishing quantity, it is present, abiding, perfect, 
you are clean through the Word, through the application of the 
blood of sprinkling to the conscience, and through the imputation 
of the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Then lift up your 
head, and sing for joy of heart, seeing that your transgression is 
pardoned, your sin is covered, and in you Jehovah seeth not 
iniquity. Dear friends, let not another moment pass till by faith 
in Jesus you have grasped this privilege. Be not content to 
believe that the priceless boon may be had, but lay hold upon it 
for yourself. You will find the song of substitution a choice song 
if you are able to sing it.

        "In my Surety I am free,
     His dear hands were pierced for me;
        With his spotless vesture on
                Holy as the Holy One."

     Much of the force of the sentence before us lies in _the 
Person praising_. To be certified as clean by the blind priests of 
Rome, would be small comfort to a true Christian. To receive the 
approving verdict of our fellow-men is consoling, but it is after 
all of small consequence. The human standard of purity is itself 
grossly incorrect, and therefore to be judged by it is but a poor 
trial, and to be acquitted a slender comfort; but the Lord Jesus 
judges no man after the flesh, He came forth from God, and is 
Himself God, infinitely just and good, hence His tests are 
accurate, and His verdict is absolute. I wot whom He pronounces 
clean is clean indeed. Our Lord was omniscient, He would have at 
once detected the least evil in His disciples; if there had 
remained upon the man unpardoned sin, He must have seen it; if any 
relic of condemnation had lingered upon them, He must have 
detected it at once, no speck could have escaped His all-
discerning eye; yet did He say without hesitation of all but 
Judas, "Ye are clean."
     Perhaps they did not catch the full glory of this utterance; 
possibly they missed much of that deep joyous meaning, which is 
now revealed to us by the Spirit; otherwise, what bliss to have 
heard with their own ears from those sacred lips, so plain, so 
positive, so sure a testimony to their character before God! Yet 
our hearts need not be filled with regret because we cannot hear 
that ever-blessed voice with these our earthly ears, for the 
testimony of Jesus in the Word is quite as sure as the witness of 
His lips when He spoke among the sons of men, and that testimony 
is, "Whosoever believeth is justified from all things." Yes, it is 
as certain as if you, dear friends, heard the Redeemer Himself 
speak, that you are free from all condemning sin if you are 
looking with your whole heart to Jesus only as your all in all. 
What a joy is yours and mine! He who is to judge the world in 
righteousness has Himself affirmed us to be clean. By how much the 
condemnation of guilt is black and terrible, by so much the 
forgiveness of sin is bright and comforting. Let us rejoice in the 
Lord, whose indisputable judgment has given forth a sentence so 
joyous, so full of glory.

     "Jesus declares me clean,
        Then clean indeed I am,
     However guilty I have been,
        I'm cleans?d through the Lamb.

     "His lips can never lie,
        His eye is never blind,
     If he acquit, I can defy
        All hell a fault to find."

     It may cheer us to call to mind _the persons praised_. They 
were not cherubim and seraphim, but men, and notably they were men 
compassed with infirmity. There was Peter, who a few minutes after 
was forward and presumptuous; and, indeed, it is not needful to 
name them one by one, for they all forsook their Master, and fled 
in His hour of peril. Not one among them was more than a mere 
child in grace; they had little about them that was apostolic 
except their commission, they were very evidently men of like 
passions with us; yet their Lord declared them to be clean, and 
clean they were. Here is good cheer for those souls who are 
hungering after righteousness, and pining because they feel so 
much of the burden of indwelling sin; for cleanliness before the 
Lord is not destroyed by our infirmities, nor prevented by our 
inward temptations. We stand in the righteousness of Another. No 
measure of personal weakness, spiritual anxiety, soul conflict, or 
mental agony can mar our acceptance in the Beloved. We may be weak 
infants, or wandering sheep in ourselves, and for both reasons we 
may be very far from what we wish to be; but, as God sees us, we 
are viewed as washed in the blood of Jesus, and we, even we, are 
clean every whit.
     What a forcible expression, "clean every whit;" every inch, 
from every point of view, in all respects, and to the uttermost 
degree! Dear friend, if a believer, this fact is true to _you_, 
even to you. Hesitate not to drink, for it is water out of your 
own cistern, given to you in the covenant of grace. Think not that 
it is presumption to believe the Word, marvellous though it be. 
You are dealing with a wonderful Saviour, who only doeth wonderful 
things, therefore stand not back on account of the greatness of 
the blessing, but rather believe the more readily because the Word 
is so like to everything the Lord doeth or speaketh. Yet when thou 
hast believed for thyself, and cast every doubt to the wind, thou 
wilt not wonder less, but more, and it will be thy never-ceasing 
cry, "Whence is this to me?" How is it that I, who wallowed with 
swine, should be made pure as the angels? Delivered from the 
foulest guilt, is it indeed possible that I am made the possessor 
of a perfect righteousness? Sing, O heavens, for the Lord hath 
done it, and He shall have everlasting praise!

     "Yes, thou, my soul, e'en thou art clean,
     The Lord has wash'd thee white as snow,
     In spotless beauty thou art seen,
     And Jesus hath pronounced thee so.

     "Despite thy conflicts, doubts, and fears,
     Yet art thou still in Christ all fair,
     Haste then to wipe away thy tears,
     And make His glory all thy care."

     _The time when the praise was given_ is not without 
instruction. The word of loving judgment is in the present tense, 
"Ye _are_ clean." It is not, "ye were clean," that might be a 
rebuke for purity shamelessly sullied, a condemnation for wilful 
neglect, a prophecy of wrath to come; neither is it, "ye might 
have been clean," that would have been a stern rebuke for 
privileges rejected, and opportunities wasted; nor is it even, "ye 
shall be clean," though that would have been a delightful prophecy 
of good things to come at some distant period; but ye are clean, 
at this moment, in this room, and around this table. Though but 
just then Peter had spoken so rudely, yet he was even then clean.
     What comfort is here amid our present sense of imperfection! 
Our cleanness is a matter of this present hour, we are, just here 
in our present condition and our position, "clean every whit." Why 
then postpone joy? The cause of it is in possession, let the mirth 
be even now overflowing. Much of our heritage is certainly future, 
but if there were no other boon tangible to faith in this 
immediate present, this one blessing alone should awaken all our 
powers to the highest praise. Are we even now clothed with the 
fair white linen which is the righteousness of saints? Yes, 'tis 
even so, for--

     "We are wash'd in Jesu's blood,
        We're pardon'd through His name;
     And the good Spirit of our God
        Has sanctified our frame."

     Then let us sing a new song unto Jehovah-Tsidkenu, the Lord 
our Righteousness.
     May the Holy Ghost now bear witness with every believer, "and 
ye are clean."

     "Then may your souls rejoice and sing,
     Then may your voices sweetly ring,
     For if your souls through Christ are clear,
     What cause have you to faint or fear?"




                 THE BELIEVER NOT AN ORPHAN.

     "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you."--John 
xiv. 18.


YOU will notice that the margin reads, "I will not leave you 
orphans: I will come to you." In the absence of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the disciples were like children deprived of their 
parents. During the three years in which He had been with them, He 
had solved all their difficulties, borne all their burdens, and 
supplied all their needs. Whenever a case was too hard or too 
heavy for them, they took it to Him. When their enemies well nigh 
overcame them, Jesus came to the rescue, and turned the tide of 
battle. They were all happy and safe enough whilst the Master was 
with them; He walked in their midst like a father amid a large 
family of children, making all the household glad. But now He was 
about to be taken from them by an ignominious death, and they 
might well feel that they would be like little children deprived 
of their natural and beloved protector. Our Saviour knew the fear 
that was in their hearts, and before they could express it, He 
removed it by saying, "You shall not be left alone in this wild 
and desert world; though I be absent in the flesh, yet I will be 
present with you in a more efficacious manner; I will come to you 
spiritually, and you shall derive from My spiritual presence even 
more good than you could have had from My bodily presence, had I 
still continued in your midst."
     Observe, first, here is an _evil averted:_ "I will not leave 
you orphans;" and, in the second place, here is_ a consolation 
provided: _"I will come to you."
      I. First, here is, an evil averted.
     Without their Lord, believers would, apart from the Holy 
Spirit, be like other orphans, unhappy and desolate. Give them 
what you might, their loss could not have been recompensed. No 
number of lamps can make up for the sun's absence; blaze as they 
may, it is still night. No circle of friends can supply to a 
bereaved woman the loss of her husband; without him, she is still 
a widow. Even thus, without Jesus, it is inevitable that the 
saints should be as orphans; but Jesus has promised in the text 
that we shall not be so; the one only thing that can remove the 
trial He declares shall be ours, "I will come to you."
     Now remember, that_ an orphan is one whose parent is dead_. 
This in itself is a great sorrow, if there were no other. The dear 
father, so well beloved, was suddenly smitten down with sickness; 
they watched him with anxiety; they nursed him with sedulous care; 
but he expired. The loving eye is closed in darkness for them. 
That active hand will no longer toil for the family. That heart 
and brain will no longer feel and think for them. Beneath the 
green grass the father sleeps, and every time the child surveys 
that hollowed hillock his heart swells with grief. Beloved, we are 
not orphans in that sense, for our Lord Jesus is not dead. It is 
true He died, for one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His 
side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water, a sure evidence 
that the pericardium had been pierced, and that the fountain of 
life had been broken up. He died, 'tis certain, but He is not dead 
now. Go not to the grave to seek Him. Angel voices say, "He is not 
here, for He is risen." He could not be holden by the bands of 
death. We do not worship a dead Christ, nor do we even think of 
Him now as a corpse. That picture on the wall, which the Romanists 
paint and worship, represents Christ as dead; but oh! it is so 
good to think of Christ as living, remaining in an existence real 
and true, none the less living because He died, but all the more 
truly full of life because He has passed through the portals of 
the grave, and is now reigning for ever. See then, dear friends, 
the bitter root of the orphan's sorrow is gone from us, for our 
Jesus is not dead now. No mausoleum enshrines His ashes, no 
pyramid entombs His body, no monument records the place of His 
permanent sepulchre.

     "He lives, the great Redeemer lives,
     What joy the blest assurance gives!"

     We are not orphans, for "the Lord is risen indeed."
     The orphan has a sharp sorrow springing out of the death of 
his parent, namely, that _he is left alone_. He cannot now make 
appeals to the wisdom of the parent who could direct him. He 
cannot run, as once he did, when he was weary, to climb the 
paternal knee. He cannot lean his aching head upon the parental 
bosom. "Father," he may say, but no voice gives an answer. 
"Mother," he may cry, but that fond title, which would awaken the 
mother if she slept, cannot arouse her from the bed of death. The 
child is alone, alone as to those two hearts which were its best 
companions. The parent and lover are gone. The little ones know 
what it is to be deserted and forsaken. But we are not so; we are 
not orphans. It is true Jesus is not here in body, but His 
spiritual presence is quite as blessed as His bodily presence 
would have been. Nay, it is better, for supposing Jesus Christ to 
be here in person, you could not all come and touch the hem of His 
garment,--not all at once, at any rate. There might be thousands 
waiting all the world over to speak with Him; but how could they 
all reach Him, if He were merely here in body? You might all be 
wanting to tell Him something, but in the body He could only 
receive some one or two of you at a time.
     But in spirit there is no need for you to stir from the pew, 
no need to say a word; Jesus hears your thoughts talk, and attends 
to all your needs at the same moment. No need to press to get at 
Him because the throng is great, for He is as near to me as He is 
to you, and as near to you as to saints in America, or the islands 
of the Southern Sea. He is everywhere present, and all His beloved 
may talk with Him. You can tell Him at this moment the sorrows 
which you dare not open up to anyone else. You will feel that, in 
declaring them to Him, you have not breathed them to the air, but 
that a real Person has heard you, One as real as though you could 
grip His hand, and could see the loving flash of His eye and mark 
the sympathetic change of His countenance.
     Is it not so with you, ye children of a living Saviour? You 
know it is; you have a Friend that sticketh closer than a brother. 
You have a near and dear One, who, in the dead of the night is in 
the chamber, and in the heat and burden of the day is in the field 
of labour. You are not orphans, the "Wonderful, Counsellor, the 
mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace," is with 
you; your Lord is here; and, as one whom his mother comforteth, so 
Jesus comforts you.
     The orphan, too, has _lost the kind hand which took care 
always that food and raiment should be provided, that the table 
should be well stored, and that the house should be kept in 
comfort_. Poor feeble one, who will provide for his wants? His 
father is dead, his mother is gone: who will take care of the 
little wanderer now? But it is not so with us. Jesus has not left 
us orphans; His care for His people is no less now than it was 
when He sat at the table with Mary, and Martha, and Lazarus, whom 
"Jesus loved." Instead of the provisions being less, they are even 
greater, for since the Holy Spirit has been given to us, we have 
richer fare and are more indulged with spiritual comforts than 
believers were before the bodily presence of the Master had 
departed. Do your souls hunger to-night? Jesus gives you the bread 
of heaven. Do you thirst to-night? The waters from the rock cease 
not to flow.

     "Come, make your wants, your burdens known."

     You have but to make known your needs to have them all 
supplied, Christ waits to be gracious in the midst of this 
assembly. He is here with His golden hand, opening that hand to 
supply the wants of every living soul. "Oh!" saith one, "I am poor 
and needy." Go on with the quotation. "Yet the Lord thinketh upon 
me." "Ah" saith another, "I have besought the Lord thrice to take 
away a thorn in the flesh from me." Remember what he said to Paul, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee." You are not left without the 
strength you want. The Lord is your Shepherd still. He will 
provide for you till He leads you through death's dark valley, and 
brings you to the shining pastures upon the hill-tops of glory. 
You are not destitute, you need not beg an asylum from an ungodly 
world by bowing to its demands, or trusting its vain promises, for 
Jesus will never leave you nor forsake you.
     The orphan, too, is _left without the instruction which is 
most suitable for a child_. We may say what we will, but there is 
none so fit to form a child's character as the parent. It is a 
very sad loss for a child to have lost either father or mother in 
its early days; for the most skilful preceptor, though he may do 
much, by the blessing of God very much, is but a stop-gap, and but 
half makes up for the original ordinance of Providence, that the 
parent's love should fashion the child's mind. But, dear friends, 
we are not orphans; we who believe in Jesus are not left without 
an education. Jesus is not here Himself, it is true. I dare say 
some of you wish you could come on Lord's-days, and listen to Him! 
Would it not be sweet to look up to this pulpit, and see the 
Crucified One, and to hear Him preach? Ah! so you think, but the 
apostle says, "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet 
now henceforth know we Him no more."
     It is most for your profit that you should receive the Spirit 
of truth, not through the golden vessel of Christ in His actual 
presence here, but through the poor earthen vessels of humble 
servants of God like ourselves. At any rate, whether _we_ speak, 
or an angel from heaven, the speaker matters not; it is the Spirit 
of God alone that is the power of the Word, and makes that Word to 
become vital and quickening to you. Now, you have the Spirit of 
God. The Holy Spirit is so given, that there is not a truth which 
you may not understand. You may be led into the deepest mysteries 
by His teaching. You may be made to know and to comprehend those 
knotty points in the Word of God which have hitherto puzzled you. 
You have but humbly to look up to Jesus, and His Spirit will still 
teach you. I tell you, though you are poor and ignorant, and 
perhaps can scarcely read a word in the Bible; for all that, you 
may be better instructed in the things of God than doctors of 
divinity, if you go to the Holy Spirit, and are taught of Him. 
Those who go only to books and to the letter, and are taught of 
men, may be fools in the sight of God; but those who go to Jesus, 
and sit at His feet, and ask to be taught of His Spirit, shall be 
wise unto salvation. Blessed be God, there are not a few amongst 
us of this sort. We are not left orphans; we have an Instructor 
with us still.
     There is one point in which the orphan is often sorrowfully 
reminded of his orphanhood, namely,_ in lacking a defender_. It is 
so natural in little children, when some big boy molests them, to 
say, "I'll tell my father!" How often did we use to say so, and 
how often have we heard from the little ones since, "I'll tell 
mother!" Sometimes, the not being able to do this is a much 
severer loss than we can guess. Unkind and cruel men have snatched 
away from orphans the little which a father's love had left 
behind; and in the court of law there has been no defender to 
protect the orphan's goods. Had the father been there, the child 
would have had its rights, scarcely would any have dared to 
infringe them; but, in the absence of the father, the orphan is 
eaten up like bread, and the wicked of the earth devour his 
estate. In this sense, the saints are not orphans. The devil would 
rob us of our heritage if he could, but there is an Advocate with 
the Father who pleads for us. Satan would snatch from us every 
promise, and tear from us all the comforts of the covenant; but we 
are not orphans, and when he brings a suit-at-law against us, and 
thinks that we are the only defendants in the case, he is 
mistaken, for we have an Advocate on high. Christ comes in and 
pleads, as the sinners' Friend, for us; and when _He_ pleads at 
the bar of justice, there is no fear but that His plea will be of 
effect, and our inheritance shall be safe. He has not left us 
orphans.
     Now I want, without saying many words, to get you who love 
the Master to feel what a very precious thought this is, that you 
are not alone in this world; that, if you have no earthly friends, 
if you have none to whom you can take your cares, if you are quite 
lonely so far as outward friends are concerned, yet Jesus is with 
you, is really with you, practically with you, able to help you, 
and ready to do so, and that you have a good and kind Protector 
close at hand at this present moment, for Christ has said it: "I 
will not leave you orphans."
     II. Secondly, there is, a consolation provided: The remedy by 
which the evil is averted is this, our Lord Jesus said, "_I will 
come to you_."
     What does this mean? Does it not mean, from the connection, 
this--"_I will come to you by My Spirit"? _Beloved, we must not 
confuse the Persons of the Godhead. The Holy Spirit is not the Son 
of God; Jesus, the Son of God, is not the Holy Spirit.
     They are two distinct Persons of the one Godhead. But yet 
there is such a wonderful unity, and the blessed Spirit acts so 
marvellously as the Vicar of Christ, that it is quite correct to 
say that, when the Spirit comes, Jesus comes, too, and "I will 
come to you," means "I, by My Spirit, who shall take My place, and 
represent Me, I will come to be with you." See then, Christian, 
you have the Holy Spirit in you and with you to be the 
Representative of Christ. Christ is with you now, not in person, 
but by His Representative,--an efficient, almighty, divine, 
everlasting Representative, who stands for Christ, and is as 
Christ to you in His presence in your souls. Because you thus have 
Christ by His Spirit, you cannot be orphans, for the Spirit of God 
is always with you. It is a delightful truth that the Spirit of 
God always dwells in believers;--not sometimes, but always. He is 
not always active in believers, and He may be grieved until His 
sensible presence is altogether withdrawn, but His secret presence 
is always there. At no single moment is the Spirit of God wholly 
gone from a believer. The believer would die spiritually if this 
could happen, but that cannot be, for Jesus has said, "Because I 
live, ye shall live also." Even when the believer sins, the Holy 
Spirit does not utterly depart from him, but is still in him to 
make him smart for the sin into which he has fallen. The 
believer's prayers prove that the Holy Spirit is still within him. 
"Take not Thy Holy Spirit from me," was the prayer of a saint who 
had fallen very foully, but in whom the Spirit of God still kept 
His residence, notwithstanding all the foulness of his guilt and 
sin.
      But, beloved, in addition to this, Jesus Christ by His 
Spirit _makes visits to His people of a peculiar kind_. The Holy 
Ghost becomes wonderfully active and potent at certain times of 
refreshing. We are then especially and joyfully sensible of His 
divine power. His influence streams through every chamber of our 
nature, and floods our dark soul with His glorious rays, as the 
sun shining in its strength. Oh, how delightful this is! Sometimes 
we have felt this at the Lord's table. My soul pants to sit with 
you at that table, because I do remember many a happy time when 
the emblems of bread and wine have assisted my faith, and kindled 
the passions of my soul into a heavenly flame. I am equally sure 
that, at the prayer-meeting, under the preaching of the Word, in 
private meditation, and in searching the Scriptures, we can say 
that Jesus Christ has come to us. What! have you no hill Mizar to 
remember?--
     
      "No Tabor-visits to recount,
      When with Him in the Holy Mount"?

     Oh, yes! some of these blessed seasons have left their 
impress upon our memories, so that, amongst our dying thoughts, 
will mingle the remembrance of those blessed seasons when Jesus 
Christ manifested Himself unto us as He doth not unto the world. 
Oh, to be wrapped in that crimson vest, closely pressed 'to His 
open side!' Oh, to put our finger into the print of nails, and 
thrust our hand into His side! We know what this means by past 
experience.

     "Dear Shepherd of Thy chosen few,
     Thy former mercies here renew."

     Permit us once again to feel the truth of the promise, "I 
will not leave you orphans; I will come to you." And now, 
gathering up the few thoughts I have uttered, let me remind you, 
dear friends, that every word of the text is instructive: "I will 
not leave you orphans: I will come to you." Observe the "I" there 
twice over. "I will not leave you orphans; father and mother may, 
but I will not; friends once beloved may turn stony-hearted, but I 
will not; Judas may play the traitor, and Ahithophel may betray 
his David, but I will not leave you comfortless. You have had many 
disappointments, great heart-breaking sorrows, but I have never 
caused you any; I--the faithful and the true Witness, the 
immutable, the unchangeable Jesus, the same yesterday, to-day, and 
for ever, I will not leave you comfortless; I will come unto you." 
Catch at that word, "I," and let your souls say, "Lord, I am not 
worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof; if Thou hadst said, 
'I will send an angel to thee,' it would have been a great mercy, 
but what sayest Thou, 'I will come unto thee'? If Thou hadst 
bidden some of my brethren come and speak a word of comfort to me, 
I had been thankful, but Thou hast put it thus in the first 
person, 'I will come unto you.' O my Lord, what shall I say, what 
shall I do, but feel a hungering and a thirsting after Thee, which 
nothing shall satisfy till Thou shalt fulfil Thine own Word, 'I 
will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you'"?
     And then notice the persons to whom it is addressed, "I will 
not leave _you_ comfortless, _you_, Peter, who will deny Me; 
_you_, Thomas, who will doubt Me; I will not leave you 
comfortless." O you who are so little in Israel that you sometimes 
think it is a pity that your name is in the church-book at all, 
because you feel yourselves to be so worthless, so unworthy, He 
will not leave _you_ comfortless, not even _you! _"O Lord," thou 
sayest, "if Thou wouldst look after the rest of Thy sheep, I would 
bless Thee for Thy tenderness to them, but _I_--I deserve to be 
left; if I were forsaken of Thee, I could not blame Thee, for I 
have played the harlot against Thy love, but yet Thou sayest, 'I 
will not leave _you_.'" Heir of heaven, do not lose your part in 
this promise. I pray you say, "Lord, come unto me, and though Thou 
refresh all my brethren, yet, Lord, refresh me with some of the 
droppings of Thy love; O Lord, fill the cup _for me; my_ thirsty 
spirit pants for it.

     "'I thirst, I faint, I die to prove
     The greatness of redeeming love,
        The love of Christ to me.'

     Now, Lord, fulfil Thy word to Thine unworthy handmaid, as I 
stand like Hannah in Thy presence. Come unto me, Thy servant, 
unworthy to lift so much as his eyes towards heaven, and only 
daring to say, 'God be merciful to me a sinner.' Fulfil Thy 
promise even to me, 'I will not leave you comfortless; I will come 
to you.'"
     Take whichever of the words you will, and they each one 
sparkle and flash after this sort. Observe, too, _the richness and 
sufficiency of the text: _"I will not leave you comfortless: I 
will come to you." He does not promise, "I will send you 
sanctifying grace, or sustaining mercy, or precious mercy," but He 
says, what is the only thing that will prevent your being orphans, 
"I will come to you." Ah! Lord, Thy grace is sweet, but Thou art 
better. The vine is good, but the clusters are better. It is well 
enough to have a gift from Thy hand, but oh! to touch the hand 
itself. It is well enough to hear the words of Thy lips, but oh! 
to kiss those lips as the spouse did in the Song, this is better 
still. You know, if there be an orphan child, you cannot prevent 
its continuing an orphan. You may feel great kindness towards it, 
supply its wants, and do all you possibly can towards it, but it 
is an orphan still. It must get its father and its mother back, or 
else it will still be an orphan. So, our blessed Lord, knowing 
this, does not say, "I will do this and that for you," but, "I 
will come to you."
     Do you not see, dear friends, here is not only all you can 
want, but all you think you can want, wrapped up in a sentence, "I 
will come to you"? "It pleased the Father that in Him should all 
fulness dwell;" so that, when Christ comes, in Him "all fulness" 
comes. "In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily," so 
that, when Jesus comes, the very Godhead comes to the believer.

     "All my capacious powers can wish
        In Thee doth richly meet;"

     and if Thou shalt come to me, it is better than all the gifts 
of Thy covenant. If I get Thee, I get all, and more than all, at 
once. Observe, then, the language and the sufficiency of the 
promise.
     But I want you to notice, further, _the continued freshness 
and force of the promise. _Somebody here owes another person fifty 
pounds, and he gives him a note of hand, "I promise to pay you 
fifty pounds." Very well! the man calls with that note of hand to-
morrow, and gets fifty pounds. And what is the good of the note of 
hand now? Why, it is of no further value, it is discharged. How 
would you like to have a note of hand which would always stand 
good? That would be a right royal present. "I promise to pay 
evermore, and this bond, though paid a thousand times, shall still 
hold good." Who would not like to have a cheque of that sort? Yet 
this is the promise which Christ gives you, "I will not leave you 
orphans: I will come to you." The first time a sinner looks to 
Christ, Christ comes to him. And what then? Why, the next minute 
it is still, "I will come to you." But here is one who has known 
Christ for fifty years, and he has had this promise fulfilled a 
thousand times a year: is it not done with? Oh, no! there it 
stands, just as fresh as when Jesus first spoke it, "I will come 
to you." Then we will treat our Lord in His own fashion, and take 
Him at His word. We will go to Him as often as ever we can, for we 
shall never weary Him; and when He has kept His promise most, then 
is it that we will go to Him, and ask Him to keep it more still; 
and after ten thousand proofs of the truth of it, we will only 
have a greater hungering and thirsting to get it fulfilled again. 
This is fit provision for life, and for death, "I will come to 
you." In the last moment, when your pulse beats faintly, and you 
are just about to pass the curtain, and enter into the invisible 
world, you may have this upon your lips, and say to your Lord, "My 
Master, still fulfil the word on which Thou hast caused me to 
hope, 'I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.'"
     Let me remind you that _the text is at this moment valid_, 
and for this I delight in it. "I will not leave you comfortless." 
That means _now_, "I will not leave you comfortless now." Are you 
comfortless at this hour? It is your own fault. Jesus Christ does 
not leave you so, nor make you so. There are rich and precious 
things in this word, "I will not leave you comfortless: I will 
come to you, I will come to you now." It may be a very dull time 
with you, and you are pining to come nearer to Christ. Very well, 
then plead the promise before the Lord. Plead the promise as you 
sit where you are: "Lord, Thou hast said Thou wilt come unto me; 
come unto me to-night." There are many reasons, believer, why you 
should plead thus. You want Him; you need Him; you require Him; 
therefore plead the promise, and expect its fulfilment. And oh! 
when He cometh, what a joy it is; He is as a bridegroom coming out 
of his chamber with his garments fragrant with aloes and cassia! 
How well the oil of joy will perfume your heart! How soon will 
your sackcloth be put away, and the garments of gladness adorn 
you! With what joy of heart will your heavy soul begin to sing 
when Jesus Christ shall whisper that you are His, and that He is 
yours! Come, my Beloved, make no tarrying; be Thou like a roe or a 
young hart upon the mountains of separation, and prove to me Thy 
promise true, "I will not leave you orphans: I will come to you."
     And now, dear friends, in conclusion, let me remind you that 
_there are many who have no share in the text_. What can I say to 
such? From my soul I pity you who do not know what the love of 
Christ means. Oh! if you could but tell the joy of God's people, 
you would not rest an hour without it.

     "His worth, if all the nations knew,
     Sure the whole world would love Him too."

     Remember, if you would find Christ, He is to be found in the 
way of faith. Trust Him, and He is yours. Depend upon the merit of 
His sacrifice; cast yourselves entirely upon that, and you are 
saved, and Christ is yours.
     God grant that we may all break bread in the kingdom above, 
and feast with Jesus, and share His glory! We are expecting His 
second coming. He is coming personally and gloriously. This is the 
brightest hope of His people. This will be the fulness of their 
redemption, the time of their resurrection. Anticipate it, 
beloved, and may God make your souls to sing for joy!

     "'Mid the splendours of the glory
        Which we hope ere long to share;
     Christ our Head, and we His members,
        Shall appear, divinely fair.
                Oh, how glorious!
     When we meet Him in the air!

     "Bright the prospect soon that greets us
        Of that long'd-for nuptial day,
     When our heavenly Bridegroom meets us
        On His kingly, conquering way;
                In the glory,
     Bride and Bridegroom reign for aye!"




            COMMUNION WITH CHRIST AND HIS PEOPLE.

        AN ADDRESS AT A COMMUNION SERVICE AT MENTONE.

     "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, 
and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread."--1 Cor. 
x. 16, 17.


I WILL read you the text as it is given in the Revised Version: 
"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the 
blood of Christ?" That is to say,--Is it not one form of 
expressing the communion of the blood of Christ? "The bread," or 
as it is in the margin, "the loaf which we break, is it not a 
communion of the body of Christ? seeing that we, who are many, are 
one loaf, one body: for we all partake of the one loaf." The word 
"loaf" helps to bring out more clearly the idea of unity intended 
to be set forth by the apostle.
     It is a lamentable fact that some have fancied that this 
simple ordinance of the Lord's supper has a certain magical, or at 
least physical power about it, so that, by the mere act of eating 
and drinking this bread and wine, men can be made partakers of the 
body and blood of Christ. It is marvellous that so plain a symbol 
should have been so complicated by genuflexions, adornments, and 
technical phrases. Can anyone see the slightest resemblance 
between the Master's sitting down with the twelve, and the mass of 
the Roman community? The original rite is lost in the super-
imposed ritual. Superstition has produced a sacrament where Jesus 
intended a fellowship. Too many, who would not go the length of 
Rome, yet speak of this simple feast as if it were a mystery dark 
and obscure. They employ all manner of hard words to turn the 
children's bread into a stone. It is not the Lord's supper, but 
the Eucharist; we see before us no plate, but a "paten"; the cup 
is a "chalice" and the table is an "altar." These are 
incrustations of superstition, whereby the blessed ordinance of 
Christ is likely to be again overgrown and perverted.
     What does this supper mean? It means communion: _communion 
with Christ, and communion with one another_.
     What is communion? The word breaks up easily into union, and 
its prefix _com_, which means _with_, union with. We must, 
therefore, first enjoy union with Christ, and with His Church, or 
else we cannot enjoy communion. Union lies at the basis of com-
munion. We must be one with Christ in heart, and soul, and life; 
baptized into His death; quickened by His life, and so brought to 
be members of His body, one with the whole Church of which He is 
the Head. We cannot have communion with Christ till we are in 
union with _Him_; and we cannot have communion with the Church 
till we are in vital union with _it_.
     I. The teaching of the Lord's supper is just this--that while 
we have many ways of communion with Christ, yet the receiving of 
Christ into our souls as our Saviour is the best way of communion 
with Him.
     I said, dear friends, that we have many ways of communion 
with Christ; let me show you that it is so.
     Communion is ours by _personal intercourse_ with the Lord 
Jesus. We speak with Him in prayer, and He speaks with us through 
the Word. Some of us speak oftener with Christ than we do with 
wife or child, and our communion with Jesus is deeper and more 
thorough than our fellowship with our nearest friend. In 
meditation and its attendant thanksgiving we speak with our risen 
Lord, and by His Holy Spirit He answers us by creating fresh 
thought and emotion in our minds. I like sometimes in prayer, when 
I do not feel that I can say anything, just to sit still, and look 
up; then faith spiritually descries the Well-beloved, and hears 
His voice in the solemn silence of the mind. Thus we have 
intercourse with Jesus of a closer sort than any words could 
possibly express. Our soul melts beneath the warmth of Jesus' 
love, and darts upward her own love in return. Think not that I am 
dreaming, or am carried off by the memory of some unusual 
rhapsody: no, I assert that the devout soul can converse with the 
Lord Jesus all the day, and can have as true fellowship with Him 
as if He still dwelt bodily among men. This thing comes to me, not 
by the hearing of the ear, but by my own personal experience: I 
know of a surety that Jesus manifests Himself unto His people as 
He doth not unto the world.
     Ah, what sweet communion often exists between the saint and 
the Well-beloved, when there is no bread and wine upon the table, 
for the Spirit Himself draws the heart of the renewed one, and it 
runs after Jesus, while the Lord Himself appears unto the longing 
spirit! Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son 
Jesus Christ. Do _you_ enjoy this charming converse?
     Next, we have communion with Christ _in His thoughts, views, 
and purposes;_ for His thoughts are our thoughts according to our 
capacity and sanctity. Believers take the same view of matters as 
Jesus does; that which pleases Him pleases them, and that which 
grieves Him grieves them also. Consider, for instance, the 
greatest theme of our thought, and see whether our thoughts are 
not like those of Christ. He delights in the Father, He loves to 
glorify the Father: do not we? Is not the Father the centre of our 
soul's delight? Do we not rejoice at the very sound of His name? 
Does not our spirit cry, "Abba, Father"? Thus it is clear we feel 
as Jesus feels towards the Father, and so we have the truest 
communion with Him. This is but one instance; your contemplations 
will bring before you a wide variety of topics wherein we think 
with Jesus. Now, identity of judgment, opinion, and purpose forms 
the highway of communion; yea, it is communion.
     We have also communion with Christ _in our emotions_. Have 
you never felt a holy horror when you have heard a word of 
blasphemy in the street? Thus Jesus felt when He saw sin, and bore 
it in His own person: only He felt it infinitely more than you do. 
Have you never felt as you looked upon sinners that you must weep 
over them? Those are holy tears, and contain the same ingredients 
as those which Jesus shed when He lamented over Jerusalem. Yes, in 
our zeal for God, our hatred of sin, our detestation of falsehood, 
our pity for men, we have true communion with Jesus.
     Further, we have had fellowship with Christ _in many of our 
actions_. Have you ever tried to teach the ignorant? This Jesus 
did. Have you found it difficult? So Jesus found it. Have you 
striven to reclaim the backslider? Then you were in communion with 
the Good Shepherd who hastens into the wilderness to find the one 
lost sheep, finds it, lays it upon His shoulders, and brings it 
home rejoicing. Have you ever watched over a soul night and day 
with tears? Then you have had communion with Him who has borne all 
our names upon His broken heart, and carries the memorial of them 
upon His pierced hands. Yes, in acts of self-denial, liberality, 
benevolence, and piety, we enter into communion with Him who went 
about doing good. Whenever we try to disentangle the snarls of 
strife, and to make peace between men who are at enmity, then are 
we doing what the great Peace-maker did, and we have communion 
with the Lord and Giver of peace. Wherever, indeed, we co-operate 
with the Lord Jesus in His designs of love to men, we are in true 
and active communion with Him.
     So it is _with our sorrows_. Certain of us have had large 
fellowship with the Lord Jesus in affliction. "Jesus wept": He 
lost a friend, and so have we. Jesus grieved over the hardness of 
men's hearts: we know that grief. Jesus was exceedingly sorry that 
the hopeful young man turned away, and went back to the world: we 
know that sorrow. Those who have sympathetic hearts, and live for 
others, readily enter into the experience of "the Man of sorrows." 
The wounds of calumny, the reproaches of the proud, the venom of 
the bigoted, the treachery of the false, and the weakness of the 
true, we have known in our measure; and therein have had communion 
with our Lord Jesus.
     Nor this alone: we have been with our Divine Master_ in His 
joys_. I suppose there never lived a happier man than the Lord 
Jesus. He was rightly called "the Man of sorrows"; but He might, 
with unimpeachable truth, have been called, "the Man of joys." He 
must have rejoiced as He called His disciples, and they came unto 
Him; as He bestowed healing and relief; as He gave pardon to 
penitents, and breathed peace on believers. His was the joy of 
finding the sheep, and taking the piece of money out of the dust. 
His work was His joy: such joy that, for its sake, He endured the 
cross, despising the shame. The exercise of benevolence is joy to 
loving hearts: the more pain it costs, the more joy it is. Kind 
actions make us happy, and in such joy we find communion with the 
great heart of Jesus.
     Thus have I given you a list of windows of agate and gates of 
carbuncle through which you may come at the Lord; but the 
ordinance of the Lord's supper sets forth a way which surpasses 
them all. It is the most accessible and the most effectual method 
of fellowship. Here it is that we have fellowship with the Lord 
Jesus by receiving Him as our Saviour. We, being guilty, accept of 
His atonement as our sacrificial cleansing, and in token thereof 
we eat this bread and drink this cup. "Oh!" says one, "I do not 
feel that I can get near to Christ. He is so high and holy, and I 
am only a poor sinner." Just so. For that very reason you can have 
fellowship with Christ in that which lies nearest to His heart: He 
is a Saviour, and to be a Saviour there must be a sinner to be 
saved. Be you that one, and Christ and you shall at once be in 
union and communion: He shall save, and you shall be saved; He 
shall sanctify, and you shall be sanctified; and twain shall thus 
be one. This table sets before you His great sacrifice. Jesus has 
offered it; will you accept it? He does not ask you to bring 
anything,--no drop of blood, no pang of flesh; all is here, and 
your part is to come and partake of it, even as of old the offerer 
partook of the peace-offering which he had brought, and so feasted 
with God and with the priest. If you work for Christ, that will 
certainly be some kind of fellowship with Him; but I tell you that 
the communion of receiving him into your inmost soul is the 
nearest and closest fellowship possible to mortal man. The 
fellowship of service is exceedingly honourable, when we and 
Christ work together for the same objects; the fellowship of 
suffering is exceedingly instructive, when our heart has graven 
upon it the same characters as were graven upon the heart of 
Christ: but the fellowship of the soul which receives Christ, and 
is received by Christ, is closer, more vital, more essential than 
any other.
     Such fellowship is eternal. No power upon earth can 
henceforth take from me the piece of bread which I have just now 
eaten, it has gone where it will be made up into blood, and nerve, 
and muscle, and bone. It is within me, and of me. That drop of 
wine has coursed through my veins, and is part and parcel of my 
being. So he that takes Jesus by faith to be his Saviour has 
chosen the good part which shall not be taken away from him. He 
has received the Christ into his inward parts, and all the men on 
earth, and all the devils in hell, cannot extract Christ from him. 
Jesus saith, "He that eateth Me, even he shall live by Me." By our 
sincere reception of Jesus into our hearts, an indissoluble union 
is established between us and the Lord, and this manifests itself 
in mutual communion. To as many as received Him, to them has He 
given this communion, even to them that believe on His name.
     II. I have now to look at another side of communion,--namely, 
the fellowship of true believers with each other. We have many 
ways of communing the one with the other, but there is no way of 
mutual communing like the common reception of the same Christ in 
the same way. I have said that there are many ways in which 
Christians commune with one another, and these doors of fellowship 
I would mention at some length.
     Let me go over much the same ground as before. We commune by 
_holy converse_. I wish we had more of this. Time was when they 
that feared the Lord spake often one to another; I am afraid that 
now they more often speak one against another. It is a grievous 
thing that full often love lies bleeding by a brother's hand. 
Where we are not quite so bad as that, yet we are often backward 
and silent, and so miss profitable converse. Our insular reserve 
has often made one Christian sit by another in utter isolation, 
when each would have been charmed with the other's company. 
Children of one family need not wait to be introduced to each 
other: having eaten of this one bread, we have given and received 
the token of brotherhood; let us therefore act consistently with 
our relationship, and fall into holy conversation next time we 
meet. I am afraid that Christian brotherhood in many cases begins 
and ends inside the place of worship. Let it not be so among us. 
Let it be our delight to find our society in the circle of which 
Jesus is the centre, and let us make those our friends who are the 
friends of Jesus. By frequent united prayer and praise, and by 
ministering the one to the other the things which we have learned 
by the Spirit, we shall have fellowship with each other in our 
Lord Jesus Christ.
     I am sure that all Christians have fellowship together in 
their _thoughts_. In the essentials of the gospel we think alike: 
in our thoughts of God, of Christ, of sin, of holiness, we keep 
step; in our intense desire to promote the kingdom of our Lord, we 
are as one. All spiritual life is one. The thoughts raised by the 
Spirit of God in the souls of men are never contrary to each 
other. I say not that the thoughts of all professors agree, but I 
do assert that the minds of the truly regenerate in all sects, and 
in all ages, are in harmony with each other,--a harmony which 
often excites delighted surprise in those who perceive it. The 
marks that divide one set of nominal Christians from another set 
are very deep and wide to those who have nothing of religion but 
the name; yet living believers scarcely notice them. Boundaries 
which separate the cattle of the field are no division to the 
birds of the air. Our minds, thoughts, desires, and hopes are one 
in Christ Jesus, and herein we have communion.
     Beloved friends, our _emotions_ are another royal road of 
fellowship. You sit down and tell your experience, and I smile to 
think that you are telling mine. Sometimes a young believer 
enlarges upon the sad story of his trials and temptations, 
imagining that nobody ever had to endure so great a fight, when 
all the while he is only describing the common adventures of those 
who go on pilgrimage, and we are all communing with him. When we 
talk together about our Lord, are we not agreed? When we speak of 
our Father, and all His dealings with us, are we not one? And when 
we weep, and when we sigh, and when we sing, and when we rejoice, 
are we not all akin? Heavenly fingers touching like strings within 
our hearts bring forth the self-same notes, for we are the 
products of the same Maker, and tuned to the same praise. Real 
harmony exists among all the true people of God: Christians are 
one in Christ.
     We have communion with one another, too, in our _actions_. We 
unite in trying to save men: I hope we do. We join in instructing, 
warning, inviting, and persuading sinners to come to Jesus. Our 
life-ministry is the same: we are workers together with God. We 
live out the one desire,--"Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in 
earth, as it is in heaven."
     Certainly we have much communion one with the other in our 
_sufferings_. There is not a poor sick or despondent saint upon 
the earth with whom we do not sympathize at this moment, for we 
are fellow-members, and partakers of the sufferings of Christ. I 
hope we can say,
     
     "Is there a lamb in all Thy flock,
        I would disdain to feed?
     Is there a foe, before whose face,
        I fear Thy cause to plead?"

     No, we suffer with each other, and bear each other's burden, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ. If we do not, we have reason for 
questioning our own faith; but if we do so, we have communion with 
each other.
     I hope we have fellowship in our _joys_. Is one happy? We 
would not envy him, but rejoice with him. Perhaps this is not so 
universal as it should be among professors. Are we at once glad 
because another prospers? If another star outshines ours, do we 
delight in its radiance? When we meet a brother with ten talents, 
do we congratulate ourselves on having such a man given to help 
us, or do we depreciate him as much as we can? Such is the 
depravity of our nature, that we do not readily rejoice in the 
progress of others if they leave us behind; but we must school 
ourselves to this. A man will speedily sit down and sympathize 
with a friend's griefs; but if he sees him honoured and esteemed, 
he is apt to regard him as a rival, and does not so readily 
rejoice with him. This ought not to be; without effort we ought to 
be happy in our brother's happiness. If we are ill, be this our 
comfort, that many are in robust health; if we are faint, let us 
be glad that others are strong in the Lord. Thus shall we enjoy a 
happy fellowship like that of the perfected above.

     When I have put all these modes of Christian communion 
together, no one of them is so sure, so strong, so deep, as 
communion in receiving the same Christ as our Saviour, and 
trusting in the same blood for cleansing unto eternal life. Here 
on the table you have the tokens of the broadest and fullest 
communion. This is a kind of communion which you and I cannot 
choose or reject: if we are in Christ, it is and must be ours. 
Certain brethren restrict their communion in the outward 
ordinance, and they think they have good reasons for doing so; but 
I am unable to see the force of their reasoning, because I 
joyfully observe that these brethren commune with other believers 
in prayer, and praise, and hearing of the Word, and other ways: 
the fact being that the matter of real communion is very largely 
beyond human control, and is to the spiritual body what the 
circulation of the blood is to the natural body, a necessary 
process not dependent upon volition. In perusing a deeply 
spiritual book of devotion, you have been charmed and benefitted, 
and yet upon looking at the title-page it may be you have found 
that the author belonged to the Church of Rome. What then? Why, 
then it has happened that the inner life has broken all barriers, 
and your spirits have communed. For my own part, in reading 
certain precious works, I have loathed their Romanism, and yet I 
have had close fellowship with their writers in weeping over sin, 
in adoring at the foot of the cross, and in rejoicing in the 
glorious enthronement of our Lord. Blood is thicker than water, 
and no fellowship is more inevitable and sincere than fellowship 
in the precious blood, and in the risen life of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Here, in the common reception of the one loaf, we bear 
witness that we are one; and in the actual participation of all 
the chosen in the one redemption, that unity is in very deed 
displayed and matured in the most substantial manner. Washed in 
the one blood, fed on the same loaf, cheered by the same cup, all 
differences pass away, and "we, being many, are one body in 
Christ, and every one members one of another."
     Now, then, dear friends, if this kind of fellowship be the 
best, let us take care to enjoy it. Let us at this hour avail 
ourselves of it.
     Let us take care to _see Christ_ in the mirror of this 
ordinance. Have any of you eaten the bread, and yet have you not 
seen Christ? Then you have gained no benefit. Have you drunk the 
wine, but have you not remembered the Lord? Alas! I fear you have 
eaten and drunk condemnation to yourselves, not discerning the 
Lord's body. But if you did see through the emblems, as aged 
persons see through their spectacles, then you have been thankful 
for such aids to vision. But what is the use of glasses if there 
is nothing to look at? and what is the use of the communion if 
Christ be not in our thoughts and hearts?
     If you did discern the Lord, then be sure, again, to _accept 
Him_. Say to yourself, "All that Christ is to any, He shall be to 
me. Does He save sinners? He shall save me. Does He change men's 
hearts? He shall change mine. Is He all in all to those that trust 
Him? He shall be all in all to me." I have heard persons say that 
they do not know how to take Christ. What says the apostle? "The 
Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart." If you 
have something in your mouth that you desire to eat, what is the 
best thing to do? Will you not swallow it? That is exactly what 
faith does. Christ's word of grace is very near you, it is on your 
tongue; let it go down into your inmost soul. Say to your Saviour, 
"I know I am not fit to receive Thee, O Jesus, but since Thou dost 
graciously come to me as bread comes to the hungry, I thankfully 
receive Thee, rejoicing to feed upon Thee! Since Thou dost come to 
me as the fruit of the vine to a thirsty man, Lord, I take Thee, 
willingly, and I thank Thee that this reception is all that Thou 
dost require of me. Has not Thy Spirit so put it--'As many as 
received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, 
even to them that believe on His name'?"
     Beloved friends, when you have thus received Jesus, fail not 
to _rejoice in Him_ as having received Him. How many there are who 
have received Christ, who talk and act as if they never had 
received Him! It is a poor dinner of which a man says, after he 
has eaten it, that he feels as if he had not dined; and it is a 
poor Christ of whom anyone can say, "I have received Him, but I am 
none the happier, none the more at peace." If you have received 
Jesus into your heart, you _are_ saved, you _are_ justified. Do 
you whisper, "I hope so"? Is that all? Do you not know? The 
hopings and hoppings of so many are a poor way of going; put both 
feet down, and say, "I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded 
that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him 
against that day." You are either saved or lost; there is no state 
between the two. You are either pardoned or condemned; and you 
have good reason for the highest happiness, or else you have grave 
causes for the direst anxiety. If you have received the atonement, 
be as glad as you can be; and if you are still an unbeliever, rest 
not till Christ is yours.
     Oh, the joy of continually entering into fellowship with 
Christ, in such a way that you never lose His company! Be this 
yours, beloved, every day, and all the day! May His shadow fall 
upon you as you rest in the sun, or stray in the gardens! May His 
voice cheer you as you lie down upon the sea-shore, and listen to 
the murmuring of the waves; may His presence glorify the mountain 
solitude as you climb the hills! May Jesus be to you an all-
surrounding presence, lighting up the night, perfuming the day, 
gladdening all places, and sanctifying all pursuits! Our Beloved 
is not a Friend for Lord's-days only, but for week-days, too; He 
is the inseparable Companion of His loving disciples. Those who 
have had fellowship with His body and His blood at this table may 
have the Lord as an habitual Guest at their own tables; those who 
have met their Master in this upper room may expect Him to make 
their own chamber bright with His royal presence. Let fellowship 
with Jesus and with the elect brotherhood be henceforth the 
atmosphere of our life, the joy of our existence. This will give 
us a heaven below, and prepare us for a heaven above.




                       THE SIN-BEARER.

              A COMMUNION MEDITATION AT MENTONE.

     "Who His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, 
that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by 
whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray; 
but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls."
--1 Peter ii. 24, 25.


THIS wonderful passage is a part of Peter's address to servants; 
and in his day nearly all servants were slaves. Peter begins at 
the eighteenth verse: "Servants, be subject to your masters with 
all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the 
froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward 
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, 
when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? 
but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called: 
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that 
ye should follow His steps: who did no sin, neither was guile 
found in His mouth: who, when He was reviled, reviled not again; 
when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself to Him 
that judgeth righteously: who His own self bare our sins in His 
own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live 
unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed." If we are in 
a lowly condition of life, we shall find our best comfort in 
thinking of the lowly Saviour bearing our sins in all patience and 
submission. If we are called to suffer, as servants often were in 
the Roman times, we shall be solaced by a vision of our Lord 
buffeted, scourged, and crucified, yet silent in the majesty of 
His endurance. If these sufferings are entirely undeserved, and we 
are grossly slandered, we shall be comforted by remembering Him 
who did no sin, and in whose lips was found no guile. Our Lord 
Jesus is Head of the Guild of Sufferers: He did well, and suffered 
for it, but took it patiently. Our support under the cross, which 
we are appointed to bear, is only to be found in Him "who His own 
self bare our sins in His own body on the tree."
     We ourselves now know by experience that there is no place 
for comfort like the cross. It is a tree stripped of all foliage, 
and apparently dead; yet we sit under its shadow with great 
delight, and its fruit is sweet unto our taste. Truly, in this 
case, "like cures like." By the suffering of our Lord Jesus, our 
suffering is made light. The servant is comforted since Jesus took 
upon Himself the form of a servant; the sufferer is cheered 
"because Christ also suffered for us;" and the slandered one is 
strengthened because Jesus also was reviled.

     "Is it not strange, the darkest hour
        That ever dawned on sinful earth
     Should touch the heart with softer power
        For comfort than an angel's mirth?
     That to the cross the mourner's eye should turn
     Sooner than where the stars of Christmas burn?"

     Let us, as we hope to pass through the tribulations of this 
world, stand fast by the cross; for if _that_ be gone, the lone-
star is quenched whose light cheers the down-trodden, shines on 
the injured, and brings light to the oppressed. If we lose the 
cross,--if we miss the substitutionary sacrifice of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, we have lost all.
     The verse on which we would now devoutly meditate speaks of 
three things: _the bearing of our sins, the changing of our 
condition, and the healing of our spiritual diseases_. Each of 
these deserves our most careful notice.
     I. The first is, the bearing of our sins by our Lord; "Who 
His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree." These 
words in plainest terms assert that our Lord Jesus did really bear 
the sins of His people. How _literal_ is the language! Words mean 
nothing if substitution is not stated here. I do not know the 
meaning of the fifty-third of Isaiah if this is not its meaning. 
Hear the prophet's words: "The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity 
of us all;" "for the transgression of my people was He stricken;" 
"He shall bear their iniquities:" "He was numbered with the 
transgressors, and He bare the sin of many."
     I cannot imagine that the Holy Spirit would have used 
language so expressive if He had not intended to teach us that our 
Saviour did really bear our sins, and suffer in our stead. What 
else can be intended by texts like these--"Christ was once offered 
to bear the sins of many" (Heb. ix. 28); "He hath made Him to be 
sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in Him" (2 Cor. v. 21); "Christ hath redeemed 
us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is 
written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree" (Gal. iii. 
13); "Christ also hath loved us, and hath given Himself for us an 
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour" (Eph. 
v. 2); "Once in the end of the world hath He appeared to put away 
sin by the sacrifice of Himself" (Heb. ix. 26)? I say modestly, 
but firmly, that these Scriptures either teach the bearing of our 
sins by our Lord Jesus, or they teach nothing. In these days, 
among many errors and denials of truth, there has sprung up a 
teaching of "modern thought" which explains away the doctrine of 
substitution and vicarious sacrifice. One wise man has gone so far 
as to say that the transference of sin or righteousness is 
impossible, and another creature of the same school has 
stigmatized the idea as immoral.
     It does not much matter what these modern haters of the cross 
may dare to say; but, assuredly, that which they deny, denounce, 
and deride, is the cardinal doctrine of our most holy faith, and 
is as clearly in Scripture as the sun is in the heavens. Beloved, 
as we suffer through the sin of Adam, so are we saved through the 
righteousness of Christ. Our fall was by another, and so is our 
rising again: we are under a system of representation and 
imputation, gainsay it who may. To us, the transference of our sin 
to Christ is a blessed fact clearly revealed in the Word of God, 
and graciously confirmed in the realizations of our faith. In that 
same chapter of Isaiah we read, "Surely He hath borne our griefs, 
and carried our sorrows," and we perceive that this was a matter 
of fact, for He was really, truly, and emphatically sorrowful; 
and, therefore, when we read that "He bare our sins in His own 
body on the tree," we dare not flitter it away, but assuredly 
believe that in very deed He was our Sin-Bearer. Possible or 
impossible, we sing with full assurance--

     "He bore on the tree the sentence for me."

     Had the sorrow been figurative, the sin-bearing might have 
been mythical; but the one fact is paralleled by the other. There 
is no figure in our text; it is a bare, literal fact: "Who His own 
self bare our sins in His own body on the tree." Oh, that men 
would give up cavilling! To question and debate at the cross, is 
an act near akin to the crime of the soldiers when they parted His 
garments among them, and cast lots for His vesture.
     Note how _personal_ are the terms here employed! How 
expressly the Holy Ghost speaketh! "Who His own self bare our sins 
in His own body." It was not by delegation, but "His own self"; 
and it was not in imagination, but "in His own body." Observe, 
also, the personality from our side of the question, He "bare our 
sins," that is to say, my sins and your sins. There is a sort of 
cadence of music here,--"His own self," "our sins." As surely as 
it was Christ's own self that suffered on the cross, so truly was 
it our own sins that Jesus bore in His own body on the tree. Our 
Lord has appeared in court for us, accepting our place at the bar: 
"He was numbered with the transgressors." Nay, more, He has 
appeared at the place of execution for us, and has borne the 
death-penalty upon the gibbet of doom in our stead. _In propria 
persona_, our Redeemer has been arraigned, though innocent; has 
come under the curse, though for ever blessed; and has suffered to 
the death, though He had done nothing worthy of blame. "He was 
wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: 
the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes 
we are healed."
     This sin-bearing on our Lord's part was _continual_. The 
passage before us has been forced beyond its teaching, by being 
made to assert that our Lord Jesus bore our sins nowhere but on 
the cross: this the words do not say. "The tree" was the place 
where beyond all other places we see our Lord bearing the 
chastisement due to our sins; but before this, He had felt the 
weight of the enormous load. It is wrong to base a great doctrine 
upon the incidental form of one passage of Scripture, especially 
when that passage of Scripture bears another meaning.
     The marginal reading, which is perfectly correct, is "Who His 
own self bare our sins in His own body to the tree." Our Lord 
carried the burden of our sins up to the tree, and there and then 
He made an end of it. He had carried that load long before, for 
John the Baptist said of Him, "Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away" (the verb is in the present tense, "which taketh 
away") "the sin of the world" (John i. 29). Our Lord was then 
bearing the sin of the world as the Lamb of God. From the day when 
He began His divine ministry, I might say even before that, He 
bore our sins. He was the Lamb "slain from the foundation of the 
world;" so, when He went up to Calvary, bearing His cross, He was 
bearing our sins up to the tree. Yet, specially and peculiarly in 
His death-agony He stood in our stead, and upon His soul and body 
burst the tempest of justice which had gathered through our 
transgressions.
     This sin-bearing is _final._ He bore our sins in His own body 
on the tree, but He bears them now no more. The sinner and the 
sinner's Surety are both free, for the law is vindicated, the 
honour of government is cleared, the substitutionary sacrifice is 
complete. He dieth no more, death hath no more dominion over Him; 
for He has ended His work, and has cried, "It is finished." As for 
the sins which He bore in His own body on the tree, they cannot be 
found, for they have ceased to be, according to that ancient 
promise, "In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the 
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; 
and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found" (Jeremiah i. 
20). The work of the Messiah was "to finish the transgression, and 
to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, 
and to bring in everlasting righteousness" (Daniel ix. 24). Now, 
if sin is made an end of, there is an end of it; and if 
transgression is "finished", there is no more to be said about it.
     Let us look back with holy faith, and see Jesus bearing the 
stupendous load of our sins up to the tree, and on the tree; and 
see how _effectual_ was His sacrifice for discharging the whole 
mass of our moral liability both in reference to guiltiness in the 
sight of God, and the punishment which follows thereon. It is a 
law of nature that nothing can be in two places at the same time; 
and if sin was borne away by our Lord, it cannot rest upon us. If 
by faith we have accepted the Substitute whom God Himself has ac-
cepted, then it cannot be that the penalty should be twice 
demanded, first of the Surety, and then of those for whom He 
stood. The Lord Jesus bore the sins of His people away, even as 
the scape-goat, in the type, carried the sin of Israel to a land 
uninhabited. Our sins are gone for ever. "As far as the east is 
from the west, so far hath He removed our transgressions from us." 
He hath cast all our iniquities into the depths of the sea; he 
hath hurled them behind his back, where they shall no more be 
seen.
     Beloved friends, we very calmly and coolly talk about this 
thing, but it is the greatest marvel in the universe; it is the 
miracle of earth, the mystery of heaven, the terror of hell. Could 
we fully realize the guilt of sin, the punishment due to it, and 
the literal substitution of Christ, it would work in us an intense 
enthusiasm of gratitude, love, and praise. I do not wonder that 
our Methodist friends shout, "Hallelujah!" This is enough to make 
us all shout and sing, as long as we live, "Glory, glory to the 
Son of God!" What a wonder that the Prince of glory, in whom is no 
sin, who was indeed incapable of evil, should condescend to come 
into such contact with our sin as is implied in His being "made 
sin for us"! Our Lord Jesus did not handle sin with the golden 
tongs, but He bore it on His own shoulders. He did not lift it 
with golden staves, as the priests carried the ark; but He Himself 
bore the hideous load of our sin in His own body on the tree. This 
is the mystery of grace which angels desire to look into. I would 
for ever preach it in the plainest and most unmistakable language.
     II. In the second place, briefly notice the change in our 
condition, which the text describes as coming out of the Lord's 
bearing of our sins: "That we, being dead to sins, should live 
unto righteousness." The change is a dying and a reviving, a 
burial and a resurrection: we are brought from life to death, and 
from death to life.
     _We are henceforth legally dead to the punishment of sin_. If 
I were condemned to die for an offence, and some other died in my 
stead, then I died in him who died for me. The law could not a 
second time lay its charge against me, and bring me again before 
the judge, and condemn me, and lead me out to die. Where would be 
the justice of such a procedure? I am dead already: how can I die 
again? I have borne the wrath of God in the person of my glorious 
and ever-blessed Substitute; how then can I bear it again? Where 
was the use of a Substitute if I am to bear it also? Should Satan 
come before God to lay an accusation against me, the answer is, 
"This man is dead. He has borne the penalty, and is 'dead to 
sins,' for the sentence against him has been executed upon 
Another." What a wonderful deliverance for us! Bless the Lord, O 
my soul!
     But Peter also means to remind us that, by and through the 
influence of Christ's death upon our hearts, _the Holy Ghost has 
made us now to be actually "dead to sins":_ that is to say, we no 
longer love them, and they have ceased to hold dominion over us. 
Sin is no longer at home in our hearts; if it enters there, it is 
as an intruder. We are no more its willing servants. Sin calls to 
us by temptation, but we give it no answer, for we are dead to its 
voice. Sin promises us a high reward, but we do not consent, for 
we are dead to its allurements. We sin, but our will is not to 
sin. It would be heaven to us to be perfectly holy. Our heart and 
life go after perfection, but sin is abhorred of our soul. "Now, 
if I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it, but 
sin that dwelleth in me." Our truest and most real self loathes 
sin; and though we fall into it, it is a fall,--we are out of our 
element, and escape from the evil with all speed. The new-born 
life within us has no dealings with sin; it is dead to sin.
     The Greek word here used cannot be fully rendered into 
English; it signifies "being unborn to sins." We were born in sin, 
but by the death of Christ, and the work of the Holy Spirit upon 
us, that birth is undone, "we are unborn to sins." That which was 
wrought in us by sin, even at our birth, is through the death of 
Jesus counteracted by the new life which His Spirit imparts. "We 
are unborn to sins." I like the phrase, unusual as it sounds. Does 
it seem possible that birth should be reversed: the born unborn? 
Yet so it is. The true _ego_, the reallest "I," is now unborn to 
sins, for we are "born, not of blood, nor of the will of the 
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." We are unborn to sins, 
and born unto God.
     But our Lord's sin-bearing has also _brought us into life_. 
Dead to evil according to law, we also live in newness of life in 
the kingdom of grace. Our Lord's object is "that we should live 
unto righteousness." Not only are our lives to be righteous, which 
I trust they are, but we are quickened and made sensitive and 
vigorous unto righteousness: through our Lord's death we are made 
quick of eye, and quick of thought, and quick of lip, and quick of 
heart unto righteousness. Certainly, if the doctrine of His 
atoning sacrifice does not vivify us, nothing will. When we sin, 
it is the sorrowful result of our former death; but when we work 
righteousness, we throw our whole soul into it, "We live unto 
righteousness." Because our Divine Lord has died, we feel that we 
must lay ourselves out for His praise. The tree which brought 
death to our Saviour is a tree of life to us. Sit under this true 
_arbor vitae_, and you will shake off the weakness and disease 
which came in by that tree of knowledge of good and evil. 
Livingstone in Africa used certain medicines which are known as 
_Livingstone's Rousers;_ but what rousers are those glorious 
truths which are extracted from the bitter wood of the cross! O my 
brethren, let us show in our lives what wonders our Lord Jesus has 
done for us by His agony and bloody sweat, by His cross and 
passion!
     III. The apostle then speaks of the healing of our diseases 
by Christ's death: "By whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were 
as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and 
Bishop of your souls."
     We were healed, and we remain so. It is not a thing to be 
done in the future; it has been wrought. Peter describes our 
disease in the words which compose verse twenty-five. What was it, 
then?
     First, it was _brutishness_. "Ye were as sheep." Sin has made 
us so that we are only fit to be compared to beasts, and to those 
of the least intelligence. Sometimes the Scripture compares the 
unregenerate man to an ass. Man is said to be "born like a wild 
ass's colt." Amos likens Israel to the "kine of Bashan", and he 
saith to them, "Ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that 
which is before her." David compared himself to behemoth: "So 
foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before Thee." We are 
nothing better than beasts until Christ comes to us. But we are 
not beasts after that: a living, heavenly, spiritual nature is 
created within us when we come into contact with our Redeemer. We 
still carry about with us the old brutish nature, but by the grace 
of God it is put in subjection, and kept there; and our fellowship 
now is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ. We "were as 
sheep," but we are now men redeemed unto God.
     We are cured also of the _proneness to wander_ which is so 
remarkable in sheep. "Ye were as sheep going astray," always going 
astray, loving to go astray, delighting in it, never so happy as 
when they are wandering away from the fold. We wander still, but 
not as sheep wander: we now seek the right way, and desire to 
follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. If we wander, it is 
through ignorance or temptation. We can truly say, "My soul 
followeth hard after Thee." Our Lord's cross has nailed us fast as 
to hands and feet: we cannot now run greedily after iniquity; 
rather do we say, "Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord 
hath dealt bountifully with thee!"

     "My wanderings, Lord, are at an end,
        I'm now return'd to Thee:
     Be Thou my Father and my Friend,
        Be all in all to me."

     Another disease of ours was _inability to return:_ "Ye were 
as sheep going astray; but are now returned." Dogs and even swine 
are more likely to return home than wandering sheep. But now, 
beloved, though we wandered, we have returned, and do still return 
to our Shepherd. Like Noah's dove, we have found no rest for the 
sole of our foot anywhere out of the ark, and therefore we return 
unto Him, and He graciously pulls us in unto Him. If we wander at 
any time, we bless God that there is a sacred something within us 
which will not let us rest, and there is a far more powerful 
something above us which draws us back. We are like the needle in 
the compass: touch that needle with your finger, and compel it to 
point to the east, or to the south, and it may do so for the 
moment; but take away the pressure, and in an instant it returns 
to the pole. So we must go back to Jesus; we must return to the 
Bishop of our souls. Our soul cries, "Whom have I in heaven but 
Thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside Thee." 
Thus, by the virtue of our Lord's death, an immortal love is 
created in us, which leads us to seek His face, and renew our 
fellowship with Him.
     Our Lord's death has also cured us of our _readiness to 
follow other leaders_. If one sheep goes through a gap in the 
hedge, the whole flock will follow. We have been accustomed to 
follow ringleaders in sin or in error: we have been too ready to 
follow custom, and to do that which is judged proper, respectable, 
and usual: but now we are resolved to follow none but Jesus, 
according to His word, "My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, 
and they follow Me. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee 
from him: for they know not the voice of strangers." For my own 
part, I am resolved to follow no human leader. Faith in Jesus 
creates a sacred independence of mind. We have learned so entire a 
dependence upon our crucified Lord that we have none to spare for 
men.
     Finally, beloved friends, when we were wandering we were like 
sheep _exposed to wolves_, but we are delivered from this by being 
near the Shepherd. We were in danger of death, in danger from the 
devil, in danger from a thousand temptations, which, like ravenous 
beasts, prowled around us. Having ended our wandering, we are now 
in a place of safety. When the lion roars, we are driven the 
closer to the Shepherd, and rejoice that His crook protects us. He 
says, "My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow 
Me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never 
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of My hand."
     What a wonderful work of grace has been wrought in us! We owe 
all this, not to the teaching of Christ, though that has helped us 
greatly; not to the example of Christ, though that is charming us 
into a diligent copying of it; but we owe it all to His stripes: 
"By whose stripes ye were healed." Brethren, we preach Christ 
crucified, because we have been saved by Christ crucified. His 
death is the death of our sins. We can never give up the doctrine 
of Christ's substitutionary sacrifice, for it is the power by 
which we hope to be made holy. Not only are we washed from guilt 
in His blood, but by that blood we overcome sin. Never, so long as 
breath or pulse remains, can we conceal the blessed truth that He 
"His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, 
being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness." The Lord give 
us to know much more of this than I can speak, for Jesus Christ's 
sake! Amen.




     SWOONING AND REVIVING CHRIST'S FEET.


   AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE CLOSE OF ONE OF THE PASTORS'            
                     COLLEGE CONFERENCES.

     "And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead. And He laid 
His right hand upon me saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first 
and the last: I am He that liveth, and was dead; and, behold. I am 
alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of 
death."--Revelation i. 17, 18.


WE have nothing now to think of but our Lord. We come to Him that 
He may cause us to forget all others. We are not here as 
ministers, cumbered with much serving, but we now sit at His feet 
with Mary, or lean on His bosom with John. The Lord Himself gives 
us our watchword as we muster our band for the last assembly. 
"Remember Me," is His loving command. We beseech Him to fill the 
full circle of our memory as the sun fills the heavens and the 
earth with light. We are to think only of Jesus, and of Him only 
will I speak. Oh, for a touch of the live coal from Him who is our 
Altar as well as our Sacrifice!
     My text is found in the words of John, in the first chapter 
of the Revelation, at the seventeenth and eighteenth verses:--
     "_And when I saw_ Him_,_ I fell at His feet as dead. And He 
laid His right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the 
first and the last: I am He that liveth, and was dead; and, 
behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell 
and of death."_
      John was of all men the most familiar with Jesus, and his 
Lord had never needed to say to him, "Lovest thou Me?" Methinks, 
if any man could have stood erect in the presence of the glorified 
Saviour, it would have been that disciple whom Jesus loved. Love 
permits us to take great liberties: the child will climb the knee 
of his royal father, and no man accuses him of presuming. John had 
such love, and yet even he could not look into the face of the 
Lord of glory without being overcome with awe. While yet in the 
body, even John must swoon if he be indulged with a premature 
vision of the Well-beloved in His majesty. If permitted to see the 
Lord before our bodies have undergone that wondrous change by 
which we are made like Jesus that we may see Him as He is, we 
shall find the sight to be more than we can bear. A clear view of 
our Lord's heavenly splendour while we are here on earth would not 
be fitting, for it would not be profitable for us always to be 
lying in a swoon at our Redeemer's feet, while there is so much 
work for us to do.
     Permit me, dear brethren, to take my text from its 
connection, and to apply it to ourselves, by bringing it down from 
the throne up yonder to the table here. It may be, I trust it will 
be, that as we see Jesus even here, _we shall with John fall at 
His feet as dead_. We shall not swoon, but we shall be dead in 
another sense, most sweetly dead, while our life is revealed in 
Him. After we have thought upon that, we shall come to what my 
text implies: then, _may we revive with John_, for if he had not 
revived he could never have told us of his fainting fit. Thus we 
shall have death with Christ, and resurrection in Him. Oh, for a 
deep experience of both, by the power of the Holy Spirit!
     I. If we are permitted to see Christ in the simple and 
instructive memorials which are now upon the table, we shall, in a 
blessed sense, fall at His feet as dead.
     For, first, here we see _provision for the removal of our 
sin_, and we are thus reminded of it. Here is the bread broken 
because we have broken God's law, and must have been broken for 
ever had there not been a bruised Saviour. In this wine we see the 
token of the blood with which we must be cleansed, or else be foul 
things to be cast away into the burnings of Tophet, because 
abominable in the sight of God. Inasmuch as we have before us the 
memorial of the atonement for sin, it reminds us of our death in 
sin in which we should still have remained but for that: grace 
which spoke us into life and salvation. Are you growing great? Be 
little again as you see that you are nothing but slaves that have 
been ransomed. "God's freed-men" is still your true rank. Are you 
beginning to think that, because you are sanctified; you have the 
less need of daily cleansing? Hear that word, "If we walk in the 
light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with 
another," yet even then "the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin." We sin even when in the highest and 
divinest fellowship, and need still the cleansing blood. How this 
humbles us before the Lord! We are to be winners of sinners, and 
yet we ourselves are sinners still, needing as truly the Bread of 
life as those to whom we serve it out.
     Ah! and some of us have been very special sinners; and 
therefore, if we love much, it is because we have had much 
forgiven. We have erred since we knew the Saviour, and that is a 
kind of sinnership which is exceedingly grievous; we have sinned 
since we have entered into the highest state of spiritual joy, and 
have been with Him on the holy mount, and have beheld His glory! 
This breeds a holy shamefacedness. We may well fall at Jesus' 
feet, though He only reveals Himself in bread and wine, for these 
convey a sense of our sinnership while they remind us of how our 
Lord met our sin, and put it away.
     Herein we fall as low as the dead. Where is the "I"? Where is 
the self-glorying? Have you any left in the presence of the 
crucified Saviour? As you in spirit eat His flesh and drink His 
blood, can you glory in your own flesh, or feel the pride of blood 
and birth? Fie upon us if there mingles a tinge of pride with our 
ministry, or a taint of self-laudation with our success! When we 
see Jesus, our Saviour, the Saviour of sinners, surely self will 
sink, and humility will fall at His feet. When we think of 
Gethsemane and Calvary, and all our great Redeemer's pain and 
agony, surely, by the Holy Ghost, self-glorying, self-seeking, and 
self-will must fall as though slain with a deadly wound. "When I 
saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead."
     Here, also, we learn a second lesson. _Jesus has placed upon 
this table food_. The bread sets forth all that is necessary, and 
the cup all that is luxurious: provision for all our wants and for 
all our right desires, all that we need for sustenance and joy. 
Then, what a poverty-stricken soul am I that I cannot find myself 
in bread! As to comforts, I may not think of them; they must be 
given me or I shall never taste them. Brothers, we are Gentlemen 
Commoners upon the bounty of our great Kinsman: we come to His 
table for our maintenance, we have no establishments of our own. 
He who feeds the sparrows feeds our souls; in spiritual things, we 
no more gather into barns than do the blessed birds; our heavenly 
Father feeds us from that "all fulness" which it hath pleased Him 
to lay up for us in Jesus. We could not live an hour spiritually 
without Him who is not only bread, but life; not only the wine 
which cheereth, but consolation itself. Our life hangs upon Jesus; 
He is our Head as well as our food. We shall never outgrow our 
need of natural bread, and spiritually we shall never rise out of 
our need of a present Christ, but the rather we shall feel a 
stronger craving and a more urgent passion for Him. Look at yonder 
vain person. He feels that he is a great man, and you own that he 
is your superior in gifts; but what a cheat he is, what a foolish 
creature to dream of being somebody! Now will he be found wanting; 
for, like ourselves, he is not sufficient even to think anything 
of himself. A beggar who has to live on alms, to eat the bread of 
dependence, to take the cup of charity,--what has he to boast of? 
He is the great One who feeds us, who gives us all that we enjoy, 
who is our all in all; and as for us, we are suppliants,--I had 
almost said mendicants,--a community of Begging Fr?res, to all 
personal spiritual wealth as dead as the slain on Marathon. The 
negro slave at least could claim his own breath, but we cannot 
claim even that. The Spirit of God must give us spiritual breath, 
or our life will expire. When we think of this, surely the sight 
of Christ in this bread and Wine, though it be a dim vision 
compared with that which ravished the heart of John, will make us 
fall at the Redeemer's feet as dead.
     The "I" cannot live, for our Lord has provided no food for 
the vain _Ego_, and its lordliness. He has provided all for 
necessity, but nothing for boasting. Oh, blessed sense of self-
annihilation! We have experienced it several times this week when 
certain of those papers were read to us by our brethren; and, 
moreover, we shrivelled right up in the blaze of the joy with 
which our Master favoured us. I hope this happy assembly and its 
heavenly exercises have melted the _Ego_ within us, and made it, 
for the while, flow away in tears. Dying to self is a blessed 
feeling. May we all realize it! When we are weak to the utmost in 
conscious death of self, then are we strong to the fulness of 
might. Swooning away unto self-death, and losing all consciousness 
of personal power, we are introduced into the infinite, and live 
in God.
     II. Now let us consider how we get alive again, and so know 
the Lord as the resurrection and the life. John did revive, and he 
tells us how it came about. He says of the Ever-blessed One,--"He 
laid His right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the 
first and the last: I am He that liveth, and was dead; and, 
behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell 
and of death."
     All the life-floods of our being will flow with renewed force 
if, first of all, we are _brought into contact with Jesus: _"He 
laid His right hand upon me." Marvellous patience that He does not 
set His foot upon us, and tread us down as the mire of the 
streets! I have lain at His feet as dead, and had He spurned me as 
tainted with corruption, I could not have impugned His justice. 
But there is nothing here about His foot! That foot has been 
pierced for us, and it cannot be that the foot which has been 
nailed to the cross for His people should ever trample them in His 
wrath. Hear these words, "He laid His right hand upon me." The 
right hand of His strength and of His glory He laid upon His 
fainting servant. It was _the hand of a man_. It is the right hand 
of Him who, in all our afflictions, was afflicted, who is a 
Brother born for adversity. Hence, everything about His hand has a 
reviving influence. The _speech_ of sympathy, my brothers, is 
often too unpractical, and hence it is too feeble to revive the 
fainting; the _touch_ of sympathy is far more effectual. You 
remember that happy story of the wild negro child who could never 
be won till the little lady sat down by her, and laid her hand 
upon her. Eva won poor Topsy by that tender touch. The tongue 
failed, but the hand achieved the victory. So was it with our 
adorable Lord. He showed us that He was bone of our bone and flesh 
of our flesh; He brought Himself into contact with us, and made us 
perceive the reality of His love to us, and then He became more 
than a conqueror over us.
     Thus, _we felt that He was no fiction_, but a real Christ, 
for there was His hand, and we felt the gentle pressure. The 
laying on of the right hand of the Lord had brought healing to the 
sick, sight to the blind, and even life to the dead, and it is no 
strange thing that it should restore a fainting disciple. May you 
all feel it at this very moment in its full reviving power! May 
there stream down from the Lord's right hand, not merely His 
sympathy, because He is a man like ourselves, but as much of the 
power of _His deity_ as can be gotten into man, so that we may be 
filled with the fulness _of God! _That is possible at this 
instant. The Lord's supper represents the giving of the whole body 
of Christ to us, to enter into us for food; surely, if we enter 
into its true meaning, we may expect to be revived and vitalized; 
for we have here more than a mere touch of the hand, it is the 
whole Christ that enters into us spiritually, and so comes into 
contact with our innermost being. I believe in "the real 
presence": do not you? The _carnal_ presence is another thing: 
_that_ we do not even desire. Lord Jesus, come into a many-handed 
contact with us now by dwelling in us, and we in Thee!
     Still, there was something else wanted, for our Lord Jesus, 
after the touch, _gave the word: _"Fear not; I am the first and 
the last." What does He say? Does He say, "Thou art"? Open your 
Testaments, and see. Does He exclaim, "Fear not; thou art the 
beloved disciple, John the apostle and divine"? I find nothing of 
the kind. He did not direct His servant to look at himself, but to 
remember the great I Am, his Saviour, and Lord. The living comfort 
of every swooning child of God, of everyone who is conscious of a 
death-wound to the natural "I," lies in that majestic "I," who 
alone can say "I am." You live because there is an "I am" who has 
life in Himself, and has that life for you.
     "I am the first." "I have gone before you, and prepared your 
way; I loved you before you loved Me; I ordained your whole course 
in life before you were in existence. In every work of grace for 
you and within you, I am the first. Like the dew which comes from 
the Lord, I waited not for man, neither tarried for the sons of 
men. And I also am the last, perfecting that which concerneth you, 
and keeping you unto the end. I am the Alpha and the Omega to you, 
and all the letters in between; I began with you, and I shall end 
with you, if an end can be thought of. I march in the van, and I 
bring up the rear. Your final preservation is as much from Me as 
your hopeful commencement." Brother, does a fear arise concerning 
that dark hour which threatens soon to arrive? What hour is that? 
Jesus knows, and He will be with you through the night, and till 
the day breaketh. If Jesus is the beginning and the end to us, 
what is there else? What have we to fear unless it be those 
unhallowed inventions of our mistrust, those superfluities of 
naughtiness which fashion themselves into unbeliefs, and doubts, 
and unkind imaginings? Christ shuts out everything that could hurt 
us, for He covers all the time, and all the space; He is above the 
heights, and beneath the depths; and everywhere He is Love.
     Read on,--"I am He that liveth." "Because I live, ye shall 
live also; no real death shall befal you, for death hath no more 
dominion over Me,--your Head, your Life." While there is a living 
Christ in heaven, no believer shall ever see death: he shall sleep 
in Jesus, and that is all, for even then he shall be "for ever 
with the Lord."
     Read on,--"and was dead." "Therefore, though die, you shall 
go no lower than I went; and you shall be brought up again even as 
I have returned from the tomb." Think of Jesus as having traversed 
the realm of death-shade, and you will not fear to follow in His 
track. Where should the dying members rest but on the same couch 
with their once dying Head?
     "And behold, I am alive for evermore." Yes, behold it, and 
never cease to behold it: we serve an ever-living Lord. Brothers, 
go home from this conference in the power of this grand utterance! 
The dear child may sicken, or the precious wife may be taken home; 
but Christ says, "I am alive for evermore." The believing heart 
can never be a widow, for its Husband is the living God. Our Lord 
Jesus will not leave us orphans, He will come unto us. Here is our 
joy, then: not in ourselves, but in the fact that He ever lives to 
carry out the Father's good pleasure in us and for us. Onward, 
soldiers of the cross, for our immortal Captain leads the way.
     Read once more,--"and have the keys of hell and of death." As 
I thought over these words, I marvelled for the poverty and 
meanness of the cause of evil; for the prince of it, the devil, 
has not the keys of his own house; he cannot be trusted with them; 
they are swinging at the girdle of Christ. Surely I shall never go 
to hell, for my Lord Jesus turned the key against my entrance long 
ago. The doors of hell were locked for me When He died on my 
behalf. I saw Him lock the door, and, what is more, I saw Him hang 
the key at His girdle, and there it is to this day. Christ has the 
keys of hell; then, whenever He chooses, He can cage the devouring 
lion, and restrain his power for evil. Oh, that the day were come! 
It is coming, for the dragon hath great wrath, knowing that his 
time is short. Let us not go forth alone to battle with this dread 
adversary; let us tell his Conqueror of him, and entreat Him to 
shorten his chain. I admire the forcible words of a dying woman to 
one who asked her what she did when she was tempted by the devil 
on account of her sin. She replied, "The devil does not tempt me 
now; he came to me a little while ago, and he does not like me 
well enough to come again!" "Why not?" "Well, he went away because 
I said to him, Chosen, chosen!" "What did you mean by that?" "Do 
you not remember how it is said in the Scripture, 'The Lord rebuke 
thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke 
thee'?" The aged woman's text was well taken, and well does the 
enemy know the rebuke which it contains. When Joshua, the high 
priest, clothed in filthy garments, stood before the angel, Satan 
stood at his right hand to resist him, but he was silenced by 
being told of the election of God: "The Lord which hath chosen 
Jerusalem rebuke thee." Ah, brethren, when Christ's right hand is 
upon us, the evil one departs! He knows too well the weight of 
that right hand.
     Conclude the verse,--"and of death." Our Lord has the keys of 
death, and this will be a joyful fact to us when our last hours 
arrive. If we say to Him, "Master, whither am I going?" He 
answers, "I have the key of death and the spirit world. Will we 
not reply, "We feel quite confident to go wherever Thou wilt lead 
us, O Lord"? We shall then pursue His track in His company. Our 
bodies shall descend into what men call a charnel-house, though it 
is really the unrobing-room of saints, the vestibule of heaven, 
the wardrobe of our dress where it shall be cleansed and 
perfected. We have a fit spiritual array for the interval, but we 
expect that our bodies shall rise again in the likeness of "the 
Lord from heaven." What gainers we shall be when we shall take up 
the robes we laid aside, and find them so gloriously changed, and 
made fit for us to wear even in the presence of our Lord! So, if 
the worst fear that crosses you should be realized, and you should 
literally die at your Lord's feet, there is no cause for dread, 
for no enemy can do you harm, since the divine right hand is 
pledged to deliver you to the end. Let us give the Well-beloved 
the most devout and fervent praise as we now partake of this regal 
festival. The King sitteth at His table, let our spikenard give 
forth its sweetest smell.




               C. H. SPURGEON'S COMMUNION HYMN.


     (No. 939 in "Our Own Hymn Book.")


     AMIDST us our Belov?d stands,
     And bids us view His pierc?d hands;
     Points to His wounded feet and side,
     Blest emblems of the Crucified.

     What food luxurious loads the board,
     When at His table sits the Lord!
     The wine how rich, the bread how sweet,
     When Jesus deigns the guests to meet!

     If now with eyes defiled and dim,
     We see the signs but see not Him,
     Oh, may His love the scales displace,
     And bid us see Him face to face!

     Our former transports we recount,
     When with Him in the holy mount,
     These cause our souls to thirst anew,
     His marr'd but lovely face to view.

     Thou glorious Bridegroom of our hearts,
     Thy present smile a heaven imparts:
     Oh, lift the veil, if veil there be,
     Let every saint Thy beauties see!









End