



Travels Through France And Italy

By Tobias Smollett





INTRODUCTION

	By Thomas Seccombe

I

Many pens have been burnished this year of grace for the purpose  of celebrating with befitting honour the second centenary of the  birth of Henry Fielding; but it is more than doubtful if, when  the right date occurs in March 1921, anything like the same  alacrity will be shown to commemorate one who was for many years,  and by such judges as Scott, Hazlitt, and Charles Dickens,  considered Fielding's complement and absolute co-equal (to say  the least) in literary achievement. Smollett's fame, indeed,  seems to have fallen upon an unprosperous curve. The coarseness  of his fortunate rival is condoned, while his is condemned  without appeal. Smollett's value is assessed without  discrimination at that of his least worthy productions, and the  historical value of his work as a prime modeller of all kinds of  new literary material is overlooked. Consider for a moment as not  wholly unworthy of attention his mere versatility as a man of  letters. Apart from Roderick Random and its successors, which  gave him a European fame, he wrote a standard history, and a  standard version of Don Quixote (both of which held their ground  against all comers for over a century). He created both satirical  and romantic types, he wrote two fine-spirited lyrics, and  launched the best Review and most popular magazine of his day. He  was the centre of a literary group, the founder to some extent of  a school of professional writers, of which strange and novel  class, after the "Great Cham of Literature," as he called Dr.  Johnson, he affords one of the first satisfactory specimens upon  a fairly large scale. He is, indeed, a more satisfactory, because  a more independent, example of the new species than the Great  Cham himself. The late Professor Beljame has shown us how the  milieu was created in which, with no subvention, whether from a  patron, a theatre, a political paymaster, a prosperous newspaper  or a fashionable subscription-list, an independent writer of the  mid-eighteenth century, provided that he was competent, could  begin to extort something more than a bare subsistence from the  reluctant coffers of the London booksellers. For the purpose of  such a demonstration no better illustration could possibly be  found, I think, than the career of Dr. Tobias Smollett. And yet,  curiously enough, in the collection of critical monographs so  well known under the generic title of "English Men of Letters"--a  series, by the way, which includes Nathaniel Hawthorne and Maria  Edgeworth--no room or place has hitherto been found for Smollett  any more than for Ben Jonson, both of them, surely, considerable  Men of Letters in the very strictest and most representative  sense of the term. Both Jonson and Smollett were to an unusual  extent centres of the literary life of their time; and if the  great Ben had his tribe of imitators and adulators, Dr. Toby also  had his clan of sub-authors, delineated for us by a master hand  in the pages of Humphry Clinker. To make Fielding the centre-piece  of a group reflecting the literature of his day would be an  artistic impossibility. It would be perfectly easy in the case of  Smollett, who was descried by critics from afar as a Colossus  bestriding the summit of the contemporary Parnassus.

Whatever there may be of truth in these observations upon the  eclipse of a once magical name applies with double force to that  one of all Smollett's books which has sunk farthest in popular  disesteem. Modern editors have gone to the length of  excommunicating Smollett's Travels altogether from the fellowship  of his Collective Works.  Critic has followed critic in  denouncing the book as that of a "splenetic" invalid. And yet it  is a book for which all English readers have cause to be  grateful, not only as a document on Smollett and his times, not  only as being in a sense the raison d'etre of the Sentimental  Journey, and the precursor in a very special sense of Humphry  Clinker, but also as being intrinsically an uncommonly readable  book, and even, I venture to assert, in many respects one of  Smollett's best. Portions of the work exhibit literary quality of  a high order: as a whole it represents a valuable because a  rather uncommon view, and as a literary record of travel it is  distinguished by a very exceptional veracity.

I am not prepared to define the differentia of a really first-rate  book of travel. Sympathy is important; but not indispensable,  or Smollett would be ruled out of court at once. Scientific  knowledge, keen observation, or intuitive power of discrimination  go far. To enlist our curiosity or enthusiasm or to excite our  wonder are even stronger recommendations. Charm of personal  manner, power of will, anthropological interest, self-effacement  in view of some great objects--all these qualities have made  travel-books live. One knows pretty nearly the books that one is  prepared to re-read in this department of literature. Marco Polo,  Herodotus, a few sections in Hakluyt, Dampier and Defoe, the  early travellers in Palestine, Commodore Byron's Travels, Curzon  and Lane, Doughty's Arabia Deserta, Mungo Park, Dubois,  Livingstone's Missionary Travels, something of Borrow (fact or  fable), Hudson and Cunninghame Graham, Bent, Bates and Wallace,  The Crossing of Greenland, Eothen, the meanderings of Modestine,  The Path to Rome, and all, or almost all, of E. F. Knight. I have  run through most of them at one breath, and the sum total would  not bend a moderately stout bookshelf. How many high-sounding  works on the other hand, are already worse than dead, or, should  we say, better dead? The case of Smollett's Travels, there is  good reason to hope, is only one of suspended animation.

To come to surer ground, it is a fact worth noting that each of  the four great prose masters of the third quarter of the  eighteenth century tried his hand at a personal record of travel.  Fielding came first in 1754 with his Journal of a Voyage to  Lisbon. Twelve years later was published Smollett's Travels  through France and Italy. Then, in 1768, Sterne's Sentimental  Journey; followed in 1775 by Johnson's Journey to the Hebrides.  Each of the four--in which beneath the apparel of the man of  letters we can discern respectively the characteristics of police  magistrate, surgeon, confessor, and moralist--enjoyed a fair  amount of popularity in its day. Fielding's Journal had perhaps  the least immediate success of the four. Sterne's Journey  unquestionably had the most. The tenant of "Shandy Hall," as was  customary in the first heyday of "Anglomania," went to Paris to  ratify his successes, and the resounding triumph of his  naughtiness there, by a reflex action, secured the vote of  London. Posterity has fully sanctioned this particular "judicium  Paridis." The Sentimental Journey is a book sui generis, and in  the reliable kind of popularity, which takes concrete form in  successive reprints, it has far eclipsed its eighteenth-century  rivals. The fine literary aroma which pervades every line of this  small masterpiece is not the predominant characteristic of the  Great Cham's Journey. Nevertheless, and in spite of the malignity  of the "Ossianite" press, it fully justified the assumption of  the booksellers that it would prove a "sound" book. It is full  of sensible observations, and is written in Johnson's most  scholarly, balanced, and dignified style. Few can read it without  a sense of being repaid, if only by the portentous sentence in  which the author celebrates his arrival at the shores of Loch  Ness, where he reposes upon "a bank such as a writer of romance  might have delighted to feign," and reflects that a "uniformity  of barrenness can afford very little amusement to the traveller;  that it is easy to sit at home and conceive rocks and heath and  waterfalls; and that these journeys are useless labours, which  neither impregnate the imagination nor enlarge the  understanding." Fielding's contribution to geography has far less  solidity and importance, but it discovers to not a few readers an  unfeigned charm that is not to be found in the pages of either  Sterne or Johnson. A thoughtless fragment suffices to show the  writer in his true colours as one of the most delightful fellows  in our literature, and to convey just unmistakably to all good  men and true the rare and priceless sense of human fellowship.

There remain the Travels through France and Italy, by T.  Smollett, M.D., and though these may not exhibit the marmoreal  glamour of Johnson, or the intimate fascination of Fielding, or  the essential literary quality which permeates the subtle  dialogue and artful vignette of Sterne, yet I shall endeavour to  show, not without some hope of success among the fair-minded,  that the Travels before us are fully deserving of a place, and  that not the least significant, in the quartette.

The temporary eclipse of their fame I attribute, first to the  studious depreciation of Sterne and Walpole, and secondly to a  refinement of snobbishness on the part of the travelling crowd,  who have an uneasy consciousness that to listen to common sense,  such as Smollett's, in matters of connoisseurship, is tantamount  to confessing oneself a Galilean of the outermost court. In this  connection, too, the itinerant divine gave the travelling doctor  a very nasty fall. Meeting the latter at Turin, just as Smollett  was about to turn his face homewards, in March 1765, Sterne wrote  of him, in the famous Journey of 1768, thus:

"The learned Smelfungus travelled from Boulogne to Paris, from  Paris to Rome, and so on, but he set out with the spleen and  jaundice, and every object he passed by was discoloured or  distorted. He wrote an account of them, but 'twas nothing but the  account of his miserable feelings." "I met Smelfungus," he wrote  later on, "in the grand portico of the Pantheon--he was just  coming out of it. ''Tis nothing but a huge cockpit,' said he--'I  wish you had said nothing worse of the Venus de Medici,' replied  I--for in passing through Florence, I had heard he had fallen  foul upon the goddess, and used her worse than a common strumpet,  without the least provocation in nature. I popp'd upon Smelfungus  again at Turin, in his return home, and a sad tale of sorrowful  adventures had he to tell, 'wherein he spoke of moving accidents  by flood and field, and of the cannibals which each other eat,  the Anthropophagi'; he had been flayed alive, and bedevil'd, and  used worse than St. Bartholomew, at every stage he had come at.  'I'll tell it,' cried Smelfungus, 'to the world.' 'You had better  tell it,' said I, 'to your physician.'"

To counteract the ill effects of "spleen and jaundice" and  exhibit the spirit of genteel humour and universal benevolence in  which a man of sensibility encountered the discomforts of the  road, the incorrigible parson Laurence brought out his own  Sentimental Journey. Another effect of Smollett's book was to  whet his own appetite for recording the adventures of the open  road. So that but for Travels through France and Italy we might  have had neither a Sentimental Journey nor a Humphry Clinker. If  all the admirers of these two books would but bestir themselves  and look into the matter, I am sure that Sterne's only too clever  assault would be relegated to its proper place and assessed at  its right value as a mere boutade. The borrowed contempt of  Horace Walpole and the coterie of superficial dilettanti, from  which Smollett's book has somehow never wholly recovered, could  then easily be outflanked and the Travels might well be in  reasonable expectation of coming by their own again.

II

In the meantime let us look a little more closely into the  special and somewhat exceptional conditions under which the  Travel Letters of Smollett were produced. Smollett, as we have  seen, was one of the first professional men of all work in  letters upon a considerable scale who subsisted entirely upon the  earnings of his own pen. He had no extraneous means of support.  He had neither patron, pension, property, nor endowment,  inherited or acquired. Yet he took upon himself the burden of a  large establishment, he spent money freely, and he prided himself  upon the fact that he, Tobias Smollett, who came up to London  without a stiver in his pocket, was in ten years' time in a  position to enact the part of patron upon a considerable scale to  the crowd of inferior denizens of Grub Street. Like most people  whose social ambitions are in advance of their time, Smollett  suffered considerably on account of these novel aspirations of  his. In the present day he would have had his motor car and his  house on Hindhead, a seat in Parliament and a brief from the  Nation to boot as a Member for Humanity. Voltaire was the only  figure in the eighteenth century even to approach such a  flattering position, and he was for many years a refugee from his  own land. Smollett was energetic and ambitious enough to start in  rather a grand way, with a large house, a carriage, menservants,  and the rest. His wife was a fine lady, a "Creole" beauty who had  a small dot of her own; but, on the other hand, her income was  very precarious, and she herself somewhat of a silly and an  incapable in the eyes of Smollett's old Scotch friends. But to  maintain such a position--to keep the bailiffs from the door from  year's end to year's end--was a truly Herculean task in days when  a newspaper "rate" of remuneration or a well-wearing copyright  did not so much as exist, and when Reviews sweated their writers  at the rate of a guinea per sheet of thirty-two pages. Smollett  was continually having recourse to loans. He produced the eight  (or six or seven) hundred a year he required by sheer hard  writing, turning out his History of England, his Voltaire, and  his Universal History by means of long spells of almost incessant  labour at ruinous cost to his health. On the top of all this  cruel compiling he undertook to run a Review (The Critical), a  magazine (The British), and a weekly political organ (The  Briton). A charge of defamation for a paragraph in the nature of  what would now be considered a very mild and pertinent piece of  public criticism against a faineant admiral led to imprisonment  in the King's Bench Prison, plus a fine of ?00. Then came a  quarrel with an old friend, Wilkes--not the least vexatious  result of that forlorn championship of Bute's government in The  Briton. And finally, in part, obviously, as a consequence of all  this nervous breakdown, a succession of severe catarrhs,  premonitory in his case of consumption, the serious illness of  the wife he adored, and the death of his darling, the "little  Boss" of former years, now on the verge of womanhood. To a man of  his extraordinarily strong affections such a series of ills was  too overwhelming. He resolved to break up his establishment at  Chelsea, and to seek a remedy in flight from present evils to a  foreign residence. Dickens went to hibernate on the Riviera upon  a somewhat similar pretext, though fortunately without the same  cause, as far as his health was concerned.

Now note another very characteristic feature of these Travel  Letters. Smollett went abroad not for pleasure, but virtually of  necessity. Not only were circumstances at home proving rather too  much for him, but also, like Stevenson, he was specifically  "ordered South" by his physicians, and he went with the  deliberate intention of making as much money as possible out of  his Travel papers. In his case he wrote long letters on the spot  to his medical and other friends at home. When he got back in the  summer of 1765 one of his first cares was to put the Letters  together. It had always been his intention carefully to revise  them for the press. But when he got back to London he found so  many other tasks awaiting him that were so far more pressing,  that this part of his purpose was but very imperfectly carried  out. The Letters appeared pretty much as he wrote them. Their  social and documentary value is thereby considerably enhanced,  for they were nearly all written close down to the facts. The  original intention had been to go to Montpellier, which was  still, I suppose, the most popular health resort in Southern  Europe. The peace of 1763 opened the way. And this brings us to  another feature of distinction in regard to Smollett's Travels.  Typical Briton, perfervid Protestant of Britain's most Protestant  period, and insular enrage though he doubtless was, Smollett had  knocked about the world a good deal and had also seen something  of the continent of Europe. He was not prepared to see everything  couleur de rose now. His was quite unlike the frame of mind of  the ordinary holiday-seeker, who, partly from a voluntary  optimism, and partly from the change of food and habit, the  exhilaration caused by novel surroundings, and timidity at the  unaccustomed sounds he hears in his ears, is determined to be  pleased with everything. Very temperamental was Smollett, and his  frame of mind at the time was that of one determined to be  pleased with nothing. We know little enough about Smollett  intime. Only the other day I learned that the majority of so- called Smollett portraits are not presentments of the novelist at  all, but ingeniously altered plates of George Washington. An  interesting confirmation of this is to be found in the recently  published Letters of Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe to Robert  Chambers. "Smollett wore black cloaths--a tall man--and extreamly  handsome. No picture of him is known to be extant--all that have  been foisted on the public as such his relations disclaim--this I  know from my aunt Mrs. Smollett, who was the wife of his nephew,  and resided with him at Bath." But one thing we do know, and in  these same letters, if confirmation had been needed, we observe  the statement repeated, namely, that Smollett was very peevish. A  sardonic, satirical, and indeed decidedly gloomy mood or temper  had become so habitual in him as to transform the man. Originally  gay and debonnair, his native character had been so overlaid that  when he first returned to Scotland in 1755 his own mother could  not recognise him until he "gave over glooming" and put on his  old bright smile. [A pleasant story of the Doctor's mother is  given in the same Letters to R. Chambers (1904). She is described  as an ill-natured-looking woman with a high nose, but not a bad  temper, and very fond of the cards. One evening an Edinburgh  bailie (who was a tallow chandler) paid her a visit. "Come awa',  bailie," said she, "and tak' a trick at the cards." "Troth madam,  I hae nae siller!" "Then let us play for a pound of candles."]  His was certainly a nervous, irritable, and rather censorious  temper. Like Mr. Brattle, in The Vicar of Bulhampton, he was  thinking always of the evil things that had been done to him.  With the pawky and philosophic Scots of his own day (Robertson,  Hume, Adam Smith, and "Jupiter" Carlyle) he had little in common,  but with the sour and mistrustful James Mill or the cross and  querulous Carlyle of a later date he had, it seems to me, a good  deal. What, however, we attribute in their case to bile or liver,  a consecrated usage prescribes that we must, in the case of  Smollett, accredit more particularly to the spleen. Whether  dyspeptic or "splenetic," this was not the sort of man to see  things through a veil of pleasant self-generated illusion. He  felt under no obligation whatever to regard the Grand Tour as a  privilege of social distinction, or its discomforts as things to  be discreetly ignored in relating his experience to the stay-at-home  public. He was not the sort of man that the Tourist Agencies  of to-day would select to frame their advertisements. As an  advocatus diaboli on the subject of Travel he would have done  well enough. And yet we must not infer that the magic of travel  is altogether eliminated from his pages. This is by no means the  case: witness his intense enthusiasm at Nimes, on sight of the  Maison Carree or the Pont du Gard; the passage describing his  entry into the Eternal City; [Ours "was the road by which so many  heroes returned with conquest to their country, by which so many  kings were led captive to Rome, and by which the ambassadors of  so many kingdoms and States approached the seat of Empire, to  deprecate the wrath, to sollicit the friendship, or sue for the  protection of the Roman people."] or the enviable account of the  alfresco meals which the party discussed in their coach as  described in Letter VIII.

As to whether Smollett and his party of five were exceptionally  unfortunate in their road-faring experiences must be left an open  question at the tribunal of public opinion. In cold blood, in one  of his later letters, he summarised his Continental experience  after this wise: inns, cold, damp, dark, dismal, dirty; landlords  equally disobliging and rapacious; servants awkward, sluttish,  and slothful; postillions lazy, lounging, greedy, and  impertinent. With this last class of delinquents after much  experience he was bound to admit the following dilemma:--If you  chide them for lingering, they will contrive to delay you the  longer. If you chastise them with sword, cane, cudgel, or  horsewhip (he defines the correctives, you may perceive, but  leaves the expletives to our imagination) they will either  disappear entirely, and leave you without resource, or they will  find means to take vengeance by overturning your carriage. The  only course remaining would be to allow oneself to become the  dupe of imposition by tipping the postillions an amount slightly  in excess of the authorized gratification. He admits that in  England once, between the Devizes and Bristol, he found this plan  productive of the happiest results. It was unfortunate that, upon  this occasion, the lack of means or slenderness of margin for  incidental expenses should have debarred him from having recourse  to a similar expedient. For threepence a post more, as Smollett  himself avows, he would probably have performed the journey with  much greater pleasure and satisfaction. But the situation is  instructive. It reveals to us the disadvantage under which the  novelist was continually labouring, that of appearing to travel  as an English Milord, en grand seigneur, and yet having at every  point to do it "on the cheap." He avoided the common conveyance  or diligence, and insisted on travelling post and in a berline;  but he could not bring himself to exceed the five-sou pourboire  for the postillions. He would have meat upon maigre days, yet  objected to paying double for it. He held aloof from the thirty-sou  table d'hote, and would have been content to pay three francs  a head for a dinner a part, but his worst passions were roused  when he was asked to pay not three, but four. Now Smollett  himself was acutely conscious of the false position. He was by  nature anything but a curmudgeon. On the contrary, he was, if I  interpret him at all aright, a high-minded, open-hearted,  generous type of man. Like a majority, perhaps, of the really  open-handed he shared one trait with the closefisted and even  with the very mean rich. He would rather give away a crown than  be cheated of a farthing. Smollett himself had little of the  traditional Scottish thriftiness about him, but the people among  whom he was going--the Languedocians and Ligurians--were  notorious for their nearness in money matters. The result of all  this could hardly fail to exacerbate Smollett's mood and to  aggravate the testiness which was due primarily to the bitterness  of his struggle with the world, and, secondarily, to the  complaints which that struggle engendered. One capital  consequence, however, and one which specially concerns us, was  that we get this unrivalled picture of the seamy side of foreign  travel--a side rarely presented with anything like Smollett's  skill to the student of the grand siecle of the Grand Tour. The  rubs, the rods, the crosses of the road could, in fact, hardly be  presented to us more graphically or magisterially than they are  in some of these chapters. Like Prior, Fielding, Shenstone, and  Dickens, Smollett was a connoisseur in inns and innkeepers. He  knew good food and he knew good value, and he had a mighty keen  eye for a rogue. There may, it is true, have been something in  his manner which provoked them to exhibit their worst side to  him. It is a common fate with angry men. The trials to which he  was subjected were momentarily very severe, but, as we shall see  in the event, they proved a highly salutary discipline to him.

To sum up, then, Smollett's Travels were written hastily and  vigorously by an expert man of letters. They were written ad  vivum, as it were, not from worked-up notes or embellished  recollections. They were written expressly for money down. They  were written rather en noir than couleur de rose by an  experienced, and, we might almost perhaps say, a disillusioned  traveller, and not by a naif or a niais. The statement that they  were to a certain extent the work of an invalid is, of course,  true, and explains much. The majority of his correspondents were  of the medical profession, all of them were members of a group  with whom he was very intimate, and the letters were by his  special direction to be passed round among them. [We do not  know precisely who all these correspondents of Smollett were, but  most of them were evidently doctors and among them, without a  doubt, John Armstrong, William Hunter, George Macaulay, and above  all John Moore, himself an authority on European travel, Governor  on the Grand Tour of the Duke of Hamilton (Son of "the beautiful  Duchess"), author of Zeluco, and father of the famous soldier.  Smollett's old chum, Dr. W. Smellie, died 5th March 1763.] In the  circumstances (bearing in mind that it was his original intention  to prune the letters considerably before publication) it was only  natural that he should say a good deal about the state of his  health. His letters would have been unsatisfying to these good  people had he not referred frequently and at some length to his  spirits and to his symptoms, an improvement in which was the  primary object of his journey and his two years' sojourn in the  South. Readers who linger over the diary of Fielding's dropsy and  Mrs. Fielding's toothache are inconsistent in denouncing the  luxury of detail with which Smollett discusses the matter of his  imposthume.

What I claim for the present work is that, in the first place, to any one interested in Smollett's personality it  supplies an unrivalled key. It is, moreover, the work of a  scholar, an observer of human nature, and, by election, a  satirist of no mean order. It gives us some characteristic social  vignettes, some portraits of the road of an unsurpassed freshness  and clearness. It contains some historical and geographical  observations worthy of one of the shrewdest and most sagacious  publicists of the day. It is interesting to the etymologist for  the important share it has taken in naturalising useful foreign  words into our speech. It includes (as we shall have occasion to  observe) a respectable quantum of wisdom fit to become  proverbial, and several passages of admirable literary quality.  In point of date (1763-65) it is fortunate, for the writer just  escaped being one of a crowd. On the whole, I maintain that it is  more than equal in interest to the Journey to the Hebrides, and  that it deserves a very considerable proportion of the praise  that has hitherto been lavished too indiscriminately upon the  Voyage to Lisbon. On the force of this claim the reader is  invited to constitute himself judge after a fair perusal of the  following pages. I shall attempt only to point the way to a  satisfactory verdict, no longer in the spirit of an advocate, but  by means of a few illustrations and, more occasionally,  amplifications of what Smollett has to tell us.

III

As was the case with Fielding many years earlier, Smollett was  almost broken down with sedentary toil, when early in June 1763  with his wife, two young ladies ("the two girls") to whom she  acted as chaperon, and a faithful servant of twelve years'  standing, who in the spirit of a Scots retainer of the olden time  refused to leave his master (a good testimonial this, by the way,  to a temper usually accredited with such a splenetic sourness),  he crossed the straits of Dover to see what a change of climate  and surroundings could do for him.

On other grounds than those of health he was glad to shake the  dust of Britain from his feet. He speaks himself of being  traduced by malice, persecuted by faction, abandoned by false  patrons, complaints which will remind the reader, perhaps, of  George Borrow's "Jeremiad," to the effect that he had been  beslavered by the venomous foam of every sycophantic lacquey and  unscrupulous renegade in the three kingdoms. But Smollett's  griefs were more serious than what an unkind reviewer could  inflict. He had been fined and imprisoned for defamation. He had  been grossly caricatured as a creature of Bute, the North British  favourite of George III., whose tenure of the premiership  occasioned riots and almost excited a revolution in the  metropolis. Yet after incurring all this unpopularity at a time  when the populace of London was more inflamed against Scotsmen  than it has ever been before or since, and having laboured  severely at a paper in the ministerial interest and thereby  aroused the enmity of his old friend John Wilkes, Smollett had  been unceremoniously thrown over by his own chief, Lord Bute, on  the ground that his paper did more to invite attack than to repel  it. Lastly, he and his wife had suffered a cruel bereavement in  the loss of their only child, and it was partly to supply a  change from the scene of this abiding sorrow, that the present  journey was undertaken.

The first stages and incidents of the expedition were not exactly  propitious. The Dover Road was a byword for its charges; the Via  Alba might have been paved with the silver wrung from reluctant  and indignant passengers. Smollett characterized the chambers as  cold and comfortless, the beds as "paultry" (with "frowsy," a  favourite word), the cookery as execrable, wine poison,  attendance bad, publicans insolent, and bills extortion,  concluding with the grand climax that there was not a drop of  tolerable malt liquor to be had from London to Dover. Smollett  finds a good deal to be said for the designation of "a den of  thieves" as applied to that famous port (where, as a German lady  of much later date once complained, they "boot ze Bible in ze  bedroom, but ze devil in ze bill", and he grizzles lamentably  over the seven guineas, apart from extras, which he had to pay  for transport in a Folkestone cutter to Boulogne Mouth.

Having once arrived at Boulogne, Smollett settled down regularly  to his work as descriptive reporter, and the letters that he  wrote to his friendly circle at home fall naturally into four  groups. The first Letters from II. to V. describe with Hogarthian  point, prejudice and pungency, the town and people of Boulogne.  The second group, Letters VI.-XII., deal with the journey from  Boulogne to Nice by way of Paris, Lyon, Nimes, and Montpellier.  The third group, Letters XIII. -XXIV., is devoted to a more  detailed and particular delineation of Nice and the Nicois. The  fourth, Letters XXV.-XLI., describes the Italian expedition and  the return journey to Boulogne en route for England, where the  party arrive safe home in July 1765.

Smollett's account of Boulogne is excellent reading, it forms an  apt introduction to the narrative of his journey, it familiarises  us with the milieu, and reveals to us in Smollett a man of  experience who is both resolute and capable of getting below the  surface of things. An English possession for a short period in  the reign of the Great Harry, Boulogne has rarely been less in  touch with England than it was at the time of Smollett's visit.  Even then, however, there were three small colonies,  respectively, of English nuns, English Jesuits, and English  Jacobites. Apart from these and the English girls in French  seminaries it was estimated ten years after Smollett's sojourn  there that there were twenty-four English families in residence.  The locality has of course always been a haunting place for the  wandering tribes of English. Many well-known men have lived or  died here both native and English. Adam Smith must have been  there very soon after Smollett. So must Dr. John Moore and  Charles Churchill, one of the enemies provoked by the Briton, who  went to Boulogne to meet his friend Wilkes and died there in  1764. Philip Thicknesse the traveller and friend of Gainsborough  died there in 1770. After long search for a place to end his days  in Thomas Campbell bought a house in Boulogne and died there, a  few months later, in 1844. The house is still to be seen, Rue St.  Jean, within the old walls; it has undergone no change, and in  1900 a marble tablet was put up to record the fact that Campbell  lived and died there. The other founder of the University of  London, Brougham, by a singular coincidence was also closely  associated with Boulogne. [Among the occupants of the English  cemetery will be found the names of Sir Harris Nicolas, Basil  Montagu, Smithson Pennant, Sir William Ouseley, Sir William  Hamilton, and Sir C. M. Carmichael. And among other literary  celebrities connected with the place, apart from Dickens (who  gave his impressions of the place in Household Words, November  1854) we should include in a brief list, Charles Lever, Horace  Smith, Wilkie Collins, Mrs. Henry Wood, Professor York Powell,  the Marquis of Steyne (Lord Seymour), Mrs. Jordan, Clark Russell,  and Sir Conan Doyle. There are also memorable associations with  Lola Montes, Heinrich Heine, Becky Sharpe, and above all Colonel  Newcome. My first care in the place was to discover the rampart  where the Colonel used to parade with little Clive. Among the  native luminaries are Daunou, Duchenne de Boulogne, one of the  foremost physiologists of the last century, an immediate  predecessor of Charcot in knowledge of the nervous system, Aug.  Mariette, the Egyptologist, Aug. Angellier, the biographer of  Burns, Sainte-Beuve, Prof. Morel, and "credibly," Godfrey de  Bouillon, of whom Charles Lamb wrote "poor old Godfrey, he must  be getting very old now." The great Lesage died here in 1747.]  The antiquaries still dispute about Gessoriacum, Godfrey de  Bouillon, and Charlemagne's Tour. Smollett is only fair in  justifying for the town, the older portions of which have a  strong medieval suggestion, a standard of comparison slightly  more distinguished than Wapping. He never lets us forget that he  is a scholar of antiquity, a man of education and a speculative  philosopher. Hence his references to Celsus and Hippocrates and  his ingenious etymologies of wheatear and samphire, more  ingenious in the second case than sound. Smollett's field of  observation had been wide and his fund of exact information was  unusually large. At Edinburgh he had studied medicine under Monro  and John Gordon, in company with such able and distinguished men  as William Hunter, Cullen, Pitcairn, Gregory, and Armstrong--and  the two last mentioned were among his present correspondents. As  naval surgeon at Carthagena he had undergone experience such as  few literary men can claim, and subsequently as compiler,  reviewer, party journalist, historian, translator, statistician,  and lexicographer, he had gained an amount of miscellaneous  information such as falls to the lot of very few minds of his  order of intelligence. He had recently directed the compilation  of a large Universal Geography or Gazetteer, the Carton or Vivien  de St. Martin if those days--hence his glib references to the  manners and customs of Laplanders, Caffres, Kamskatchans, and  other recondite types of breeding. His imaginative faculty was  under the control of an exceptionally strong and retentive  memory. One may venture to say, indeed, without danger of  exaggeration that his testimonials as regards habitual accuracy  of statement have seldom been exceeded. Despite the doctor's  unflattering portraits of Frenchmen, M. Babeau admits that his  book is one written by an observer of facts, and a man whose  statements, whenever they can be tested, are for the most part  "singularly exact." Mr. W. J. Prouse, whose knowledge of the  Riviera district is perhaps almost unequalled out of France,  makes this very remarkable statement. "After reading all that  has been written by very clever people about Nice in modern  times, one would probably find that for exact precision of  statement, Smollett was still the most trustworthy guide," a view  which is strikingly borne out by Mr. E. Schuyler, who further  points out Smollett's shrewd foresight in regard to the  possibilities of the Cornice road, and of Cannes and San Remo as  sanatoria." Frankly there is nothing to be seen which he does  not recognise." And even higher testimonies have been paid to  Smollett's topographical accuracy by recent historians of Nice  and its neighbourhood.

The value which Smollett put upon accuracy in the smallest  matters of detail is evinced by the corrections which he made in  the margin of a copy of the 1766 edition of the Travels. These  corrections, which are all in Smollett's own and unmistakably  neat handwriting, may be divided into four categories. In the  first place come a number of verbal emendations. Phrases are  turned, inverted and improved by the skilful "twist of the pen"  which becomes a second nature to the trained corrector of proofs;  there are moreover a few topographical corrigenda, suggested by  an improved knowledge of the localities, mostly in the  neighbourhood of Pisa and Leghorn, where there is no doubt that  these corrections were made upon the occasion of Smollett's  second visit to Italy in 1770. [Some not unimportant errata were  overlooked. Thus Smollett's representation of the droit d'aubaine  as a monstrous and intolerable grievance is of course an  exaggeration. (See Sentimental Journey; J. Hill Burton, The Scot  Abroad, 1881, p. 135; and Luchaire, Instit. de France.) On his  homeward journey he indicates that he travelled from Beaune to  Chalons and so by way of Auxerre to Dijon. The right order is  Chalons, Beaune, Dijon, Auxerre. As further examples of the zeal  with which Smollett regarded exactitude in the record of facts we  have his diurnal register of weather during his stay at Nice and  the picture of him scrupulously measuring the ruins at Cimiez  with packthread.] In the second place come a number of English  renderings of the citations from Latin, French, and Italian  authors. Most of these from the Latin are examples of Smollett's  own skill in English verse making. Thirdly come one or two  significant admissions of overboldness in matters of criticism,  as where he retracts his censure of Raphael's Parnassus in Letter  XXXIII. Fourthly, and these are of the greatest importance, come  some very interesting additional notes upon the buildings of  Pisa, upon Sir John Hawkwood's tomb at Florence, and upon the  congenial though recondite subject of antique Roman hygiene. [Cf.  the Dinner in the manner of the Ancients in Peregrine Pickle,  (xliv.) and Letters IX. to XL in Humphry Clinker.]

After Smollett's death his books were for the most part sold for  the benefit of his widow. No use was made of his corrigenda. For  twenty years or so the Travels were esteemed and referred to, but  as time went on, owing to the sneers of the fine gentlemen of  letters, such as Walpole and Sterne, they were by degrees  disparaged and fell more or less into neglect. They were  reprinted, it is true, either in collective editions of Smollett  or in various collections of travels; [For instance in Baldwin's  edition of 1778; in the 17th vol. of Mayor's Collection of  Voyages and Travels, published by Richard Phillips in twenty-eight  vols., 1809; and in an abbreviated form in John Hamilton  Moore's New and Complete Collection of Voyages and Travels  (folio, Vol. 11. 938-970).] but they were not edited with any  care, and as is inevitable in such cases errors crept in,  blunders were repeated, and the text slightly but gradually  deteriorated. In the last century Smollett's own copy of the  Travels bearing the manuscript corrections that he had made in  1770, was discovered in the possession of the Telfer family and  eventually came into the British Museum. The second volume, which  affords admirable specimens of Smollett's neatly written  marginalia, has been exhibited in a show-ease in the King's  Library.

The corrections that Smollett purposed to make in the Travels are  now for the second time embodied in a printed edition of the  text. At the same time the text has been collated with the  original edition of 1766, and the whole has been carefully  revised. The old spelling has been, as far as possible, restored.  Smollett was punctilious in such matters, and what with his  histories, his translations, his periodicals, and his other  compilations, he probably revised more proof-matter for press  than any other writer of his time. His practice as regards  orthography is, therefore, of some interest as representing what  was in all probability deemed to be the most enlightened  convention of the day.

To return now to the Doctor's immediate contemplation of  Boulogne, a city described in the Itineraries as containing rien  de remarquable. The story of the Capuchin [On page 21. A Capuchin  of the same stripe is in Pickle, ch. Ill. sq.] is very racy of  Smollett, while the vignette of the shepherd at the beginning of  Letter V. affords a first-rate illustration of his terseness.  Appreciate the keen and minute observation concentrated into the  pages that follow, [Especially on p. 34 to p. 40.] commencing  with the shrewd and economic remarks upon smuggling, and ending  with the lively description of a Boulonnais banquet, very  amusing, very French, very life-like, and very Smollettian.  In Letter V. the Doctor again is very much himself. A little  provocation and he bristles and stabs all round. He mounts the  hygienic horse and proceeds from the lack of implements of  cleanliness to the lack of common decency, and "high flavoured  instances, at which even a native of Edinburgh would stop his  nose." [This recalls Johnson's first walk up the High Street,  Edinburgh, on Bozzy's arm. "It was a dusky night: I could not  prevent his being assailed by the evening effluvia of Edinburgh.  . . . As we marched along he grumbled in my ear, 'I smell you in  the dark!'"] And then lest the southrons should escape we have a  reference to the "beastly habit of drinking from a tankard in  which perhaps a dozen filthy mouths have slabbered as is the  custom in England." With all his coarsenesses this blunt Scot was  a pioneer and fugleman of the niceties. Between times most  nations are gibbetted in this slashing epistle. The ingenious  boasting of the French is well hit off in the observation of the  chevalier that the English doubtless drank every day to the  health of the Marquise de Pompadour. The implication reminded  Smollett of a narrow escape from a duello (an institution he  reprobates with the utmost trenchancy in this book) at Ghent in  1749 with a Frenchman who affirmed that Marlborough's battles  were purposely lost by the French generals in order to mortify  Mme. de Maintenon. Two incidents of some importance to Smollett  occurred during the three months' sojourn at Boulogne. Through  the intervention of the English Ambassador at Paris (the Earl of  Hertford) he got back his books, which had been impounded by the  Customs as likely to contain matter prejudicial to the state or  religion of France, and had them sent south by shipboard to  Bordeaux. Secondly, he encountered General Paterson, a friendly  Scot in the Sardinian service, who confirmed what an English  physician had told Smollett to the effect that the climate of  Nice was infinitely preferable to that of Montpellier "with  respect to disorders of the breast." Smollett now hires a berline  and four horses for fourteen louis, and sets out with rather a  heavy heart for Paris. It is problematic, he assures his good  friend Dr. Moore, whether he will ever return. "My health is very  precarious."

IV

The rapid journey to Paris by way of Montreuil, Amiens, and  Clermont, about one hundred and fifty-six miles from Boulogne,  the last thirty-six over a paved road, was favourable to  superficial observation and the normal corollary of epigram.  Smollett was much impressed by the mortifying indifference of the  French innkeepers to their clients. "It is a very odd contrast  between France and England. In the former all the people are  complaisant but the publicans; in the latter there is hardly any  complaisance but among the publicans." [In regard to two  exceptional instances of politeness on the part of innkeepers,  Smollett attributes one case to dementia, the other, at Lerici,  to mental shock, caused by a recent earthquake.] Idleness and  dissipation confront the traveller, not such a good judge,  perhaps, as was Arthur Young four-and-twenty years later. "Every  object seems to have shrunk in its dimensions since I was last in  Paris." Smollett was an older man by fifteen years since he  visited the French capital in the first flush of his success as  an author. The dirt and gloom of French apartments, even at  Versailles, offend his English standard of comfort. "After all,  it is in England only where we must look for cheerful apartments,  gay furniture, neatness, and convenience. There is a strange  incongruity in the French genius. With all their volatility,  prattle, and fondness for bons mots they delight in a species of  drawling, melancholy, church music. Their most favourite dramatic  pieces are almost without incident, and the dialogue of their  comedies consists of moral insipid apophthegms, entirely  destitute of wit or repartee." While amusing himself with the  sights of Paris, Smollett drew up that caustic delineation of the  French character which as a study in calculated depreciation has  rarely been surpassed. He conceives the Frenchman entirely as a  petit-maitre, and his view, though far removed from  Chesterfield's, is not incompatible with that of many of his  cleverest contemporaries, including Sterne. He conceives of the  typical Frenchman as regulating his life in accordance with the  claims of impertinent curiosity and foppery, gallantry and  gluttony. Thus:

"If a Frenchman is capable of real friendship, it must certainly  be the most disagreeable present he can possibly make to a man  of a true English character. You know, madam, we are naturally  taciturn, soon tired of impertinence, and much subject to fits of  disgust. Your French friend intrudes upon you at all hours; he  stuns you with his loquacity; he teases you with impertinent  questions about your domestic and private affairs; he attempts to  meddle in all your concerns, and forces his advice upon you with  the most unwearied importunity; he asks the price of everything  you wear, and, so sure as you tell him, undervalues it without  hesitation; he affirms it is in a bad taste, ill contrived, ill  made; that you have been imposed upon both with respect to the  fashion and the price; that the marquis of this, or the countess  of that, has one that is perfectly elegant, quite in the bon ton,  and yet it cost her little more than you gave for a thing that  nobody would wear.

"If a Frenchman is admitted into your family, and distinguished  by repeated marks of your friendship and regard, the first return  he makes for your civilities is to make love to your wife, if she  is handsome; if not, to your sister, or daughter, or niece. If  he suffers a repulse from your wife, or attempts in vain to  debauch your sister, or your daughter, or your niece, he will,  rather than not play the traitor with his gallantry, make his  addresses to your grandmother; and ten to one but in one shape or  another he will find means to ruin the peace of a family in which  he has been so kindly entertained. What he cannot accomplish by  dint of compliment and personal attendance, he will endeavour to  effect by reinforcing these with billets-doux, songs, and verses,  of which he always makes a provision for such purposes. If he is  detected in these efforts of treachery, and reproached with his  ingratitude, he impudently declares that what he had done was no  more than simple gallantry, considered in France as an  indispensable duty on every man who pretended to good breeding.  Nay, he will even affirm that his endeavours to corrupt your  wife, or deflower your daughter, were the most genuine proofs he  could give of his particular regard for your family.

"If there were five hundred dishes at table, a Frenchman will eat  of all of them, and then complain he has no appetite--this I have  several times remarked. A friend of mine gained a considerable  wager upon an experiment of this kind; the petit-maitre ate of  fourteen different plates, besides the dessert, then disparaged  the cook, declaring he was no better than a marmiton, or  turnspit."

The gross unfairness, no less than the consummate cleverness, of  this caricature compels us to remember that this was written in  the most insular period of our manners, and during a brief lull  in a century of almost incessant mutual hostility between the two  nations. Aristocrats like Walpole, Gibbon, and Chesterfield could  regard France from a cosmopolitan point of view, as leading the  comite of nations. But to sturdy and true-born patriots, such as  Hogarth and Smollett, reciprocal politeness appeared as grotesque  as an exchange of amenities would be between a cormorant and an  ape. Consequently, it was no doubt with a sense of positive  relief to his feelings that Smollett could bring himself to sum  up the whole matter thus. "A Frenchman lays out his whole revenue  upon taudry suits of cloaths, or in furnishing a magnificent  repas of fifty or a hundred dishes, one-half of which are not  eatable or intended to be eaten. His wardrobe goes to the  fripier, his dishes to the dogs, and himself to the devil."

These trenchant passages were written partly, it may be imagined,  to suit the English taste of the day. In that object they must  have succeeded, for they were frequently transcribed into  contemporary periodicals. In extenuation of Smollett's honesty of  purpose, however, it may be urged that he was always a  thoroughgoing patriot, [Witness his violently anti-French play,  the Reprisal of 1757.] and that, coming from a Calvinistic  country where a measure of Tartufism was a necessary condition of  respectability, he reproduces the common English error of  ignoring how apt a Frenchman is to conceal a number of his best  qualities. Two other considerations deserve attention. The race-portrait  was in Smollett's day at the very height of its  disreputable reign. Secondly, we must remember how very  profoundly French character has been modified since 1763, and  more especially in consequence of the cataclysms of 1789 and  1870.

Smollett's vis comica is conspicuous in the account of the  coiffure of the period and of the superstitious reverence which a  Frenchman of that day paid to his hair. In tracing the origin of  this superstition he exhibits casually his historical learning.  The crine profuso and barba demissa of the reges crinitos, as the  Merovingians were called, are often referred to by ancient  chroniclers. Long hair was identified with right of succession,  as a mark of royal race, and the maintenance of ancient  tradition. A tondu signified a slave, and even under the  Carolingians to shave a prince meant to affirm his exclusion from  the succession.

v

A general improvement in English roads, roadside inns, and  methods of conveyance commenced about 1715. The continental roads  lagged behind, until when Arthur Young wrote in 1788-89 they had  got badly into arrears. The pace of locomotion between Rome and  England changed very little in effect from the days of Julius  Caesar to those of George III. It has been said with point that  Trajan and Sir Robert Peel, travelling both at their utmost speed  achieved the distance between Rome and London in an almost  precisely similar space of time. Smollett decided to travel post  between Paris and Lyons, and he found that the journey lasted  full five days and cost upwards of thirty guineas. [One of the  earliest printed road books in existence gives the posts between  Paris and Lyons. This tiny duodecimo, dated 1500, and more than  worth its weight in gold has just been acquired by the British  Museum. On the old Roman routes, see Arnold's Lectures on Modern  History, 1842.] Of roads there was a choice between two. The  shorter route by Nevers and Moulins amounted to just about three  hundred English miles. The longer route by Auxerre and Dijon,  which Smollett preferred extended to three hundred and thirty  miles. The two roads diverged after passing Fontainebleau, the  shorter by Nemours and the longer by Moret. The first road was  the smoother, but apart from the chance of seeing the Vendange  the route de Burgoyne was far the more picturesque. Smollett's  portraiture of the peasantry in the less cultivated regions  prepares the mind for Young's famous description of those "gaunt  emblems of famine." In Burgundy the Doctor says, "I saw a peasant  ploughing the ground with a jackass, a lean cow, and a he-goat  yoked together." His vignette of the fantastic petit-maitre at  Sens, and his own abominable rudeness, is worthy of the master  hand that drew the poor debtor Jackson in the Marshalsea in  Roderick Random.

His frank avowal of ill temper at the time deprives our  entertainment of the unamiable tinge of which it would otherwise  have partaken. "The truth is, I was that day more than usually  peevish, from the bad weather as well as from the dread of a fit  of asthma, with which I was threatened. And I daresay my  appearance seemed as uncouth to him as his travelling dress  appeared to me. I had a grey, mourning frock under a wide  greatcoat, a bob-wig without powder, a very large laced hat, and  a meagre, wrinkled, discontented countenance."

From Lyons the traveller secured a return berline going back to  Avignon with three mules and a voiturier named Joseph. Joseph,  though he turned out to be an ex-criminal, proved himself the one  Frenchman upon whose fidelity and good service Smollett could  look back with unfeigned satisfaction. The sight of a skeleton  dangling from a gibbet near Valence surprised from this droll  knave an ejaculation and a story, from which it appeared only too  evident that he had been first the comrade and then the  executioner of one of the most notorious brigands of the century.  The story as told by Smollett does not wholly agree with the best  authenticated particulars. The Dick Turpin of eighteenth century  France, Mandrin has engendered almost as many fables as his  English congener. [See Maignien's Bibliographie des Ecrits  relatifs a Mandrin.] As far as I have been able to discover, the  great freebooter was born at St. Etienne in May 1724. His father  having been killed in a coining affair, Mandrin swore to revenge  him. He deserted from the army accordingly, and got together a  gang of contrebandiers, at the head of which his career in Savoy  and Dauphine almost resembles that of one of the famous guerilla  chieftains described in Hardman's Peninsular Scenes and Sketches.  Captured eventually, owing to the treachery of a comrade, he was  put to death on the wheel at Valence on 26th May 1755. Five  comrades were thrown into jail with him; and one of these  obtained his pardon on condition of acting as Mandrin's  executioner. Alas, poor Joseph!

Three experiences Smollett had at this season which may well fall  to the lot of road-farers in France right down to the present  day. He was poisoned with garlic, surfeited with demi-roasted  small birds, and astonished at the solid fare of the poorest  looking travellers. The summer weather, romantic scenery, and  occasional picnics, which Smollett would have liked to repeat  every summer under the arches of the Pont du Gard--the monument  of antiquity which of all, excepting only the Maison Carree at  Nimes, most excited his enthusiastic admiration, all contributed  to put him into an abnormally cheerful and convalescent  humour. . . .

Smollett now bent his steps southwards to Montpellier. His  baggage had gone in advance. He was uncertain as yet whether to  make Montpellier or Nice his headquarters in the South. Like  Toulouse and Tours, and Turin, Montpellier was for a period a  Mecca to English health and pleasure seekers abroad. A city of no  great antiquity, but celebrated from the twelfth century for its  schools of Law and Physic, it had been incorporated definitely  with France since 1382, and its name recurs in French history  both as the home of famous men in great number and as, before and  after the brief pre-eminence of La Rochelle, the rival of Nimes  as capital of Protestantism in the South. Evelyn, Burnet, the two  Youngs, Edward and Arthur, and Sterne have all left us an  impression of the city. Prevented by snow from crossing the Mont  Cenis, John Locke spent two winters there in the days of Charles  II. (1675-77), and may have pondered a good many of the problems  of Toleration on a soil under which the heated lava of religious  strife was still unmistakeable. And Smollett must almost have  jostled en route against the celebrated author of The Wealth of  Nations, who set out with his pupil for Toulouse in February  1764. A letter to Hume speaks of the number of English in the  neighbourhood just a month later. Lomenie de Brienne was then in  residence as archbishop. In the following November, Adam Smith  and his charge paid a visit to Montpellier to witness a pageant  and memorial, as it was supposed, of a freedom that was gone for  ever, the opening of the States of Languedoc. Antiquaries and  philosophers went to moralise on the spectacle in the spirit in  which Freeman went to Andorra, Byron to the site of Troy, or De  Tocqueville to America. It was there that the great economist met  Horne Tooke.

Smollett's more practical and immediate object in making this  pilgrimage was to interview the great lung specialist, known  locally to his admiring compatriots as the Boerhaave of  Montpellier, Dr. Fizes. The medical school of Montpellier was  much in evidence during the third quarter of the eighteenth  century, and for the history of its various branches there are  extant numerous Memoires pour Servir, by Prunelle, Astruc, and  others. Smollett was only just in time to consult the reigning  oracle, for the "illustrious" Dr. Fizes died in the following  year. He gives us a very unfavourable picture of this "great  lanthorn of medicine," who, notwithstanding his prodigious age,  his stoop, and his wealth, could still scramble up two pairs for  a fee of six livres. More than is the case with most medical  patients, however, should we suspect Smollett of being unduly  captious. The point as to how far his sketch of the French doctor  and his diagnosis was a true one, and how far a mere caricature,  due to ill health and prejudice, has always piqued my curiosity.  But how to resolve a question involving so many problems not of  ordinary therapeutic but of historical medicine! In this  difficulty I bethought me most fortunately of consulting an authority probably without a rival in this special branch of  medical history, Dr. Norman Moore, who with his accustomed  generosity has given me the following most instructive diagnosis  of the whole situation.

"I have read Smollett's account of his illness as it appears in  several passages in his travels and in the statement which he  drew up for Professor 'F.' at Montpellier.

"Smollett speaks of his pulmonic disorder, his 'asthmatical  disorder,' and uses other expressions which show that his lungs  were affected. In his statement he mentions that he has cough,  shortness of breath, wasting, a purulent expectoration, loss of  appetite at times, loss of strength, fever, a rapid pulse,  intervals of slight improvement and subsequent exacerbations. 

"This shortness of breath, he says, has steadily increased. This  group of symptoms makes it certain that he had tuberculosis of  the lungs, in other words, was slowly progressing in consumption.

"His darting pains in his side were due to the pleurisy which  always occurs in such an illness.

"His account shows also the absence of hopelessness which is a  characteristic state of mind in patients with pulmonary  tuberculosis.

"I do not think that the opinion of the Montpellier professor  deserves Smollett's condemnation. It seems to me both careful and  sensible and contains all the knowledge of its time. Smollett,  with an inconsistency not uncommon in patients who feel that they  have a serious disease, would not go in person to the Professor,  for he felt that from his appearance the Professor would be sure  to tell him he had consumption. He half hoped for some other view  of the written case in spite of its explicit statements, and when  Professor F-- wrote that the patient had tubercles in his lungs,  this was displeasing to poor Smollett, who had hoped against hope  to receive--some other opinion than the only possible one, viz.,  that he undoubtedly had a consumption certain to prove fatal."

The cruel truth was not to be evaded. Smollett had tuberculosis,  though not probably of the most virulent kind, as he managed to  survive another seven years, and those for the most part years of  unremitting labour. He probably gained much by substituting Nice  for Montpellier as a place to winter in, for although the climate  of Montpellier is clear and bright in the highest degree, the  cold is both piercing and treacherous. Days are frequent during  the winter in which one may stand warmly wrapped in the brilliant  sun and feel the protection of a greatcoat no more than that of a  piece of gauze against the icy and penetrating blast that comes  from "tile roof of France."

Unable to take the direct route by Arles as at present, the  eastward-bound traveller from Montpellier in 1764 had to make a  northerly detour. The first stone bridge up the Rhone was at  Avignon, but there was a bridge of boats connecting Beaucaire  with Tarascon. Thence, in no very placable mood, Smollett set out  in mid-November by way of Orgon [Aix], Brignolles and le Muy,  striking the Mediterranean at Frejus. En route he was inveigled  into a controversy of unwonted bitterness with an innkeeper at le  Muy. The scene is conjured up for us with an almost disconcerting  actuality; no single detail of the author's discomfiture is  omitted. The episode is post-Flaubertian in its impersonal  detachment, or, as Coleridge first said, "aloofness." On crossing  the Var, the sunny climate, the romantic outline of the  Esterelles, the charms of the "neat village" of Cannes, and the  first prospect of Nice began gradually and happily to effect a  slight mitigation in our patient's humour. Smollett was  indubitably one of the pioneers of the Promenade des Anglais.  Long before the days of "Dr. Antonio" or Lord Brougham, he  described for his countrymen the almost incredible dolcezza of  the sunlit coast from Antibes to Lerici. But how much better  than the barren triumph of being the unconscious fugleman of so  glittering a popularity must have been the sense of being one of  the first that ever burst from our rude island upon that secluded  little Piedmontese town, as it then was, of not above twelve  thousand souls, with its wonderful situation, noble perspective  and unparalleled climate. Well might our travel-tost doctor  exclaim, "When I stand on the rampart and look around I can  scarce help thinking myself enchanted." It was truly a garden of  Armida for a native of one of the dampest corners of North  Britain.

"Forty or fifty years ago, before the great transformation took  place on the French Riviera, when Nizza, Villafranca, and Mentone  were antique Italian towns, and when it was one of the  eccentricities of Lord Brougham, to like Cannes, all that sea-board  was a delightful land. Only a hundred years ago Arthur Young had trouble to get an old woman and a donkey to carry his  portmanteau from Cannes to Antibes. I can myself remember Cannes  in 1853, a small fishing village with a quiet beach, and Mentone,  a walled town with mediaeval gates and a castle, a few humble  villas and the old Posta to give supper to any passing traveller.  It was one of the loveliest bits of Italy, and the road from  Nizza to Genoa was one long procession for four days of glorious  scenery, historic remnants, Italian colour, and picturesque  ports. From the Esterelles to San Remo this has all been ruined  by the horde of northern barbarians who have made a sort of  Trouville, Brighton, or Biarritz, with American hotels and  Parisian boulevards on every headland and bay. First came the  half underground railway, a long tunnel with lucid intervals,  which destroyed the road by blocking up its finest views and  making it practically useless. Then miles of unsightly  caravanserais high walls, pompous villas, and Parisian grandes  rues crushed out every trace of Italy, of history, and pictorial  charm." So writes Mr. Frederic Harrison of this delectable coast,  [In the Daily Chronicle, 15th March 1898.] as it was, at a period  within his own recollection--a period at which it is hardly  fanciful to suppose men living who might just have remembered  Smollett, as he was in his last days, when he returned to die on  the Riviera di Levante in the autumn of 1771. Travel had then  still some of the elements of romance. Rapidity has changed all  that. The trouble is that although we can transport our bodies so  much more rapidly than Smollett could, our understanding travels  at the same old pace as before. And in the meantime railway and  tourist agencies have made of modern travel a kind of mental  postcard album, with grand hotels on one side, hotel menus on the  other, and a faint aroma of continental trains haunting, between  the leaves as it were. Our real knowledge is still limited to the  country we have walked over, and we must not approach the country  we would appreciate faster than a man may drive a horse or propel  a bicycle; or we shall lose the all-important sense of artistic  approach. Even to cross the channel by time-table is fatal to  that romantic spirit (indispensable to the true magic of travel)  which a slow adjustment of the mind to a new social atmosphere  and a new historical environment alone can induce. Ruskin, the  last exponent of the Grand Tour, said truly that the benefit of  travel varies inversely in proportion to its speed. The cheap rapidity which has made our villes de plaisir and cotes d'azur  what they are, has made unwieldy boroughs of suburban villages,  and what the rail has done for a radius of a dozen miles, the  motor is rapidly doing for one of a score. So are we sped! But we  are to discuss not the psychology of travel, but the immediate  causes and circumstances of Smollett's arrival upon the territory  of Nice.

VI

Smollett did not interpret the ground-plan of the history of Nice  particularly well. Its colonisation from Massilia, its long  connection with Provence, its occupation by Saracens, its stormy  connection with the house of Anjou, and its close fidelity to the  house of Savoy made no appeal to his admiration. The most  important event in its recent history, no doubt, was the capture  of the city by the French under Catinat in 1706 (Louis XIV. being  especially exasperated against what he regarded as the treachery  of Victor Amadeus), and the razing to the ground of its famous  citadel. The city henceforth lost a good deal of its civic  dignity, and its morale was conspicuously impaired. In the war of  the Austrian succession an English fleet under Admiral Matthews  was told off to defend the territory of the Nicois against the  attentions of Toulon. This was the first close contact  experienced between England and Nice, but the impressions formed  were mutually favourable. The inhabitants were enthusiastic about  the unaccustomed English plan of paying in full for all supplies  demanded. The British officers were no less delighted with the  climate of Nice, the fame of which they carried to their northern  homes. It was both directly and indirectly through one of these  officers that the claims of Nice as a sanatorium came to be put  so plainly before Smollett. [Losing its prestige as a ville  forte, Nice was henceforth rapidly to gain the new character of a  ville de plaisir. In 1763, says one of the city's historians,  Smollett, the famous historian and novelist, visited Nice.  "Arriving here shattered in health and depressed in spirits,  under the genial influence of the climate he soon found himself a  new man. His notes on the country, its gardens, its orange  groves, its climate without a winter, are pleasant and just and  would seem to have been written yesterday instead of more than a  hundred years ago. . . . His memory is preserved in the street  nomenclature of the place; one of the thoroughfares still bears  the appellation of Rue Smollett." (James Nash, The Guide to Nice,  1884, p. 110.)]

Among other celebrated residents at Nice during the period of  Smollett's visit were Edward Augustus, Duke of York, the brother  of George III., who died at Monaco a few years later, and Andre  Massena, a native of the city, then a lad of six.

Before he left Montpellier Smollett indulged in two more  seemingly irresistible tirades against French folly: one against  their persistent hero-worship of such a stuffed doll as Louis le  Grand, and the second in ridicule of the immemorial French  panacea, a bouillon. Now he gets to Nice he feels a return of the  craving to take a hand's turn at depreciatory satire upon the  nation of which a contemporary hand was just tracing the  deservedly better-known delineation, commencing

Gay sprightly land of mirth and social ease, Pleas'd with thyself, whom all the world can please. . . .

Such inveteracy (like Dr. Johnson's against Swift) was not  unnaturally suspected by friends in England of having some  personal motive. In his fifteenth letter home, therefore,  Smollett is assiduous in disclaiming anything of the kind. He  begins by attempting an amende honorable, but before he has got  well away from his exordium he insensibly and most  characteristically diverges into the more congenial path of  censure, and expands indeed into one of his most eloquent  passages--a disquisition upon the French punctilio (conceived upon  lines somewhat similar to Mercutio's address to Benvolio), to  which is appended a satire on the duello as practised in France,  which glows and burns with a radiation of good sense, racy of  Smollett at his best.

To eighteenth century lovers the discussion on duelling will  recall similar talks between Boswell and Johnson, or that between  the lieutenant and Tom in the Seventh Book of Tom Jones, but,  more particularly, the sermon delivered by Johnson on this  subject a propos of General Oglethorpe's story of how he avoided  a duel with Prince Eugene in 1716. "We were sitting in company at  table, whence the Prince took up a glass of wine and by a fillip  made some of it fly in Oglethorpe's face. Here was a nice  dilemma. To have challenged him instantly might have fixed a  quarrelsome character upon the young soldier: to have taken no  notice of it might have been counted as cowardice. Oglethorpe,  therefore, keeping his eye on the Prince, and smiling all the  time, as if he took what His Highness had done in jest, said,  "Mon Prince" (I forget the French words he used), "that's a good  joke; but we do it much better in England," and threw a whole  glass of wine in the Prince's face. An old general who sat by  said, "Il a bien fait, mon Prince, vous l'avez commence," and  thus all ended in good humour."

In Letter XIII. Smollett settles down to give his correspondents  a detailed description of the territory and people of Nice. At  one time it was his intention to essay yet another branch of  authorship and to produce a monograph on the natural history,  antiquities, and topography of the town as the capital of this  still unfamiliar littoral; with the late-born modesty of  experience, however, he recoils from a task to which he does not  feel his opportunities altogether adequate. [See p. 152.] A  quarter of Smollett's original material would embarrass a  "Guide"-builder of more recent pattern.

Whenever he got near a coast line Smollett could not refrain from  expressing decided views. If he had lived at the present day he  would infallibly have been a naval expert, better informed than  most and more trenchant than all; but recognizably one of the  species, artist in words and amateur of ocean-strategy. [Smollett  had, of course, been surgeon's mate on H.M.S. Cumberland, 1740-41.]  His first curiosity at Nice was raised concerning the port,  the harbour, the galleys moored within the mole, and the naval  policy of his Sardinian Majesty. His advice to Victor Amadeus was  no doubt as excellent and as unregarded as the advice of naval  experts generally is. Of more interest to us is his account of  the slave-galleys. Among the miserable slaves whom "a British  subject cannot behold without horror and compassion," he observes  a Piedmontese count in Turkish attire, reminding the reader of  one of Dumas' stories of a count among the forcats. To learn that  there were always volunteer oarsmen among these poor outcasts is  to reflect bitterly upon the average happiness of mankind. As to  whether they wore much worse off than common seamen in the  British navy of the period (who were only in name volunteers and  had often no hope of discharge until they were worn out) under  such commanders as Oakum or Whiffle [In Roderick Random.] is  another question. For confirmation of Smollett's account in  matters of detail the reader may turn to Aleman's Guzman  d'Afarache, which contains a first-hand description of the life  on board a Mediterranean slave galley, to Archenholtz's Tableau  d'Italie of 1788, to Stirling Maxwell's Don John of Austria  (1883, i. 95), and more pertinently to passages in the Life of a  Galley Slave by Jean Marteilhe (edited by Miss Betham-Edwards in  1895). After serving in the docks at Dunkirk, Marteilhe, as a  confirmed protestant, makes the journey in the chain-gang to  Marseilles, and is only released after many delays in consequence  of the personal interest and intervention of Queen Anne. If at  the peace of Utrecht in 1713 we had only been as tender about the  case of our poor Catalan allies! Nice at that juncture had just  been returned by France to the safe-keeping of Savoy, so that in  order to escape from French territory, Marteilhe sailed for Nice  in a tartane, and not feeling too safe even there, hurried thence  by Smollett's subsequent route across the Col di Tende. Many  Europeans were serving at this time in the Turkish or Algerine  galleys. But the most pitiable of all the galley slaves were  those of the knights of St. John of Malta. "Figure to yourself,"  wrote Jacob Houblon [The Houblon Family, 1907 ii. 78. The  accounts in Evelyn and Goldsmith are probably familiar to the  reader.] about this year, "six or seven hundred dirty half-naked  Turks in a small vessel chained to the oars, from which they are  not allowed to stir, fed upon nothing but bad biscuit and water,  and beat about on the most trifling occasion by their most  inhuman masters, who are certainly more Turks than their slaves."

After several digressions, one touching the ancient Cemenelion, a  subject upon which the Jonathan Oldbucks of Provence without  exception are unconscionably tedious, Smollett settles down to a  capable historical summary preparatory to setting his palette for  a picture of the Nissards "as they are." He was, as we are aware,  no court painter, and the cheerful colours certainly do not  predominate. The noblesse for all their exclusiveness cannot  escape his censure. He can see that they are poor (they are  unable to boast more than two coaches among their whole number),  and he feels sure that they are depraved. He attributes both  vices unhesitatingly to their idleness and to their religion. In  their singularly unemotional and coolly comparative outlook upon  religion, how infinitely nearer were Fielding and Smollett than  their greatest successors, Dickens and Thackeray, to the modern  critic who observes that there is "at present not a single  credible established religion in existence." To Smollett  Catholicism conjures up nothing so vividly as the mask of comedy,  while his native Calvinism stands for the corresponding mask of  tragedy. [Walpole's dictum that Life was a comedy to those who  think, a tragedy for those who feel, was of later date than this  excellent mot of Smollett's.] Religion in the sunny spaces of the  South is a "never-failing fund of pastime." The mass (of which he  tells a story that reminds us of Lever's Micky Free) is just a  mechanism invented by clever rogues for an elaborate system of  petty larceny. And what a ferocious vein of cynicism underlies  his strictures upon the perverted gallantry of the Mariolaters at  Florence, or those on the two old Catholics rubbing their ancient  gums against St. Peter's toe for toothache at Rome. The recurring  emblems of crosses and gibbets simply shock him as mementoes of  the Bagne.

At Rome he compares a presentment of St. Laurence to "a barbecued  pig." "What a pity it is," he complains, "that the labours of  painting should have been employed on such shocking objects of  the martyrology," floggings, nailings, and unnailings... "Peter writhing on the cross, Stephen battered with stones,  Sebastian stuck full of arrows, Bartholomew flayed alive," and so  on. His remarks upon the famous Pieta of Michael Angelo are frank  to the point of brutality. The right of sanctuary and its  "infamous prerogative," unheard of in England since the days of  Henry VII., were still capable of affording a lesson to the Scot  abroad. "I saw a fellow who had three days before murdered his  wife in the last month of pregnancy, taking the air with great  composure and serenity, on the steps of a church in Florence."  Smollett, it is clear, for all his philosophy, was no degenerate  representative of the blind, unreasoning seventeenth-century  detestation of "Popery and wooden shoes."

Smollett is one of the first to describe a "conversazione," and  in illustration of the decadence of Italian manners, it is  natural that he should have a good deal to tell us about the  Cicisbeatura. His account of the cicisbeo and his duties, whether  in Nice, Florence, or Rome, is certainly one of the most  interesting that we have. Before Smollett and his almost  contemporary travel correspondent, Samuel Sharp, it would  probably be hard to find any mention of the cicisbeo in England,  though the word was consecrated by Sheridan a few years later.  Most of the "classic" accounts of the usage such as those by Mme.  de Stael, Stendhal, Parini, Byron and his biographers date from  very much later, when the institution was long past its prime if  not actually moribund. Now Smollett saw it at the very height of  its perfection and at a time when our decorous protestant  curiosity on such themes was as lively as Lady Mary Montagu had  found it in the case of fair Circassians and Turkish harems just  thirty years previously. [A cicisbeo was a dangler. Hence the  word came to be applied punningly to the bow depending from a  clouded cane or ornamental crook. In sixteenth-century Spain,  home of the sedan and the caballero galante, the original term  was bracciere. In Venice the form was cavaliere servente. For a  good note on the subject, see Sismondi's Italian Republics, ed.  William Boulting, 1907, p. 793.] Like so much in the shapes and  customs of Italy the cicisbeatura was in its origin partly Gothic  and partly Oriental. It combined the chivalry of northern  friendship with the refined passion of the South for the  seclusion of women. As an experiment in protest against the  insipidity which is too often an accompaniment of conjugal  intercourse the institution might well seem to deserve a more  tolerant and impartial investigation than it has yet received at  the hands of our sociologists. A survival so picturesque could  hardly be expected to outlive the bracing air of the nineteenth  century. The north wind blew and by 1840 the cicisbeatura was a  thing of the past.

Freed from the necessity of a systematic delineation Smollett  rambles about Nice, its length and breadth, with a stone in his  pouch, and wherever a cockshy is available he takes full  advantage of it. He describes the ghetto (p. 171), the police  arrangements of the place which he finds in the main highly  efficient, and the cruel punishment of the strappado. The  garrucha or strappado and the garrotes, combined with the water-torture  and the rack, represented the survival of the fittest in  the natural selection of torments concerning which the Holy  Office in Italy and Spain had such a vast experience. The  strappado as described by Smollett, however, is a more severe  form of torture even than that practised by the Inquisition, and  we can only hope that his description of its brutality is highly  coloured. [See the extremely learned disquisition on the whole  subject in Dr. H. C. Lea's History of the Inquisition in Spain,  1907, vol. iii. book vi chap. vii.] Smollett must have enjoyed  himself vastly in the market at Nice. He gives an elaborate and  epicurean account of his commissariat during the successive  seasons of his sojourn in the neighbourhood. He was not one of  these who live solely "below the diaphragm"; but he understood  food well and writes about it with a catholic gusto and relish  (156-165). He laments the rarity of small birds on the Riviera,  and gives a highly comic account of the chasse of this species of  gibier. He has a good deal to say about the sardine and tunny  fishery, about the fruit and scent traffic, and about the wine  industry; and he gives us a graphic sketch of the silkworm  culture, which it is interesting to compare with that given by  Locke in 1677. He has something to say upon the general  agriculture, and more especially upon the olive and oil industry.  Some remarks upon the numerous "mummeries" and festas of the  inhabitants lead him into a long digression upon the feriae of  the Romans. It is evident from this that the box of books which  he shipped by way of Bordeaux must have been plentifully supplied  with classical literature, for, as he remarks with unaffected  horror, such a thing as a bookseller had not been so much as  heard of in Nice. Well may he have expatiated upon the total lack  of taste among the inhabitants! In dealing with the trade,  revenue, and other administrative details Smollett shows himself  the expert compiler and statistician a London journalist in large  practice credits himself with becoming by the mere exercise of  his vocation. In dealing with the patois of the country he  reveals the curiosity of the trained scholar and linguist.  Climate had always been one of his hobbies, and on learning that  none of the local practitioners was in a position to exact a  larger fee than sixpence from his patients (quantum mutatus the  Nice physician of 1907!) he felt that he owed it to himself to  make this the subject of an independent investigation. He kept a  register of the weather during the whole of his stay, and his  remarks upon the subject are still of historical interest,  although with Teysseire's minutely exact Monograph on the  Climatology of Nice (1881) at his disposal and innumerable  commentaries thereon by specialists, the inquirer of to-day would  hardly go to Smollett for his data. Then, as now, it is curious  to find the rumour current that the climate of Nice was sadly  deteriorating. "Nothing to what it was before the war!" as the  grumbler from the South was once betrayed into saying of the  August moon. Smollett's esprit chagrin was nonplussed at first to  find material for complaint against a climate in which he admits  that there was less rain and less wind than in any other part of  the world that he knew. In these unwonted circumstances he is  constrained to fall back on the hard water and the plague of  cousins or gnats as affording him the legitimate grievance, in  whose absence the warrior soul of the author of the Ode to  Independence could never be content.

VII

For his autumn holiday in 1764 Smollett decided on a jaunt to  Florence and Rome, returning to Nice for the winter; and he  decided to travel as far as Leghorn by sea. There was choice  between several kinds of small craft which plied along the coast,  and their names recur with cheerful frequency in the pages of  Marryat and other depictors of the Mediterranean. There was the  felucca, an open boat with a tilt over the stern large enough to  freight a post-chaise, and propelled by ten to twelve stout  mariners. To commission such a boat to Genoa, a distance of a  hundred miles, cost four louis. As alternative, there was the  tartane, a sailing vessel with a lateen sail. Addison sailed from  Marseilles to Genoa in a tartane in December 1699: a storm arose,  and the patron alarmed the passengers by confessing his sins (and  such sins!) loudly to a Capuchin friar who happened to be aboard.  Smollett finally decided on a gondola, with four rowers and a  steersman, for which he had to pay nine sequins (4 1/2 louis).  After adventures off Monaco, San Remo, Noli, and elsewhere, the  party are glad to make the famous phones on the Torre della  Lanterna, of which banker Rogers sings in his mediocre verse:

Thy pharos Genoa first displayed itself  Burning in stillness on its rocky seat;  That guiding star so oft the only one,  When those now glowing in the azure vault  Are dark and silent

Smollett's description of Genoa is decidedly more interesting. He  arrived at a moment specially propitious to so sardonic an  observer, for the Republic had fallen on evil times, having  escaped from the clutches of Austria in 1746 by means of a  popular riot, during which the aristocracy considerately looked  the other way, only to fall into an even more embarrassed and  unheroic position vis-a-vis of so diminutive an opponent as  Corsica. The whole story is a curious prototype of the nineteenth  century imbroglio between Spain and Cuba. Of commonplaces about  the palaces fruitful of verbiage in Addison and Gray, who says  with perfect truth, "I should make you sick of marble were I to  tell you how it is lavished here," Smollett is sparing enough,  though he evidently regards the inherited inclination of Genoese  noblemen to build beyond their means as an amiable weakness. His  description of the proud old Genoese nobleman, who lives in  marble and feeds on scraps, is not unsympathetic, and suggests  that the "deceipt of the Ligurians," which Virgil censures in the  line

Haud Ligurum extremus, dum fallere fata sinebant

may possibly have been of this Balderstonian variety. But  Smollett had little room in his economy for such vapouring  speculations. He was as unsentimental a critic as Sydney Smith or  Sir Leslie Stephen. He wants to know the assets of a place more  than its associations. Facts, figures, trade and revenue returns  are the data his shrewd mind requires to feed on. He has a keen  eye for harbours suitable for an English frigate to lie up in,  and can hardly rest until his sagacity has collected material for  a political horoscope.

Smollett's remarks upon the mysterious dispensations of  Providence in regard to Genoa and the retreat of the Austrians  are charged to the full with his saturnine spirit. His suspicions  were probably well founded. Ever since 1685 Genoa had been the  more or less humiliated satellite of France, and her once famous  Bank had been bled pretty extensively by both belligerents. The  Senate was helpless before the Austrian engineers in 1745, and  the emancipation of the city was due wholly to a popular emeute.  She had relapsed again into a completely enervated condition.  Smollett thought she would have been happier under British  protection. But it is a vicious alternative for a nation to  choose a big protector. It was characteristic of the Republic  that from 1790 to 1798 its "policy" was to remain neutral. The  crisis in regard to Corsica came immediately after Smollett's  visit, when in 1765, under their 154th doge Francesco Maria  Rovere, the Genoese offered to abandon the island to the patriots  under Paoli, reserving only the possession of the two loyal  coast-towns of Bonifazio and Calvi. [See Boswell's Corsica, 1766-8.]  At Paoli's instance these conciliatory terms were refused.  Genoa, in desperation and next door to bankruptcy, resolved to  sell her rights as suzerain to France, and the compact was  concluded by a treaty signed at Versailles in 1768. Paoli was  finally defeated at Ponte Novo on 9th May 1769, and fled to  England. On 15th August the edict of "Reunion" between France and  Corsica was promulgated. On the same day Napoleon Buonaparte was  born at Ajaccio.

After a week at Genoa Smollett proceeded along the coast to  Lerici. There, being tired of the sea, the party disembarked, and  proceeded by chaise from Sarzano to Cercio in Modenese territory,  and so into Tuscany, then under the suzerainty of Austria. His  description of Pisa is of an almost sunny gaiety and good humour.  Italy, through this portal, was capable of casting a spell even  upon a traveller so case-hardened as Smollett. The very churches  at Pisa are "tolerably ornamented." The Campo Santo and Tower  fall in no way short of their reputation, while the brass gates  so far excel theirs that Smollett could have stood a whole day to  examine and admire them. These agremens may be attributable in  some measure to "a very good inn."  In stating that galleys were  built in the town, Smollett seems to have fallen a victim, for  once, to guide-book information. Evelyn mentions that galleys  were built there in his time, but that was more than a hundred  years before. The slips and dock had long been abandoned, as  Smollett is careful to point out in his manuscript notes, now in  the British Museum. He also explains with superfluous caution  that the Duomo of Pisa is not entirely Gothic. Once arrived in  the capital of Tuscany, after admitting that Florence is a noble  city, our traveller is anxious to avoid the hackneyed ecstasies  and threadbare commonplaces, derived in those days from Vasari  through Keysler and other German commentators, whose genius  Smollett is inclined to discover rather "in the back than in the  brain."

The two pass-words for a would-be connoisseur, according to  Goldsmith, were to praise Perugino, and to say that such and such  a work would have been much better had the painter devoted more  time and study to it. With these alternatives at hand one might  pass with credit through any famous continental collection.  Smollett aspired to more independence of thought and opinion,  though we perceive at every turn how completely the Protestant  prejudice of his "moment" and "milieu" had obtained dominion over  him. To his perception monks do not chant or intone, they bawl  and bellow their litanies. Flagellants are hired peasants who pad  themselves to repletion with women's bodices. The image of the  Virgin Mary is bejewelled, hooped, painted, patched, curled, and  frizzled in the very extremity of the fashion. No particular  attention is paid by the mob to the Crucified One, but as soon as  his lady-mother appeared on the shoulders of four lusty friars  the whole populace fall upon their knees in the dirt. We have  some characteristic criticism and observation of the Florentine  nobles, the opera, the improvisatori, [For details as to the  eighteenth-century improvisatore and commedia delle arte the  reader is referred to Symonds's Carlo Gozzi. See also the Travel  Papers of Mrs. Piozzi; Walpole's Letters to Sir Horace Mann, and  Doran's Mann and Manners at the Court of Florence. (Vide Appendix  A, p. 345)] the buildings, and the cicisbei. Smollett nearly  always gives substantial value to his notes, however casual, for  he has an historian's eye, and knows the symptoms for which the  inquirer who comes after is likely to make inquisition.

Smollett's observations upon the state of Florence in Letters  XXVII and XXVIII are by no means devoid of value. The direct rule  of the Medici had come to an end in 1737, and Tuscany (which with  the exception of the interlude of 1798-1814 remained in Austrian  hands down to 1860) was in 1764 governed by the Prince de Craon,  viceroy of the Empress Maria Theresa. Florence was, indeed, on  the threshold of the sweeping administrative reforms instituted  by Peter Leopold, the archduke for whom Smollett relates that  they were preparing the Pitti Palace at the time of his stay.  This Prince governed the country as Grand Duke from 1765 to 1790,  when he succeeded his brother as Emperor, and left a name in  history as the ill-fated Leopold. Few more active exponents of  paternal reform are known to history. But the Grand Duke had to  deal with a people such as Smollett describes. Conservative to  the core, subservient to their religious directors, the "stupid  party" in Florence proved themselves clever enough to retard the  process of enlightenment by methods at which even Smollett  himself might have stood amazed. The traveller touches an  interesting source of biography when he refers to the Englishman  called Acton, formerly an East India Company captain, now  commander of the Emperor's Tuscan Navy, consisting of "a few  frigates." This worthy was the old commodore whom Gibbon visited  in retirement at Leghorn. The commodore was brother of Gibbon's  friend, Dr. Acton, who was settled at Besancon, where his noted  son, afterwards Sir John Acton, was born in 1736. Following in  the footsteps of his uncle the commodore, who became a Catholic,  Smollett tells us, and was promoted Admiral of Tuscany, John  Acton entered the Tuscan Marine in 1775.

[Sir John Acton's subsequent career belongs to history. His  origin made him an expert on naval affairs, and in 1776 he  obtained some credit for an expedition which he commanded against  the Barbary pirates. In 1778 Maria Carolina of Naples visited her  brother Leopold at Florence, and was impressed by Acton's  ugliness and reputation for exceptional efficiency. Her favourite  minister, Prince Caramanico, persuaded the Grand Duke, Leopold,  to permit Acton to exchange into the Neapolitan service, and  reorganize the navy of the southern kingdom. This actually came  to pass, and, moreover, Acton played his cards so well that he  soon engrossed the ministries of War and Finance, and after the  death of Caracciolo, the elder, also that of Foreign Affairs. Sir  William Hamilton had a high opinion of the" General," soon to  become Field-Marshal. He took a strong part in resistance to  revolutionary propaganda, caused to be built the ships which  assisted Nelson in 1795, and proved himself one of the most  capable bureaucrats of the time. But the French proved too  strong, and Napoleon was the cause of his disgrace in 1804. In  that year, by special dispensation from the Pope, he married his  niece, and retired to Palermo, where he died on 12th August  1811.]

Let loose in the Uffizi Gallery Smollett shocked his sensitive  contemporaries by his freedom from those sham ecstasies which  have too often dogged the footsteps of the virtuosi. Like Scott  or Mark Twain at a later date Smollett was perfectly ready to  admire anything he could understand; but he expressly disclaims  pretensions to the nice discernment and delicate sensibility of  the connoisseur. He would never have asked to be left alone with  the Venus de Medicis as a modern art-critic is related to have  asked to be left alone with the Venus of Rokeby. He would have  been at a loss to understand the state of mind of the eminent  actor who thought the situation demanded that he should be  positively bereft of breath at first sight of the Apollo  Belvedere, and panting to regain it, convulsively clutched at the  arm of his companion, with difficulty articulating, "I breathe."  Smollett refused to be hypnotized by the famous Venus discovered  at Hadrian's villa, brought from Tivoli in 1680, and then in the  height of its renown; the form he admired, but condemned the face  and the posture. Personally I disagree with Smollett, though the  balance of cultivated opinion has since come round to his side.  The guilt of Smollett lay in criticizing what was above  criticism, as the contents of the Tribuna were then held to be.  And in defence of this point of view it may at least be said that  the Uffizi was then, with the exception of the Vatican, the only  gallery of first-rate importance open to the travelling public on  the Grand Tour. Founded by Cosimo I, built originally by George  Vasari, and greatly enlarged by Francis I, who succeeded to the  Grand Duchy in 1574, the gallery owed most perhaps to the  Cardinal, afterwards Ferdinand I, who constructed the Tribuna,  and to Cardinal Leopold, an omnivorous collector, who died in  1675. But all the Medici princes added to the rarities in the  various cabinets, drawing largely upon the Villa Medici at Rome  for this purpose, and the last of them, John Gaston (1723-1737),  was one of the most liberal as regards the freedom of access  which he allowed to his accumulated treasures. Among the  distinguished antiquaries who acted as curators and cicerones  were Sebastiano Bianchi, Antonio Cocchi, Raymond Cocchi, Joseph  Bianchi, J. B. Pelli, the Abbe Lanzi, and Zacchiroli. The last  three all wrote elaborate descriptions of the Gallery during the  last decades of the eighteenth century. There was unhappily an  epidemic of dishonesty among the custodians of gems at this  period, and, like the notorious Raspe, who fled from Cassel in  1775, and turned some of his old employers to ridicule in his  Baron Munchausen, Joseph Bianchi was convicted first of robbing  his cabinet and then attempting to set it on fire, for which  exploit the "learned and judicious Bianchi," as Smollett called  him in his first edition, was sent to prison for life. The  Arrotino which Smollett so greatly admired, and which the  delusive Bianchi declared to be a representation of the Augur  Attus Naevius, is now described as "A Scythian whetting his knife  to flay Marsyas."

Kinglake has an amusingly cynical passage on the impossibility of  approaching the sacred shrines of the Holy Land in a fittingly  reverential mood. Exactly the same difficulty is experienced in  approaching the sacred shrines of art. Enthusiasm about great  artistic productions, though we may readily understand it to be  justifiable, is by no means so easily communicable. How many  people possessing a real claim to culture have felt themselves  puzzled by their insensibility before some great masterpiece!  Conditions may be easily imagined in which the inducement to  affect an ecstasy becomes so strong as to prove overpowering.  Many years ago at Florence the loiterers in the Tribuna were  startled by the sudden rush into the place of a little man whose  literary fame gave him high claims to intuitive taste. He placed  himself with high clasped hand before the chief attraction in  that room of treasures. "There," he murmured, "is the Venus de  Medicis, and here I must stay--for ever and for ever." He had  scarcely uttered these words, each more deeply and solemnly than  the preceding, when an acquaintance entered, and the enthusiast,  making a hasty inquiry if Lady So-and-So had arrived, left the  room not to return again that morning. Before the same statue  another distinguished countryman used to pass an hour daily. His  acquaintance respected his raptures and kept aloof; but a young  lady, whose attention was attracted by sounds that did not seem  expressive of admiration, ventured to approach, and found the  poet sunk in profound, but not silent, slumber. From such  absurdities as these, or of the enthusiast who went into raptures  about the head of the Elgin Ilissos (which is unfortunately a  headless trunk), we are happily spared in the pages of Smollett.  In him complete absence of gush is accompanied by an independent  judgement, for which it may quite safely be claimed that good  taste is in the ascendant in the majority of cases.

From Florence Smollett set out in October 1764 for Siena, a  distance of forty-two miles, in a good travelling coach; he slept  there, and next day, seven and a half miles farther on, at Boon  Convento, hard by Montepulciano, now justly celebrated for its  wine, he had the amusing adventure with the hostler which gave  occasion for his vivid portrait of an Italian uffiziale, and also  to that irresistible impulse to cane the insolent hostler, from  the ill consequences of which he was only saved by the  underling's precipitate flight. The night was spent at  Radicofani, five and twenty miles farther on. A clever postilion  diversified the route to Viterbo, another forty-three miles. The  party was now within sixteen leagues, or ten hours, of Rome. The  road from Radicofani was notoriously bad all the way, but  Smollett was too excited or too impatient to pay much attention  to it. "You may guess what I felt at first sight of the city of  Rome."

"When you arrive at Rome," he says later, in somewhat more  accustomed vein, "you receive cards from all your country folk in  that city. They expect to have the visit returned next day, when  they give orders not to be at home, and you never speak to one  another in the sequel. This is a refinement in hospitality and  politeness which the English have invented by the strength of  their own genius without any assistance either from France,  Italy, or Lapland." It is needless to recapitulate Smollett's  views of Rome. Every one has his own, and a passing traveller's  annotations are just about as nourishing to the imagination as a  bibliographer's note on the Bible. Smollett speaks in the main  judiciously of the Castle of St. Angelo, the Piazza and the  interior of St. Peter's, the Pincian, the Forum, the Coliseum,  the Baths of Caracalla, and the other famous sights of successive  ages. On Roman habits and pastimes and the gullibility of the  English cognoscente he speaks with more spice of authority. Upon  the whole he is decidedly modest about his virtuoso vein, and  when we reflect upon the way in which standards change and idols  are shifted from one pedestal to another, it seems a pity that  such modesty has not more votaries. In Smollett's time we must  remember that Hellenic and primitive art, whether antique or  medieval, were unknown or unappreciated. The reigning models of  taste in ancient sculpture were copies of fourth-century  originals, Hellenistic or later productions. Hence Smollett's  ecstasies over the Laocoon, the Niobe, and the Dying Gladiator.  Greek art of the best period was hardly known in authentic  examples; antiques so fine as the Torso of Hercules were rare.  But while his failures show the danger of dogmatism in art  criticism, Smollett is careful to disclaim all pretensions to the  nice discernment of the real connoisseur. In cases where good  sense and sincere utterance are all that is necessary he is  seldom far wrong. Take the following description for example:--

"You need not doubt but that I went to the church of St. Peter in  Montorio, to view the celebrated Transfiguration by Raphael,  which, if it was mine, I would cut in two parts. The three  figures in the air attract the eye so strongly that little or no  attention is paid to those below on the mountain. I apprehend  that the nature of the subject does not admit of that keeping and  dependence which ought to be maintained in the disposition of the  lights and shadows in a picture. The groups seem to be entirely  independent of each other. The extraordinary merit of this piece,  I imagine, consists not only in the expression of divinity on the  face of Christ, but also in the surprising lightness of the  figure that hovers like a beautiful exhalation in the air."

Smollett's remarks about the "Last Judgement" of Michael Angelo,  (that it confuses the eye as a number of people speaking at once  confounds the ear; and that while single figures are splendid,  the whole together resembles a mere mob, without subordination,  keeping, or repose) will probably be re-echoed by a large  proportion of the sightseers who gaze upon it yearly. But his  description of the "Transfiguration" displays an amount of taste  and judgement which is far from being so widely distributed. For  purposes of reproduction at the present day, I may remind the  reader that the picture is ordinarily "cut in two." and the  nether portion is commonly attributed to Raphael's pupils, while  the "beautiful exhalation," as Smollett so felicitously terms it,  is attributed exclusively to the master when at the zenith of his  powers. His general verdict upon Michael Angelo and Raphael has  much in it that appeals to a modern taste. Of Raphael, as a  whole, he concludes that the master possesses the serenity of  Virgil, but lacks the fire of Homer; and before leaving this same  Letter XXXIII, in which Smollett ventures so many independent  critical judgements, I am tempted to cite yet another example of  his capacity for acute yet sympathetic appreciation.  "In the Palazzo Altieri I admired a picture, by Carlo Maratti,  representing a saint calling down lightning from heaven to  destroy blasphemers. It was the figure of the saint I admired,  merely as a portrait. The execution of the other parts was tame  enough; perhaps they were purposely kept down in order to  preserve the importance of the principal figure. I imagine  Salvator Rosa would have made a different disposition on the same  subject--that amidst the darkness of a tempest he would have  illuminated the blasphemer with the flash of lightning by which  he was destroyed. This would have thrown a dismal gleam upon his  countenance, distorted by the horror of his situation as well as  by the effects of the fire, and rendered the whole scene  dreadfully picturesque."

Smollett confuses historical and aesthetic grandeur. What appeals  to him most is a monument of a whole past civilization, such as  the Pont du Gard. His views of art, too, as well as his views of  life, are profoundly influenced by his early training as a  surgeon. He is not inclined by temperament to be sanguine. His  gaze is often fixed, like that of a doctor, upon the end of life;  and of art, as of nature, he takes a decidedly pathological view.  Yet, upon the whole, far from deriding his artistic impressions,  I think we shall be inclined rather to applaud them, as well for  their sanity as for their undoubted sincerity.

For the return journey to Florence Smollett selected the  alternative route by Narni, Terni, Spoleto, Foligno, Perugia, and  Arezzo, and, by his own account, no traveller ever suffered quite  so much as he did from "dirt," "vermin," "poison," and imposture.  At Foligno, where Goethe also, in his travels a score of years or  so later, had an amusing adventure, Smollett was put into a room  recently occupied by a wild beast (bestia), but the bestia turned  out on investigation to be no more or no less than an "English  heretic." The food was so filthy that it might have turned the  stomach of a muleteer; their coach was nearly shattered to  pieces; frozen with cold and nearly devoured by rats. Mrs.  Smollett wept in silence with horror and fatigue; and the bugs  gave the Doctor a whooping-cough. If Smollett anticipated a  violent death from exhaustion and chagrin in consequence of these  tortures he was completely disappointed. His health was never  better,--so much so that he felt constrained in fairness to drink  to the health of the Roman banker who had recommended this  nefarious route. [See the Doctor's remarks at the end of Letter  XXXV.] By Florence and Lerici he retraced his steps to Nice early  in 1765, and then after a brief jaunt to Turin (where he met  Sterne) and back by the Col di Tende, he turned his face  definitely homewards. The journey home confirmed his liking for  Pisa, and gives an opening for an amusing description of the  Britisher abroad (Letter XXXV). We can almost overhear Thackeray,  or the author of Eothen, touching this same topic in Letter XLI.  "When two natives of any other country chance to meet abroad,  they run into each other's embrace like old friends, even though  they have never heard of one another till that moment; whereas  two Englishmen in the same situation maintain a mutual reserve  and diffidence, and keep without the sphere of each other's  attraction, like two bodies endowed with a repulsive power."  Letter XXXVI gives opportunity for some discerning remarks on  French taxation. Having given the French king a bit of excellent  advice (that he should abolish the fermiers generaux), Smollett  proceeds, in 1765, to a forecast of probabilities which is deeply  significant and amazingly shrewd. The fragment known as  Smollett's Dying Prophecy of 1771 has often been discredited. Yet  the substance of it is fairly adumbrated here in the passage  beginning, "There are undoubtedly many marks of relaxation in the  reins of French government," written fully six years previously.  After a pleasing description of Grasse, "famous for its pomatum,  gloves, wash-balls, perfumes, and toilette boxes lined with  bergamot," the homeward traveller crossed the French frontier at  Antibes, and in Letter XXXIX at Marseille, he compares the galley  slaves of France with those of Savoy. At Bath where he had gone  to set up a practice, Smollett once astonished the faculty by  "proving" in a pamphlet that the therapeutic properties of  the waters had been prodigiously exaggerated. So, now, in the  south of France he did not hesitate to pronounce solemnly that  "all fermented liquors are pernicious to the human constitution."  Elsewhere he comments upon the immeasurable appetite of the French for bread. The Frenchman will recall the story of the  peasant-persecuting baron whom Louis XII. provided with a  luxurious feast, which the lack of bread made uneatable; he may  not have heard a story told me in Liege at the Hotel Charlemagne  of the Belgian who sought to conciliate his French neighbour by  remarking, "Je vois que vous etes Franais, monsieur, parceque  vous mangez beaucoup de pain," and the Frenchman's retort, "Je  vois que vous etes lye monsieur, parceque vous mangez beaucoup  de tout!" From Frejus  Smollett proceeds to Toulon, repeating the old epigram that "the  king of France is greater at Toulon than at Versailles." The  weather is so pleasant that the travellers enjoy a continual  concert of "nightingales" from Vienne to Fontainebleau. The  "douche" of Aix-les-Bains having been explained, Smollett and his  party proceeded agreeably to Avignon, where by one of the strange  coincidences of travel he met his old voiturier Joseph "so  embrowned by the sun that he might have passed for an Iroquois."  In spite of Joseph's testimonial the "plagues of posting" are  still in the ascendant, and Smollett is once more generous of  good advice. Above all, he adjures us when travelling never to  omit to carry a hammer and nails, a crowbar, an iron pin or two,  a large knife, and a bladder of grease. Why not a lynch pin,  which we were so carefully instructed how to inquire about in  Murray's Conversation for Travellers?

But-the history of his troublous travels is drawing to an end.  From Lyons the route is plain through Macon, Chalons, Dijon,  Auxerre, Sells, and Fontainebleau--the whole itinerary almost  exactly anticipates that of Talfourd's Vacation Tour one hundred  and ten years later, except that on the outward journey Talfourd  sailed down the Rhone.

Smollett's old mental grievances and sores have been shifted and  to some extent, let us hope, dissipated by his strenuous  journeyings, and in June 1765, after an absence of two years, he  is once more enabled to write,

"You cannot imagine what pleasure I feel while I survey the white  cliffs of Dover at this distance [from Boulogne]. Not that I am  at all affected by the nescio qua dulcedine natalis soli of  Horace.

"That seems to be a kind of fanaticism, founded on the prejudices  of education, which induces a Laplander to place the terrestrial  paradise among the snows of Norway, and a Swiss to prefer the  barren mountains of Soleure to the fruitful plains of Lombardy. I  am attached to my country, because it is the land of liberty,  cleanliness, and convenience; but I love it still more tenderly,  as the scene of all my interesting connections, as the habitation  of my friends, for whose conversation, correspondence, and esteem  I wish alone to live."

For the time being it cannot be doubted that the hardships  Smollett had to undergo on his Italian journey, by sea and land,  and the violent passions by which he was agitated owing to the  conduct of refractory postilions and extortionate innkeepers,  contributed positively to brace up and invigorate his  constitution. He spoke of himself indeed as "mended by ill-treatment"  not unlike Tavernier, the famous traveller,--said to  have been radically cured of the gout by a Turkish aga in Egypt,  who gave him the bastinado because he would not look at the head  of the bashaw of Cairo. But Fizes was right after all in his  swan-prescription, for poor Smollett's cure was anything but a  radical one. His health soon collapsed under the dreary round of  incessant labour at Chelsea. His literary faculty was still  maturing and developing. His genius was mellowing, and a later  work might have eclipsed Clinker. But it was not to be. He had a  severe relapse in the winter. In 1770 he had once more to take  refuge from overwork on the sunny coast he had done so much to  popularize among his countrymen, and it was near Leghorn that he  died on 17th September 1771.

ANNO AETATIS 51. EHEV!	QVAM PROCVL A PATRIA! PROPE LIBVRNI PORTVM, IN ITALIA JACET SEPVLTVS.

THOMAS SECCOMBE. ACTON, May 1907.


LETTER I

BOULOGNE SUR MER, June 23, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--You laid your commands upon me at parting, to  communicate from time to time the observations I should make in  the course of my travels and it was an injunction I received with  pleasure. In gratifying your curiosity, I shall find some  amusement to beguile the tedious hours, which, without some such  employment, would be rendered insupportable by distemper and  disquiet.

You knew, and pitied my situation, traduced by malice, persecuted  by faction, abandoned by false patrons, and overwhelmed by the  sense of a domestic calamity, which it was not in the power of  fortune to repair.

You know with what eagerness I fled from my country as a scene of  illiberal dispute, and incredible infatuation, where a few  worthless incendiaries had, by dint of perfidious calumnies and  atrocious abuse, kindled up a flame which threatened all the  horrors of civil dissension.

I packed up my little family in a hired coach, and attended by my  trusty servant, who had lived with me a dozen of years, and now  refused to leave me, took the road to Dover, in my way to the  South of France, where I hoped the mildness of the climate would  prove favourable to the weak state of my lungs.

You advised me to have recourse again to the Bath waters, from  the use of which I had received great benefit the preceding  winter: but I had many inducements to leave England. My wife  earnestly begged I would convey her from a country where every  object served to nourish her grief: I was in hopes that a  succession of new scenes would engage her attention, and  gradually call off her mind from a series of painful reflections;  and I imagined the change of air, and a journey of near a  thousand miles, would have a happy effect upon my own  constitution. But, as the summer was already advanced, and the  heat too excessive for travelling in warm climates, I proposed  staying at Boulogne till the beginning of autumn, and in the mean  time to bathe in the sea, with a view to strengthen and prepare  my body for the fatigues of such a long journey.

A man who travels with a family of five persons, must lay his  account with a number of mortifications; and some of these I have  already happily overcome. Though I was well acquainted with the  road to Dover, and made allowances accordingly, I could not help  being chagrined at the bad accommodation and impudent imposition  to which I was exposed. These I found the more disagreeable, as  we were detained a day extraordinary on the road, in consequence  of my wife's being indisposed.

I need not tell you this is the worst road in England with  respect to the conveniences of travelling, and must certainly  impress foreigners with an unfavourable opinion of the nation in  general. The chambers are in general cold and comfortless, the  beds paultry, the cookery execrable, the wine poison, the  attendance bad, the publicans insolent, and the bills extortion;  there is not a drop of tolerable malt liquor to be had from  London to Dover.

Every landlord and every waiter harangued upon the knavery of a  publican in Canterbury, who had charged the French ambassador  forty pounds for a supper that was not worth forty shillings.  They talked much of honesty and conscience; but when they  produced their own bills, they appeared to be all of the same  family and complexion. If it was a reproach upon the English  nation, that an innkeeper should pillage strangers at that rate;  it is a greater scandal, that the same fellow should be able to  keep his house still open. I own, I think it would be for the  honour of the kingdom to reform the abuses of this road; and in  particular to improve the avenue to London by the way of Kent-Street,  which is a most disgraceful entrance to such an opulent  city. A foreigner, in passing through this beggarly and ruinous  suburb, conceives such an idea of misery and meanness, as all the  wealth and magnificence of London and Westminster are afterwards  unable to destroy. A friend of mine, who brought a Parisian from  Dover in his own post-chaise, contrived to enter Southwark after  it was dark, that his friend might not perceive the nakedness of  this quarter. The stranger was much pleased with the great number  of shops full of merchandize, lighted up to the best advantage.  He was astonished at the display of riches in Lombard-Street and  Cheapside. The badness of the pavement made him find the streets  twice as long as they were. They alighted in Upper Brook-Street  by Grosvenor-Square; and when his conductor told him they were  then about the middle of London, the Frenchman declared, with  marks of infinite surprize, that London was very near as long as  Paris.

On my arrival at Dover I payed off my coachman, who went away  with a heavy heart. He wanted much to cross the sea, and  endeavoured to persuade me to carry the coach and horses to the  other side. If I had been resolved to set out immediately for the  South, perhaps I should have taken his advice. If I had retained  him at the rate of twenty guineas per month, which was the price  he demanded, and begun my journey without hesitation, I should  travel more agreeably than I can expect to do in the carriages of  this  country; and the difference of the expence would be a mere trifle. I would advise every man who travels through France to  bring his own vehicle along with him, or at least to purchase one  at Calais or Boulogne, where second-hand berlins and chaises may  be generally had at reasonable rates. I have been offered a very  good berlin for thirty guineas: but before I make the purchase, I  must be better informed touching the different methods of  travelling in this country.

Dover is commonly termed a den of thieves; and I am afraid it is  not altogether without reason, it has acquired this appellation.  The people are said to live by piracy in time of war; and by  smuggling and fleecing strangers in time of peace: but I will do  them the justice to say, they make no distinction between  foreigners and natives. Without all doubt a man cannot be much  worse lodged and worse treated in any part of Europe; nor will he  in any other place meet with more flagrant instances of fraud,  imposition, and brutality. One would imagine they had formed a  general conspiracy against all those who either go to, or return  from the continent. About five years ago, in my passage from  Flushing to Dover, the master of the packet-boat brought-to all  of a sudden off the South Foreland, although the wind was as  favourable as it could blow. He was immediately boarded by a  customhouse boat, the officer of which appeared to be his friend.  He then gave the passengers to understand, that as it was low  water, the ship could not go into the harbour; but that the boat  would carry them ashore with their baggage.

The custom-house officer demanded a guinea for this service, and  the bargain was made. Before we quitted the ship, we were obliged  to gratify the cabin-boy for his attendance, and to give drink-money  to the sailors. The boat was run aground on the open beach;  but we could not get ashore without the assistance of three or  four fellows, who insisted upon being paid for their trouble.  Every parcel and bundle, as it was landed, was snatched up by a  separate porter: one ran away with a hat-box, another with a wig-box,  a third with a couple of shirts tied up in a handkerchief,  and two were employed in carrying a small portmanteau that did  not weigh forty pounds. All our things were hurried to the  custom-house to be searched, and the searcher was paid for  disordering our cloaths: from thence they were removed to the  inn, where the porters demanded half-a-crown each for their  labour. It was in vain to expostulate; they surrounded the house  like a pack of hungry bounds, and raised such a clamour, that we  were fain to comply. After we had undergone all this imposition,  we were visited by the master of the packet, who, having taken  our fares, and wished us joy of our happy arrival in England,  expressed his hope that we would remember the poor master, whose  wages were very small, and who chiefly depended upon the  generosity of the passengers. I own I was shocked at his  meanness, and could not help telling him so. I told him, I could  not conceive what title he had to any such gratification: he had  sixteen passengers, who paid a guinea each, on the supposition  that every person should have a bed; but there were no more than  eight beds in the cabin, and each of these was occupied before I  came on board; so that if we had been detained at sea a whole  week by contrary winds and bad weather, one half of the  passengers must have slept upon the boards, howsoever their  health might have suffered from this want of accommodation.  Notwithstanding this check, he was so very abject and  importunate, that we gave him a crown a-piece, and he retired.

The first thing I did when I arrived at Dover this last time, was  to send for the master of a packet-boat, and agree with him to  carry us to Boulogne at once, by which means I saved the expence  of travelling by land from Calais to this last place, a journey  of four-and-twenty miles. The hire of a vessel from Dover to  Boulogne is precisely the same as from Dover to Calais, five  guineas; but this skipper demanded eight, and, as I did not know  the fare, I agreed to give him six. We embarked between six and  seven in the evening, and found ourselves in a most wretched  hovel, on board what is called a Folkstone cutter. The cabin was  so small that a dog could hardly turn in it, and the beds put me  in mind of the holes described in some catacombs, in which the  bodies of the dead were deposited, being thrust in with the feet  foremost; there was no getting into them but end-ways, and indeed  they seemed so dirty, that nothing but extreme necessity could  have obliged me to use them. We sat up all night in a most  uncomfortable situation, tossed about by the sea, cold, arid  cramped and weary, and languishing for want of sleep. At three in  the morning the master came down, and told us we were just off  the harbour of Boulogne; but the wind blowing off shore, he could  not possibly enter, and therefore advised us to go ashore in the  boat. I went upon deck to view the coast, when he pointed to the  place where he said Boulogne stood, declaring at the same time we  were within a short mile of the harbour's mouth. The morning was  cold and raw, and I knew myself extremely subject to catch cold;  nevertheless we were all so impatient to be ashore, that I  resolved to take his advice. The boat was already hoisted out,  and we went on board of it, after I had paid the captain and  gratified his crew. We had scarce parted from the ship, when we  perceived a boat coming towards us from the shore; and the master  gave us to understand, it was coming to carry us into the  harbour. When I objected to the trouble of shifting from one boat  to another in the open sea, which (by the bye) was a little  rough; he said it was a privilege which the watermen of Boulogne  had, to carry all passengers ashore, and that this privilege he  durst not venture to infringe. This was no time nor place to  remonstrate. The French boat came alongside half filled with  water, and we were handed from the one to the other. We were then  obliged to lie upon our oars, till the captain's boat went on  board and returned from the ship with a packet of letters. We  were afterwards rowed a long league, in a rough sea, against wind  and tide, before we reached the harbour, where we landed,  benumbed with cold, and the women excessively sick: from our  landing-place we were obliged to walk very near a mile to the inn  where we purposed to lodge, attended by six or seven men and  women, bare-legged, carrying our baggage. This boat cost me a  guinea, besides paying exorbitantly the people who carried our  things; so that the inhabitants of Dover and of Boulogne seem to  be of the same kidney, and indeed they understand one another  perfectly well. It was our honest captain who made the signal for  the shore-boat before I went upon deck; by which means he not  only gratified his friends, the watermen of Boulogne, but also  saved about fifteen shillings portage, which he must have paid  had he gone into the harbour; and thus he found himself at  liberty to return to Dover, which he reached in four hours. I  mention these circumstances as a warning to other passengers.  When a man hires a packet-boat from Dover to Calais or Boulogne,  let him remember that the stated price is five guineas; and let  him insist upon being carried into the harbour in the ship,  without paying the least regard to the representations of the  master, who is generally a little dirty knave. When he tells you  it is low water, or the wind is in your teeth, you may say you  will stay on board till it is high water, or till the wind comes  favourable. If he sees you are resolute, he will find means to  bring his ship into the harbour, or at least to convince you,  without a possibility of your being deceived, that it is not in  his power. After all, the fellow himself was a loser by his  finesse; if he had gone into the harbour, he would have had  another fare immediately back to Dover, for there was a Scotch  gentleman at the inn waiting for such an opportunity.

Knowing my own weak constitution, I took it for granted this  morning's adventure would cost me a fit of illness; and what  added to my chagrin, when we arrived at the inn, all the beds  were occupied; so that we were obliged to sit in a cold kitchen  above two hours, until some of the lodgers should get up. This  was such a bad specimen of French accommodation, that my wife  could not help regretting even the inns of Rochester,  Sittingbourn, and Canterbury: bad as they are, they certainly  have the advantage, when compared with the execrable auberges of  this country, where one finds nothing but dirt and imposition.  One would imagine the French were still at war with the English,  for they pillage them without mercy.

Among the strangers at this inn where we lodged, there was a  gentleman of the faculty, just returned from Italy. Understanding  that I intended to winter in the South of France, on account of a  pulmonic disorder, he strongly recommended the climate of Nice in  Provence, which, indeed, I had often heard extolled; and I am  almost resolved to go thither, not only for the sake of the air,  but also for its situation on the Mediterranean, where I can have  the benefit of bathing; and from whence there is a short cut by  sea to Italy, should I find it necessary to try the air of  Naples.

After having been ill accommodated three days at our inn, we have  at last found commodious lodgings, by means of Mrs. B-, a very  agreeable French lady, to whom we were recommended by her  husband, who is my countryman, and at present resident in London.  For three guineas a month we have the greatest part of a house  tolerably furnished; four bed-chambers on the first floor, a  large parlour below, a kitchen, and the use of a cellar.

These, I own, are frivolous incidents, scarce worth committing to  paper; but they may serve to introduce observations of more  consequence; and in the mean time I know nothing will be  indifferent to you, that concerns--Your humble servant.



LETTER II

BOULOGNE SUR MER, July 15, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--The custom-house officers at Boulogne, though as  alert, are rather more civil than those on your side of the  water. I brought no plate along with me, but a dozen and a half  of spoons, and a dozen teaspoons: the first being found in one of  our portmanteaus, when they were examined at the bureau, cost me  seventeen livres entree; the others being luckily in my servant's  pocket, escaped duty free. All wrought silver imported into  France, pays at the rate of so much per mark: therefore those who  have any quantity of plate, will do well to leave it behind them,  unless they can confide in the dexterity of the shipmasters; some  of whom will undertake to land it without the ceremony of  examination. The ordonnances of France are so unfavourable to  strangers, that they oblige them to pay at the rate of five per  cent. for all the bed and table linen which they bring into the  kingdom, even though it has been used. When my trunks arrived in  a ship from the river Thames, I underwent this ordeal: but what  gives me more vexation, my books have been stopped at the bureau;  and will be sent to Amiens at my expence, to be examined by the  chambre syndicale; lest they should contain something prejudicial  to the state, or to the religion of the country. This is a  species of oppression which one would not expect to meet with in  France, which piques itself on its politeness and hospitality:  but the truth is, I know no country in which strangers are worse  treated with respect to their essential concerns. If a foreigner  dies in France, the king seizes all his effects, even though his  heir should be upon the spot; and this tyranny is called the  droit d'aubaine founded at first upon the supposition, that all  the estate of foreigners residing in France was acquired in that  kingdom, and that, therefore, it would be unjust to convey it to  another country. If an English protestant goes to France for the  benefit of his health, attended by his wife or his son, or both,  and dies with effects in the house to the amount of a thousand  guineas, the king seizes the whole, the family is left destitute,  and the body of the deceased is denied christian burial. The  Swiss, by capitulation, are exempted from this despotism, and so  are the Scots, in consequence of an ancient alliance between the  two nations. The same droit d'aubaine is exacted by some of the  princes in Germany: but it is a great discouragement to commerce,  and prejudices every country where it is exercised, to ten times  the value of what it brings into the coffers of the sovereign.

I am exceedingly mortified at the detention of my books, which  not only deprives me of an amusement which I can very ill  dispense with; but, in all probability, will expose me to sundry  other inconveniencies. I must be at the expence of sending them  sixty miles to be examined, and run the risque of their being  condemned; and, in the mean time, I may lose the opportunity of  sending them with my heavy baggage by sea to Bourdeaux, to be  sent up the Garonne to Tholouse, and from thence transmitted  through the canal of Languedoc to Cette, which is a sea-port on  the Mediterranean, about three or four leagues from Montpelier.

For the recovery of my books, I had recourse to the advice of my  landlord, Mons. B--. He is a handsome young fellow, about twenty-five  years of age, and keeps house with two maiden sisters, who  are professed devotees. The brother is a little libertine, good  natured and obliging; but a true Frenchman in vanity, which is  undoubtedly the ruling passion of this volatile people. He has an  inconsiderable place under the government, in consequence of  which he is permitted to wear a sword, a privilege which he does  not fail to use. He is likewise receiver of the tythes of the  clergy in this district, an office that gives him a command of  money, and he, moreover, deals in the wine trade. When I came to  his house, he made a parade of all these advantages: he displayed  his bags of money, and some old gold which his father had left  him. He described his chateau in the country; dropped hints of  the fortunes that were settled upon mademoiselles his sisters;  boasted of his connexions at court; and assured me it was not for  my money that he let his lodgings, but altogether with a view to  enjoy the pleasure of my company. The truth, when stript of all  embellishments, is this: the sieur B-- is the son of an honest  bourgeois lately dead, who left him the house, with some stock in  trade, a little money, and a paltry farm: his sisters have about  three thousand livres (not quite 140 L) apiece; the brother's  places are worth about fifty pounds a year, and his connexions at  court are confined to a commis or clerk in the secretary's  office, with whom he corresponds by virtue of his employment. My  landlord piques himself upon his gallantry and success with the  fair-sex: he keeps a fille de joye, and makes no secret of his  amours. He told miss C-- the other day, in broken English, that,  in the course of the last year, he had made six bastards. He  owned, at the same time, he had sent them all to the hospital;  but, now his father is dead, he would himself take care of his  future productions. This, however, was no better than a  gasconade. Yesterday the house was in a hot alarm, on account of  a new windfall of this kind: the sisters were in tears; the  brother was visited by the cure of the parish; the lady in the  straw (a sempstress) sent him the bantling in a basket, and he  transmitted it by the carriers to the Enfans trouves at Paris.

But to return from this digression: Mr. B-- advised me to send a  requete or petition to the chancellor of France, that I might  obtain an order to have my books examined on the spot, by the  president of Boulogne, or the procureur du roy, or the sub-delegate  of the intendance. He recommended an advocat of his  acquaintance to draw up the memoire, and introduced him  accordingly; telling me at the same time, in private, that if he  was not a drunkard, he would be at the head of his profession. He  had indeed all the outward signs of a sot; a sleepy eye, a  rubicund face, and carbuncled nose. He seemed to be a little out  at elbows, had marvellous foul linen, and his breeches were not  very sound: but he assumed an air of importance, was very  courteous, and very solemn. I asked him if he did not sometimes  divert himself with the muse: he smiled, and promised, in a  whisper, to shew me some chansonettes de sa facon. Meanwhile he  composed the requete in my name, which was very pompous, very  tedious, and very abject. Such a stile might perhaps be necessary  in a native of France; but I did not think it was at all suitable  to a subject of Great-Britain. I thanked him for the trouble he  had taken, as he would receive no other gratification; but when  my landlord proposed to send the memoire to his correspondent at  Paris, to be delivered to the chancellor, I told him I had  changed my mind, and would apply to the English ambassador. I  have accordingly taken the liberty to address myself to the earl  of H--; and at the same time I have presumed to write to the  duchess of D--, who is now at Paris, to entreat her grace's  advice and interposition. What effect these applications may  have, I know not: but the sieur B-- shakes his head, and has told  my servant, in confidence, that I am mistaken if I think the  English ambassador is as great a man at Paris as the chancellor  of France.

I ought to make an apology for troubling you with such an  unentertaining detail, and consider that the detention of my  books must be a matter of very little consequence to any body,  but to--Your affectionate humble servant.

LETTER III

BOULOGNE, August 15, 1763.

SIR--I am much obliged to you for your kind enquiries after my  health, which has been lately in a very declining condition. In  consequence of a cold, caught a few days after my arrival in  France, I was seized with a violent cough, attended with a fever,  and stitches in my breast, which tormented me all night long  without ceasing. At the same time I had a great discharge by  expectoration, and such a dejection of spirits as I never felt  before. In this situation I took a step which may appear to have  been desperate. I knew there was no imposthume in my lungs, and I  supposed the stitches were spasmodical. I was sensible that all  my complaints were originally derived from relaxation. I  therefore hired a chaise, and going to the beach, about a league  from the town, plunged into the sea without hesitation. By this  desperate remedy, I got a fresh cold in my head: but my stitches  and fever vanished the very first day; and by a daily repetition  of the bath, I have diminished my cough, strengthened my body,  and recovered my spirits. I believe I should have tried the same  experiment, even if there had been an abscess in my lungs, though  such practice would have been contrary to all the rules of  medicine: but I am not one of those who implicitly believe in all  the dogmata of physic. I saw one of the guides at Bath, the  stoutest fellow among them, who recovered from the last stage of  a consumption, by going into the king's bath, contrary to the  express injunction of his doctor. He said, if he must die, the  sooner the better, as he had nothing left for his subsistence.  Instead of immediate death, he found instant case, and continued  mending every day, till his health was entirely re-established. I  myself drank the waters of Bath, and bathed, in diametrical  opposition to the opinion of some physicians there settled, and  found myself better every day, notwithstanding their unfavourable  prognostic. If I had been of the rigid fibre, full of blood,  subject to inflammation, I should have followed a different  course. Our acquaintance, doctor C--, while he actually spit  up matter, and rode out every day for his life, led his horse  to water, at the pond in Hyde-Park, one cold frosty morning,  and the beast, which happened to be of a hot constitution,  plunged himself and his master over head and ears in the water.  The poor doctor hastened home, half dead with fear, and  was put to bed in the apprehension of a new imposthume; instead  of which, he found himself exceedingly recruited in his spirits,  and his appetite much mended. I advised him to take the  hint, and go into the cold bath every morning; but he did not  chuse to run any risque. How cold water comes to be such a  bugbear, I know not: if I am not mistaken, Hippocrates recommends  immersion in cold water for the gout; and Celsus expressly says,  in omni tussi utilis est natatio: in every cough swimming is of  service.

I have conversed with a physician of this place, a sensible man,  who assured me he was reduced to meer skin and bone by a cough  and hectic fever, when he ordered a bath to be made in his own  house, and dipped himself in cold water every morning. He at the  same time left off drinking and swallowing any liquid that was  warm. He is now strong and lusty, and even in winter has no other  cover than a single sheet. His notions about the warm drink were  a little whimsical: he imagined it relaxed the tone of the  stomach; and this would undoubtedly be the case if it was drank  in large quantities, warmer than the natural temperature of the  blood. He alledged the example of the inhabitants of the Ladrone  islands, who never taste any thing that is not cold, and are  remarkably healthy. But to balance this argument I mentioned the  Chinese, who scarce drink any thing but warm tea; and the  Laplanders, who drink nothing but warm water; yet the people of  both these nations are remarkably strong, healthy, and long-lived.

You desire to know the fate of my books. My lord H--d is not yet  come to France; but my letter was transmitted to him from Paris;  and his lordship, with that generous humanity which is peculiar  to his character, has done me the honour to assure me, under his  own hand, that he has directed Mr. N--lle, our resident at Paris,  to apply for an order that my books may be restored.

I have met with another piece of good fortune, in being  introduced to general Paterson and his lady, in their way to  England from Nice, where the general has been many years  commandant for the king of Sardinia. You must have heard of this  gentleman, who has not only eminently distinguished himself, by  his courage and conduct as an officer; but also by his probity  and humanity in the exercise, of his office, and by his  remarkable hospitality to all strangers, especially the subjects  of Great-Britain, whose occasions called them to the place where  he commanded. Being pretty far advanced in years, he begged leave  to resign, that he might spend the evening of his days in his own  country; and his Sardinian majesty granted his request with  regret, after having honoured him with very particular marks of  approbation and esteem. The general talks so favourably of the  climate of Nice, with respect to disorders of the breast, that I  am now determined to go thither. It would have been happy for me  had he continued in his government. I think myself still very  fortunate, in having obtained of him a letter of recommendation  to the English consul at Nice, together with directions how to  travel through the South of France. I propose to begin my journey  some time next month, when the weather will be temperate to the  southward; and in the wine countries I shall have the pleasure of  seeing the vintage, which is always a season of festivity among  all ranks of people.

You have been very much mis-informed, by the person who compared  Boulogne to Wapping: he did a manifest injustice to this place  which is a large agreeable town, with broad open streets,  excellently paved; and the houses are of stone, well built and  commodious. The number of inhabitants may amount to sixteen  thousand. You know this was generally supposed to be the portus  Itius, and Gessoriacum of the antients: though it is now believed  that the portus Itius, from whence Caesar sailed to Britain, is a  place called Whitsand, about half way between this place and  Calais. Boulogne is the capital of the Boulonnois, a district  extending about twelve leagues, ruled by a governor independent  of the governor of Picardy; of which province, however, this  country forms a part. The present governor is the duc d'Aumout.  The town of Boulogne is the see of a bishop suffragan of Rheims,  whose revenue amounts to about four-and-twenty thousand livres,  or one thousand pounds sterling. It is also the seat of a  seneschal's court, from whence an appeal lies to the parliament  of Paris; and thither all condemned criminals are sent, to have  their sentence confirmed or reversed. Here is likewise a  bailiwick, and a court of admiralty. The military jurisdiction of  the city belongs to a commandant appointed by the king, a sort of  sinecure bestowed upon some old officer. His appointments are  very inconsiderable: he resides in the Upper Town, and his  garrison at present consists of a few hundreds of invalids.

Boulogne is divided into the Upper and Lower Towns. The former is  a kind of citadel, about a short mile in circumference, situated  on a rising ground, surrounded by a high wall and rampart,  planted with rows of trees, which form a delightful walk. It  commands a fine view of the country and Lower Town; and in clear  weather the coast of England, from Dover to Folkstone, appears so  plain, that one would imagine it was within four or five leagues  of the French shore. The Upper Town was formerly fortified with  outworks, which are now in ruins. Here is a square, a town-house,  the cathedral, and two or three convents of nuns; in one of which  there are several English girls, sent hither for their education.  The smallness of the expence encourages parents to send their  children abroad to these seminaries, where they learn scarce any  thing that is useful but the French language; but they never fail  to imbibe prejudices against the protestant religion, and  generally return enthusiastic converts to the religion of Rome.  This conversion always generates a contempt for, and often an  aversion to, their own country. Indeed it cannot reasonably be  expected that people of weak minds, addicted to superstition,  should either love or esteem those whom they are taught to  consider as reprobated heretics. Ten pounds a year is the usual  pension in these convents; but I have been informed by a French  lady who had her education in one of them, that nothing can be  more wretched than their entertainment.

The civil magistracy of Boulogne consists of a mayor and  echevins; and this is the case in almost all the towns of France.

The Lower Town is continued from the gate of the Upper Town, down  the slope of a hill, as far as the harbour, stretching on both  sides to a large extent, and is much more considerable than the  Upper, with respect to the beauty of the streets, the convenience  of the houses, and the number and wealth of the inhabitants.  These, however, are all merchants, or bourgeoise, for the  noblesse or gentry live all together in the Upper Town, and never  mix with the others. The harbour of Boulogne is at the mouth of  the small river, or rather rivulet Liane, which is so shallow,  that the children wade through it at low water. As the tide  makes, the sea flows in, and forms a pretty extensive harbour,  which, however, admits nothing but small vessels. It is  contracted at the mouth by two stone jetties or piers, which seem  to have been constructed by some engineer, very little acquainted  with this branch of his profession; for they are carried out in  such a manner, as to collect a bank of sand just at the entrance  of the harbour. The road is very open and unsafe, and the surf  very high when the wind blows from the sea. There is no  fortification near the harbour, except a paltry fort mounting  about twenty guns, built in the last war by the prince de Cruy,  upon a rock about a league to the eastward of Boulogne. It  appears to be situated in such a manner, that it can neither  offend, nor be offended. If the depth of water would admit a  forty or fifty gun ship to lie within cannon-shot of it, I  apprehend it might be silenced in half an hour; but, in all  probability, there will be no vestiges of it at the next rupture  between the two crowns. It is surrounded every day by the sea, at  high water; and when it blows a fresh gale towards the shore, the  waves break over the top of it, to the terror and astonishment of  the garrison, who have been often heard crying piteously for  assistance. I am persuaded, that it will one day disappear in the  twinkling of an eye. The neighbourhood of this fort, which is a  smooth sandy beach, I have chosen for my bathing place. The road  to it is agreeable and romantic, lying through pleasant  cornfields, skirted by open downs, where there is a rabbit  warren, and great plenty of the birds so much admired at  Tunbridge under the name of wheat-ears. By the bye, this is a  pleasant corruption of white-a-se, the translation of their  French name cul-blanc, taken from their colour for they are  actually white towards the tail.

Upon the top of a high rock, which overlooks the harbour, are the  remains of an old fortification, which is indiscriminately  called, Tour d'ordre, and Julius Caesar's fort. The original  tower was a light-house built by Claudius Caesar, denominated  Turris ardens, from the fire burned in it; and this the French  have corrupted into Tour d'ordre; but no vestiges of this Roman  work remain; what we now see, are the ruins of a castle built by  Charlemagne. I know of no other antiquity at Boulogne, except an  old vault in the Upper Town, now used as a magazine, which is  said to be part of an antient temple dedicated to Isis.

On the other side of the harbour, opposite to the Lower Town,  there is a house built, at a considerable expence, by a general  officer, who lost his life in the late war. Never was situation  more inconvenient, unpleasant, and unhealthy. It stands on the  edge of an ugly morass formed by the stagnant water left by the  tide in its retreat: the very walks of the garden are so moist,  that, in the driest weather, no person can make a tour of it,  without danger of the rheumatism. Besides, the house is  altogether inaccessible, except at low water, and even then the  carriage must cross the harbour, the wheels up to the axle-tree  in mud: nay, the tide rushes in so fast, that unless you seize  the time to a minute, you will be in danger of perishing. The  apartments of this house are elegantly fitted up, but very small;  and the garden, notwithstanding its unfavourable situation,  affords a great quantity of good fruit. The ooze, impregnated  with sea salt, produces, on this side of the harbour, an  incredible quantity of the finest samphire I ever saw. The French  call it passe-pierre; and I suspect its English name is a  corruption of sang-pierre. It is generally found on the faces of  bare rocks that overhang the sea, by the spray of which it is  nourished. As it grew upon a naked rock, without any appearance  of soil, it might be naturally enough called sang du pierre, or  sangpierre, blood of the rock; and hence the name samphire. On  the same side of the harbour there is another new house, neatly  built, belonging to a gentleman who has obtained a grant from the  king of some ground which was always overflowed at high water. He  has raised dykes at a considerable expence, to exclude the tide,  and if he can bring his project to bear, he will not only gain a  good estate for himself, but also improve the harbour, by  increasing the depth at high-water.

In the Lower Town of Boulogne there are several religious houses,  particularly a seminary, a convent of Cordeliers, and another of  Capuchins. This last, having fallen to decay, was some years ago  repaired, chiefly by the charity of British travellers, collected  by father Graeme, a native of North-Britain, who had been an  officer in the army of king James II. and is said to have turned  monk of this mendicant order, by way of voluntary penance, for  having killed his friend in a duel. Be that as it may, he was a  well-bred, sensible man, of a very exemplary life and  conversation; and his memory is much revered in this place. Being  superior of the convent, he caused the British arms to be put up  in the church, as a mark of gratitude for the benefactions  received from our nation. I often walk in the garden of the  convent, the walls of which are washed by the sea at high-water.  At the bottom of the garden is a little private grove, separated  from it by a high wall, with a door of communication; and hither  the Capuchins retire, when they are disposed for contemplation.  About two years ago, this place was said to be converted to a  very different use. There was among the monks one pere Charles, a  lusty friar, of whom the people tell strange stories. Some young  women of the town were seen mounting over the wall, by a ladder  of ropes, in the dusk of the evening; and there was an unusual  crop of bastards that season. In short, pere Charles and his  companions gave such scandal, that the whole fraternity was  changed; and now the nest is occupied by another flight of these  birds of passage. If one of our privateers had kidnapped a  Capuchin during the war, and exhibited him, in his habit, as a  shew in London, he would have proved a good prize to the captors;  for I know not a more uncouth and grotesque animal, than an old  Capuchin in the habit of his order. A friend of mine (a Swiss  officer) told me, that a peasant in his country used to weep  bitterly, whenever a certain Capuchin mounted the pulpit to hold  forth to the people. The good father took notice of this man, and  believed he was touched by the finger of the Lord. He exhorted  him to encourage these accessions of grace, and at the same time  to be of good comfort, as having received such marks of the  divine favour. The man still continued to weep, as before, every  time the monk preached; and at last the Capuchin insisted upon  knowing what it was, in his discourse or appearance, that made  such an impression upon his heart "Ah, father! (cried the  peasant) I never see you but I think of a venerable goat, which I  lost at Easter. We were bred up together in the same family. He  was the very picture of your reverence--one would swear you were  brothers. Poor Baudouin! he died of a fall--rest his soul! I  would willingly pay for a couple of masses to pray him out of  purgatory."

Among other public edifices at Boulogne, there is an hospital, or  workhouse, which seems to be established upon a very good  foundation. It maintains several hundreds of poor people, who are  kept constantly at work, according to their age and abilities, in  making thread, all sorts of lace, a kind of catgut, and in  knitting stockings. It is under the direction of the bishop; and  the see is at present filled by a prelate of great piety and  benevolence, though a little inclining to bigotry and fanaticism.  The churches in this town are but indifferently built, and poorly  ornamented. There is not one picture in the place worth looking  at, nor indeed does there seem to be the least taste for the  liberal arts.

In my next, I shall endeavour to satisfy you in the other  articles you desire to know. Mean-while, I am ever--Yours.

LETTER IV

BOULOGNE, September 1, 1763.

SIR,--I am infinitely obliged to D. H-- for the favourable manner  in which he has mentioned me to the earl of H-- I have at last  recovered my books, by virtue of a particular order to the  director of the douane, procured by the application of the  English resident to the French ministry. I am now preparing for  my long journey; but, before I leave this place, I shall send you  the packet I mentioned, by Meriton. Mean-while I must fulfil my  promise in communicating the observations I have had occasion to make upon this town and  country.

The air of Boulogne is cold and moist, and, I believe, of  consequence unhealthy. Last winter the frost, which continued six  weeks in London, lasted here eight weeks without intermission;  and the cold was so intense, that, in the garden of the  Capuchins, it split the bark of several elms from top to bottom.  On our arrival here we found all kinds of fruit more backward  than in England. The frost, in its progress to Britain, is much  weakened in crossing the sea. The atmosphere, impregnated with  saline particles, resists the operation of freezing. Hence, in  severe winters, all places near the sea-side are less cold than  more inland districts. This is the reason why the winter is often  more mild at Edinburgh than at London. A very great degree of  cold is required to freeze salt water. Indeed it will not freeze  at all, until it has deposited all its salt. It is now generally  allowed among philosophers, that water is no more than ice thawed  by heat, either solar, or subterranean, or both; and that this  heat being expelled, it would return to its natural consistence.  This being the case, nothing else is required for the freezing of  water, than a certain degree of cold, which may be generated by  the help of salt, or spirit of nitre, even under the line. I  would propose, therefore, that an apparatus of this sort should  be provided in every ship that goes to sea; and in case there  should be a deficiency of fresh water on board, the seawater may  be rendered potable, by being first converted into ice.

The air of Boulogne is not only loaded with a great evaporation  from the sea, increased by strong gales of wind from the West and  South-West, which blow almost continually during the greatest  part of the year; but it is also subject to putrid vapours,  arising from the low marshy ground in the neighbourhood of the  harbour, which is every tide overflowed with seawater. This may  be one cause of the scrofula and rickets, which are two  prevailing disorders among the children in Boulogne. But I  believe the former is more owing to the water used in the Lower  Town, which is very hard and unwholsome. It curdles with soap,  gives a red colour to the meat that is boiled in it, and, when  drank by strangers, never fails to occasion pains in the stomach  and bowels; nay, sometimes produces dysenteries. In all  appearance it is impregnated with nitre, if not with something  more mischievous: we know that mundic, or pyrites, very often  contains a proportion of arsenic, mixed with sulphur, vitriol, and mercury. Perhaps it partakes of the acid of some coal mine;  for there are coal works in this district. There is a well of  purging water within a quarter of a mile of the Upper Town, to  which the inhabitants resort in the morning, as the people of  London go to the Dog-and-duck, in St. George's fields. There is  likewise a fountain of excellent water, hard by the cathedral, in  the Upper Town, from whence I am daily supplied at a small  expence. Some modern chemists affirm, that no saline chalybeate  waters can exist, except in the neighbourhood of coal damps; and  that nothing can be more mild, and gentle, and friendly to the  constitution, than the said damps: but I know that the place  where I was bred stands upon a zonic of coal; that the water  which the inhabitants generally use is hard and brackish; and  that the people are remarkably subject to the king's evil and  consumption. These I would impute to the bad water, impregnated  with the vitriol and brine of coal, as there is nothing in the  constitution of the air that should render such distempers  endemial. That the air of Boulogne encourages putrefaction,  appears from the effect it has upon butcher's meat, which, though  the season is remarkably cold, we can hardly keep four-and-twenty  hours in the coolest part of the house.

Living here is pretty reasonable; and the markets are tolerably  supplied. The beef is neither fat nor firm; but very good for  soup, which is the only use the French make of it. The veal is  not so white, nor so well fed, as the English veal; but it is  more juicy, and better tasted. The mutton and pork are very good.  We buy our poultry alive, and fatten them at home. Here are  excellent turkies, and no want of game: the hares, in particular,  are very large, juicy, and high-flavoured. The best part of the  fish caught on this coast is sent post to Paris, in chasse-marines,  by a company of contractors, like those of Hastings in  Sussex. Nevertheless, we have excellent soles, skaite, flounders  and whitings, and sometimes mackarel. The oysters are very large,  coarse, and rank. There is very little fish caught on the French  coast, because the shallows run a great way from the shore; and  the fish live chiefly in deep water: for this reason the  fishermen go a great way out to sea, sometimes even as far as the  coast of England. Notwithstanding all the haste the contractors  can make, their fish in the summer is very often spoiled before  it arrives at Paris; and this is not to be wondered at,  considering the length of the way, which is near one hundred and  fifty miles. At best it must be in such a mortified condition,  that no other people, except the negroes on the coast of Guinea,  would feed upon it.

The wine commonly drank at Boulogne comes from Auxerre, is very  small and meagre, and may be had from five to eight sols a  bottle; that is, from two-pence halfpenny to fourpence. The  French inhabitants drink no good wine; nor is there any to be  had, unless you have recourse to the British wine-merchants here  established, who deal in Bourdeaux wines, brought hither by sea  for the London market. I have very good claret from a friend, at  the rate of fifteen-pence sterling a bottle; and excellent small  beer as reasonable as in England. I don't believe there is a drop  of generous Burgundy in the place; and the aubergistes impose  upon us shamefully, when they charge it at two livres a bottle.  There is a small white wine, called preniac, which is very  agreeable and very cheap. All the brandy which I have seen in  Boulogne is new, fiery, and still-burnt. This is the trash which  the smugglers import into England: they have it for about ten-pence  a gallon. Butcher's meat is sold for five sols, or two-pence  halfpenny a pound, and the pound here consists of eighteen  ounces. I have a young turkey for thirty sols; a hare for four-and-twenty;  a couple of chickens for twenty sols, and a couple of  good soles for the same price. Before we left England, we were  told that there was no fruit in Boulogne; but we have found  ourselves agreeably disappointed in this particular. The place is  well supplied with strawberries, cherries, gooseberries,  corinths, peaches, apricots, and excellent pears. I have eaten  more fruit this season, than I have done for several years. There  are many well-cultivated gardens in the skirts of the town;  particularly one belonging to our friend Mrs. B--, where we often  drink tea in a charming summer-house built on a rising ground,  which commands a delightful prospect of the sea. We have many  obligations to this good lady, who is a kind neighbour, an  obliging friend, and a most agreeable companion: she speaks  English prettily, and is greatly attached to the people and the  customs of our nation. They use wood for their common fewel,  though, if I were to live at Boulogne, I would mix it with coal,  which this country affords. Both the wood and the coal are  reasonable enough. I am certain that a man may keep house in  Boulogne for about one half of what it will cost him in London;  and this is said to be one of the dearest places in France.

The adjacent country is very agreeable, diversified with hill and  dale, corn-fields, woods, and meadows. There is a forest of a  considerable extent, that begins about a short league from the  Upper Town: it belongs to the king, and the wood is farmed to  different individuals.

In point of agriculture, the people in this neighbourhood seem to  have profited by the example of the English. Since I was last in  France, fifteen years ago, a good number of inclosures and  plantations have been made in the English fashion. There is a  good many tolerable country-houses, within a few miles of  Boulogne; but mostly empty. I was offered a compleat house, with  a garden of four acres well laid out, and two fields for grass or  hay, about a mile from the town, for four hundred livres, about  seventeen pounds a year: it is partly furnished, stands in an  agreeable situation, with a fine prospect of the sea, and was  lately occupied by a Scotch nobleman, who is in the service of  France.

To judge from appearance, the people of Boulogne are descended  from the Flemings, who formerly possessed this country; for, a  great many of the present inhabitants have fine skins, fair hair,  and florid complexions; very different from the natives of France  in general, who are distinguished by black hair, brown skins, and  swarthy faces. The people of the Boulonnois enjoy some  extraordinary privileges, and, in particular, are exempted from  the gabelle or duties upon salt: how they deserved this mark of  favour, I do not know; but they seem to have a spirit of  independence among them, are very ferocious, and much addicted to  revenge. Many barbarous murders are committed, both in the town  and country; and the peasants, from motives of envy and  resentment, frequently set their neighbours' houses on fire.  Several instances of this kind have happened in the course of the  last year. The interruption which is given, in arbitrary  governments, to the administration of justice, by the  interposition of the great, has always a bad effect upon the  morals of the common people. The peasants too are often rendered  desperate and savage, by the misery they suffer from the  oppression and tyranny of their landlords. In this neighbourhood  the labouring people are ill lodged and wretchedly fed; and they  have no idea of cleanliness. There is a substantial burgher in  the High Town, who was some years ago convicted of a most  barbarous murder. He received sentence to be broke alive upon the  wheel; but was pardoned by the interposition of the governor of  the county, and carries on his business as usual in the face of  the whole community. A furious abbe, being refused orders by the  bishop, on account of his irregular life, took an opportunity to  stab the prelate with a knife, one Sunday, as he walked out of  the cathedral. The good bishop desired he might be permitted to  escape; but it was thought proper to punish, with the utmost  severity, such an atrocious attempt. He was accordingly  apprehended, and, though the wound was not mortal, condemned to  be broke. When this dreadful sentence was executed, he cried out,  that it was hard he should undergo such torments, for having  wounded a worthless priest, by whom he had been injured, while  such-a-one (naming the burgher mentioned above) lived in ease and  security, after having brutally murdered a poor man, and a  helpless woman big with child, who had not given him the least  provocation.

The inhabitants of Boulogne may be divided into three classes;  the noblesse or gentry, the burghers, and the canaille. I don't  mention the clergy, and the people belonging to the law, because  I shall occasionally trouble you with my thoughts upon the  religion and ecclesiastics of this country; and as for the  lawyers, exclusive of their profession, they may be considered as  belonging to one or other of these divisions. The noblesse are  vain, proud, poor, and slothful. Very few of them have above six  thousand livres a year, which may amount to about two hundred and  fifty pounds sterling; and many of them have not half this  revenue. I think there is one heiress, said to be worth one  hundred thousand livres, about four thousand two hundred pounds;  but then her jewels, her cloaths, and even her linen, are  reckoned part of this fortune. The noblesse have not the common  sense to reside at their houses in the country, where, by farming  their own grounds, they might live at a small expence, and  improve their estates at the same time. They allow their country  houses to go to decay, and their gardens and fields to waste; and  reside in dark holes in the Upper Town of Boulogne without light,  air, or convenience. There they starve within doors, that they may have wherewithal to purchase fine cloaths, and  appear dressed once a day in the church, or on the rampart. They  have no education, no taste for reading, no housewifery, nor  indeed any earthly occupation, but that of dressing their hair,  and adorning their bodies. They hate walking, and would never go  abroad, if they were not stimulated by the vanity of being seen.  I ought to except indeed those who turn devotees, and spend the  greatest part of their time with the priest, either at church or  in their own houses. Other amusements they have none in this  place, except private parties of card-playing, which are far from  being expensive. Nothing can be more parsimonious than the  oeconomy of these people: they live upon soupe and bouille, fish  and sallad: they never think of giving dinners, or entertaining  their friends; they even save the expence of coffee and tea,  though both are very cheap at Boulogne. They presume that every  person drinks coffee at home, immediately after dinner, which is  always over by one o'clock; and, in lieu of tea in the afternoon,  they treat with a glass of sherbet, or capillaire. In a word, I  know not a more insignificant set of mortals than the noblesse of  Boulogne; helpless in themselves, and useless to the community;  without dignity, sense, or sentiment; contemptible from pride.  and ridiculous from vanity. They pretend to be jealous of their  rank, and will entertain no correspondence with the merchants,  whom they term plebeians. They likewise keep at a great distance  from strangers, on pretence of a delicacy in the article of  punctilio: but, as I am informed, this stateliness is in a great  measure affected, in order to conceal their poverty, which would  appear to greater disadvantage, if they admitted of a more  familiar communication. Considering the vivacity of the French  people, one would imagine they could not possibly lead such an  insipid life, altogether unanimated by society, or diversion.  True it is, the only profane diversions of this place are a  puppet-show and a mountebank; but then their religion affords a  perpetual comedy. Their high masses, their feasts, their  processions, their pilgrimages, confessions, images, tapers,  robes, incense, benedictions, spectacles, representations, and  innumerable ceremonies, which revolve almost incessantly, furnish  a variety of entertainment from one end of the year to the other.  If superstition implies fear, never was a word more misapplied  than it is to the mummery of the religion of Rome. The people are  so far from being impressed with awe and religious terror by this  sort of machinery, that it amuses their imaginations in the most  agreeable manner, and keeps them always in good humour. A Roman  catholic longs as impatiently for the festival of St. Suaire, or  St. Croix, or St. Veronique, as a schoolboy in England for the  representation of punch and the devil; and there is generally as  much laughing at one farce as at the other. Even when the descent  from the cross is acted, in the holy week, with all the  circumstances that ought naturally to inspire the gravest  sentiments, if you cast your eyes among the multitude that croud  the place, you will not discover one melancholy face: all is  prattling, tittering, or laughing; and ten to one but you  perceive a number of them employed in hissing the female who  personates the Virgin Mary. And here it may not be amiss to  observe, that the Roman catholics, not content with the infinite  number of saints who really existed, have not only personified  the cross, but made two female saints out of a piece of linen.  Veronique, or Veronica, is no other than a corruption of vera  icon, or vera effigies, said to be the exact representation of  our Saviour's face, impressed upon a piece of linen, with which  he wiped the sweat from his forehead in his way to the place of  crucifixion. The same is worshipped under the name of St. Suaire,  from the Latin word sudarium. This same handkerchief is said to  have had three folds, on every one of which was the impression:  one of these remains at Jerusalem, a second was brought to Rome,  and a third was conveyed to Spain. Baronius says, there is a very  antient history of the sancta facies in the Vatican. Tillemont, however, looks upon the  whole as a fable. Some suppose Veronica to be the same with St.  Haemorrhoissa, the patroness of those who are afflicted with the  piles, who make their joint invocations to her and St. Fiacre,  the son of a Scotch king, who lived and died a hermit in France.  The troops of Henry V. of England are said to have pillaged the  chapel of this Highland saint; who, in revenge, assisted his  countrymen, in the French service, to defeat the English at  Bauge, and afterwards afflicted Henry with the piles, of which he  died. This prince complained, that he was not only plagued by the  living Scots, but even persecuted by those who were dead.

I know not whether I may be allowed to compare the Romish  religion to comedy, and Calvinism to tragedy. The first amuses  the senses, and excites ideas of mirth and good-humour; the  other, like tragedy, deals in the passions of terror and pity.  Step into a conventicle of dissenters, you will, ten to one, hear  the minister holding forth upon the sufferings of Christ, or the  torments of hell, and see many marks of religious horror in the  faces of the hearers. This is perhaps one reason why the  reformation did not succeed in France, among a volatile, giddy,  unthinking people, shocked at the mortified appearances of the  Calvinists; and accounts for its rapid progress among nations of  a more melancholy turn of character and complexion: for, in the  conversion of the multitude, reason is generally out of the  question. Even the penance imposed upon the catholics is little  more than mock mortification: a murderer is often quit with his  confessor for saying three prayers extraordinary; and these easy  terms, on which absolution is obtained, certainly encourage the  repetition of the most enormous crimes. The pomp and ceremonies  of this religion, together with the great number of holidays they  observe, howsoever they may keep up the spirits of the  commonalty, and help to diminish the sense of their own misery,  must certainly, at the same time, produce a frivolous taste for  frippery and shew, and encourage a habit of idleness, to which I,  in a great measure, ascribe the extreme poverty of the lower  people. Very near half of their time, which might he profitably  employed in the exercise of industry, is lost to themselves and  the community, in attendance upon the different exhibitions of  religious mummery.

But as this letter has already run to an unconscionable length, I  shall defer, till another occasion, what I have further to say on  the people of this place, and in the mean time assure you, that I  am always--Yours affectionately.

LETTER V

BOULOGNE, September 12, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--My stay in this place now draws towards a period.  'Till within these few days I have continued bathing, with some  advantage to my health, though the season has been cold and wet,  and disagreeable. There was a fine prospect of a plentiful  harvest in this neighbourhood. I used to have great pleasure in  driving between the fields of wheat, oats, and barley; but the  crop has been entirely ruined by the rain, and nothing is now to  be seen on the ground but the tarnished straw, and the rotten  spoils of the husbandman's labour. The ground scarce affords  subsistence to a few flocks of meagre sheep, that crop the  stubble, and the intervening grass; each flock under the  protection of its shepherd, with his crook and dogs, who lies  every night in the midst of the fold, in a little thatched  travelling lodge, mounted on a wheel-carriage. Here he passes the  night, in order to defend his flock from the wolves, which are  sometimes, especially in winter, very bold and desperate.

Two days ago we made an excursion with Mrs. B-- and Capt. L-- to  the village of Samers, on the Paris road, about three leagues  from Boulogne. Here is a venerable abbey of Benedictines, well  endowed, with large agreeable gardens prettily laid out. The  monks are well lodged, and well entertained. Tho' restricted from  flesh meals by the rules of their order, they are allowed to eat  wild duck and teal, as a species of fish; and when they long for  a good bouillon, or a partridge, or pullet, they have nothing to  do but to say they are out of order. In that case the appetite of  the patient is indulged in his own apartment. Their church is  elegantly contrived, but kept in a very dirty condition. The  greatest curiosity I saw in this place was an English boy, about  eight or nine years old, whom his father had sent hither to learn  the French language. In less than eight weeks, he was become  captain of the boys of the place, spoke French perfectly well,  and had almost forgot his mother tongue. But to return to the  people of Boulogne.

The burghers here, as in other places, consist of merchants,  shop-keepers, and artisans. Some of the merchants have got  fortunes, by fitting out privateers during the war. A great many  single ships were taken from the English, notwithstanding the  good look-out of our cruisers, who were so alert, that the  privateers from this coast were often taken in four hours after  they sailed from the French harbour; and there is hardly a  captain of an armateur in Boulogne, who has not been prisoner in  England five or six times in the course of the war. They were  fitted out at a very small expence, and used to run over in the  night to the coast of England, where they hovered as English  fishing smacks, until they kidnapped some coaster, with which  they made the best of their way across the Channel. If they fell  in with a British cruiser, they surrendered without resistance:  the captain was soon exchanged, and the loss of the proprietor  was not great: if they brought their prize safe into harbour,  the advantage was considerable. In time of peace the merchants of  Boulogne deal in wine brandies, and oil, imported from the South,  and export fish, with the manufactures of France, to Portugal,  and other countries; but the trade is not great. Here are two or  three considerable houses of wine merchants from Britain, who  deal in Bourdeaux wine, with which they supply London and other  parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The fishery of mackarel  and herring is so considerable on this coast, that it is said to  yield annually eight or nine hundred thousand livres, about  thirty-five thousand pounds sterling.

The shop-keepers here drive a considerable traffic with the  English smugglers, whose cutters are almost the only vessels one  sees in the harbour of Boulogne, if we except about a dozen of  those flat-bottomed boats, which raised such alarms in England,  in the course of the war. Indeed they seem to be good for nothing  else, and perhaps they were built for this purpose only. The  smugglers from the coast of Kent and Sussex pay English gold for  great quantities of French brandy, tea, coffee, and small wine,  which they run from this country. They likewise buy glass  trinkets, toys, and coloured prints, which sell in England, for  no other reason, but that they come from France, as they may be  had as cheap, and much better finished, of our own manufacture.  They likewise take off ribbons, laces, linen, and cambrics;  though this branch of trade is chiefly in the hands of traders  that come from London and make their purchases at Dunkirk, where  they pay no duties. It is certainly worth while for any traveller  to lay in a stock of linen either at Dunkirk or Boulogne; the  difference of the price at these two places is not great. Even  here I have made a provision of shirts for one half of the money  they would have cost in London. Undoubtedly the practice of  smuggling is very detrimental to the fair trader, and carries  considerable sums of money out of the kingdom, to enrich our  rivals and enemies. The custom-house officers are very watchful,  and make a great number of seizures: nevertheless, the smugglers  find their account in continuing this contraband commerce; and  are said to indemnify themselves, if they save one cargo out of  three. After all, the best way to prevent smuggling, is to lower  the duties upon the commodities which are thus introduced. I have  been told, that the revenue upon tea has encreased ever since the  duty upon it was diminished. By the bye, the tea smuggled on the  coast of Sussex is most execrable stuff. While I stayed at  Hastings, for the conveniency of bathing, I must have changed my  breakfast, if I had not luckily brought tea with me from London:  yet we have as good tea at Boulogne for nine livres a pound, as  that which sells at fourteen shillings at London.

The bourgeois of this place seem to live at their ease, probably  in consequence of their trade with the English. Their houses  consist of the ground-floor, one story above, and garrets. In  those which are well furnished, you see pier-glasses and marble  slabs; but the chairs are either paultry things, made with straw  bottoms, which cost about a shilling a-piece, or old-fashioned,  high-backed seats of needle-work, stuffed, very clumsy and  incommodious. The tables are square fir boards, that stand on  edge in a corner, except when they are used, and then they are  set upon cross legs that open and shut occasionally. The king of  France dines off a board of this kind. Here is plenty of table-linen  however. The poorest tradesman in Boulogne has a napkin on  every cover, and silver forks with four prongs, which are used  with the right hand, there being very little occasion for knives;  for the meat is boiled or roasted to rags. The French beds are so  high, that sometimes one is obliged to mount them by the help of  steps; and this is also the case in Flanders. They very seldom  use feather-beds; but they lie upon a paillasse, or bag of straw,  over which are laid two, and sometimes three mattrasses. Their  testers are high and old-fashioned, and their curtains generally  of thin bays, red, or green, laced with taudry yellow, in  imitation of gold. In some houses, however, one meets with  furniture of stamped linen; but there is no such thing as a  carpet to be seen, and the floors are in a very dirty condition.  They have not even the implements of cleanliness in this country.  Every chamber is furnished with an armoire, or clothes-press, and  a chest of drawers, of very clumsy workmanship. Every thing shews  a deficiency in the mechanic arts. There is not a door, nor a  window, that shuts close. The hinges, locks, and latches, are of  iron, coarsely made, and ill contrived. The very chimnies are  built so open, that they admit both rain and sun, and all of them  smoke intolerably. If there is no cleanliness among these people,  much less shall we find delicacy, which is the cleanliness of the  mind. Indeed they are utter strangers to what we call common  decency; and I could give you some high-flavoured instances, at  which even a native of Edinburgh would stop his nose. There are  certain mortifying views of human nature, which undoubtedly ought  to be concealed as much as possible, in order to prevent giving  offence: and nothing can be more absurd, than to plead the  difference of custom in different countries, in defence of these  usages which cannot fail giving disgust to the organs and senses  of all mankind. Will custom exempt from the imputation of gross  indecency a French lady, who shifts her frowsy smock in presence  of a male visitant, and talks to him of her lavement, her  medecine, and her bidet! An Italian signora makes no scruple of  telling you, she is such a day to begin a course of physic for  the pox. The celebrated reformer of the Italian comedy introduces  a child befouling itself, on the stage, OE, NO TI SENTI? BISOGNA  DESFASSARLO, (fa cenno che sentesi mal odore). I have known a  lady handed to the house of office by her admirer, who stood at  the door, and entertained her with bons mots all the time she was  within. But I should be glad to know, whether it is possible for  a fine lady to speak and act in this manner, without exciting  ideas to her own disadvantage in the mind of every man who has  any imagination left, and enjoys the entire use of his senses,  howsoever she may be authorised by the customs of her country?  There is nothing so vile or repugnant to nature, but you may  plead prescription for it, in the customs of some nation or  other. A Parisian likes mortified flesh: a native of Legiboli  will not taste his fish till it is quite putrefied: the civilized  inhabitants of Kamschatka get drunk with the urine of their  guests, whom they have already intoxicated: the Nova Zemblans  make merry on train-oil: the Groenlanders eat in the same dish  with their dogs: the Caffres, at the Cape of Good Hope, piss upon  those whom they delight to honour, and feast upon a sheep's  intestines with their contents, as the greatest dainty that can  be presented. A true-bred Frenchman dips his fingers, imbrowned  with snuff, into his plate filled with ragout: between every  three mouthfuls, he produces his snuff-box, and takes a fresh  pinch, with the most graceful gesticulations; then he displays  his handkerchief, which may be termed the flag of abomination,  and, in the use of both, scatters his favours among those who  have the happiness to sit near him. It must be owned, however,  that a Frenchman will not drink out of a tankard, in which,  perhaps, a dozen of filthy mouths have flabbered, as is the  custom in England. Here every individual has his own gobelet,  which stands before him, and he helps himself occasionally with  wine or water, or both, which likewise stand upon the table. But  I know no custom more beastly than that of using water-glasses,  in which polite company spirt, and squirt, and spue the filthy  scourings of their gums, under the eyes of each other. I knew a  lover cured of his passion, by seeing this nasty cascade  discharged from the mouth of his mistress. I don't doubt but I  shall live to see the day, when the hospitable custom of the  antient Aegyptians will be revived; then a conveniency will be  placed behind every chair in company, with a proper provision of  waste paper, that individuals may make themselves easy without  parting company. I insist upon it, that this practice would not  be more indelicate than that which is now in use. What then, you  will say, must a man sit with his chops and fingers up to the  ears and knuckles in grease? No; let those who cannot eat without  defiling themselves, step into another room, provided with basons  and towels: but I think it would be better to institute schools,  where youth may learn to eat their victuals, without daubing  themselves, or giving offence to the eyes of one another.

The bourgeois of Boulogne have commonly soup and bouilli at noon,  and a roast, with a sallad, for supper; and at all their meals  there is a dessert of fruit. This indeed is the practice all over  France. On meagre days they eat fish, omelettes, fried beans,  fricassees of eggs and onions, and burnt cream. The tea which  they drink in the afternoon is rather boiled than infused; it is  sweetened all together with coarse sugar, and drank with an equal  quantity of boiled milk.

We had the honour to be entertained the other day by our  landlord, Mr. B--, who spared no cost on this banquet, exhibited  for the glory of France. He had invited a newmarried couple,  together with the husband's mother and the lady's father, who was  one of the noblesse of Montreuil, his name Mons. L--y. There were  likewise some merchants of the town, and Mons. B--'s uncle, a  facetious little man, who had served in the English navy, and was  as big and as round as a hogshead; we were likewise favoured with  the company of father K--, a native of Ireland, who is vicaire or  curate of the parish; and among the guests was Mons. L--y's son,  a pretty boy, about thirteen or fourteen years of age. The repas  served up in three services, or courses, with entrees and hors  d'oeuvres, exclusive of the fruit, consisted of about twenty  dishes, extremely well dressed by the rotisseur, who is the best  cook I ever knew, in France, or elsewhere; but the plates were not  presented with much order. Our young ladies did not seem to be  much used to do the honours of the table. The most extraordinary  circumstance that I observed on this occasion--as, that all the  French who were present ate of every dish that appeared; and I am  told, that if there had been an hundred articles more, they would  have had a trial of each. This is what they call doing justice to  the founder. Mons. L--y was placed at the head of the table and  indeed he was the oracle and orator of the company; tall, thin,  and weather-beaten, not unlike the picture of Don Quixote after  he had lost his teeth. He had been garde du corps, or life-guardman  at Versailles; and by virtue of this office he was  perfectly well acquainted with the persons of the king and the  dauphin, with the characters of the ministers and grandees, and,  in a word, with all the secrets of state, on which he held forth  with equal solemnity and elocution. He exclaimed against the  jesuits, and the farmers of the revenue, who, he said, had ruined  France. Then, addressing himself to me, asked, if the English did  not every day drink to the health of madame la marquise? I did  not at first comprehend his meaning; but answered in general,  that the English were not deficient in complaisance for the  ladies. "Ah! (cried he) she is the best friend they have in the  world. If it had not been for her, they would not have such  reason to boast of the advantages of the war." I told him the  only conquest which the French had made in the war, was atchieved  by one of her generals: I meant the taking of Mahon. But I did  not choose to prosecute the discourse, remembering that in the  year 1749, I had like to have had an affair with a Frenchman at  Ghent, who affirmed, that all the battles gained by the great  duke of Marlborough were purposely lost by the French generals,  in order to bring the schemes of madame de Maintenon into  disgrace. This is no bad resource for the national vanity of  these people: though, in general, they are really persuaded, that  theirs is the richest, the bravest, the happiest, and the most  powerful nation under the sun; and therefore, without some such  cause, they must be invincible. By the bye, the common people  here still frighten their wayward children with the name of  Marlborough. Mr. B--'s son, who was nursed at a peasant's house,  happening one day, after he was brought home, to be in disgrace  with his father, who threatened to correct him, the child ran for  protection to his mother, crying, "Faites sortir ce vilaine  Malbroug," "Turn out that rogue Marlborough." It is amazing to  hear a sensible Frenchman assert, that the revenues of France  amount to four hundred millions of livres, about twenty millions  sterling, clear of all incumbrances, when in fact their clear  revenue is not much above ten. Without all doubt they have reason  to inveigh against the fermiers generaux, who oppress the people  in raising the taxes, not above two-thirds of which are brought  into the king's coffers: the rest enriches themselves, and  enables them to bribe high for the protection of the great, which  is the only support they have against the remonstrances of the  states and parliaments, and the suggestions of common sense;  which will ever demonstrate this to be, of all others, the most  pernicious method of supplying the necessities of government.

Mons. L--y seasoned the severity of his political apothegms with  intermediate sallies of mirth and gallantry. He ogled the  venerable gentlewoman his commere, who sat by him. He looked,  sighed, and languished, sung tender songs, and kissed the old  lady's hand with all the ardour of a youthful admirer. I  unfortunately congratulated him on having such a pretty young  gentleman to his son. He answered, sighing, that the boy had  talents, but did not put them to a proper use--"Long before I  attained his age (said he) I had finished my rhetoric." Captain  B--, who had eaten himself black in the face, and, with the  napkin under his chin, was no bad representation of Sancho Panza  in the suds, with the dishclout about his neck, when the duke's  scullions insisted upon shaving him; this sea-wit, turning to the  boy, with a waggish leer, "I suppose (said he) you don't  understand the figure of amplification so well as Monsieur your  father." At that instant, one of the nieces, who knew her uncle  to be very ticklish, touched him under the short ribs, on which  the little man attempted to spring up, but lost the centre of  gravity. He overturned his own plate in the lap of the person  that sat next to him, and falling obliquely upon his own chair,  both tumbled down upon the floor together, to the great  discomposure of the whole company; for the poor man would have  been actually strangled, had not his nephew loosed his stock with  great expedition. Matters being once more adjusted, and the  captain condoled on his disaster, Mons. L--y took it in his head  to read his son a lecture upon filial obedience. This was mingled  with some sharp reproof, which the boy took so ill that he  retired. The old lady observed that he had been too severe: her  daughter-in-law, who was very pretty, said her brother had given  him too much reason; hinting, at the same time, that he was  addicted to some terrible vices; upon which several individuals  repeated the interjection, ah! ah! "Yes (said Mons. L--y, with a  rueful aspect) the boy has a pernicious turn for gaming: in one  afternoon he lost, at billiards, such a sum as gives me horror to  think of it." "Fifty sols in one afternoon," (cried the sister).  "Fifty sols! (exclaimed the mother-in-law, with marks of  astonishment) that's too much--that's too much!--he's to blame--  he's to blame! but youth, you know, Mons. L--y--ah! vive la  jeunesse!"--"et l'amour!" cried the father, wiping his eyes,  squeezing her hand, and looking tenderly upon her. Mr. B-- took  this opportunity to bring in the young gentleman, who was  admitted into favour, and received a second exhortation. Thus  harmony was restored, and the entertainment concluded with fruit,  coffee, and liqueurs.

When a bourgeois of Boulogne takes the air, he goes in a one-horse  chaise, which is here called cabriolet, and hires it for  half-a-crown a day. There are also travelling chaises, which hold  four persons, two seated with their faces to the horses, and two  behind their backs; but those vehicles are all very ill made, and  extremely inconvenient. The way of riding most used in this place  is on assback. You will see every day, in the skirts of the town,  a great number of females thus mounted, with the feet on either  side occasionally, according as the wind blows, so that sometimes  the right and sometimes the left hand guides the beast: but in  other parts of France, as well as in Italy, the ladies sit on  horseback with their legs astride, and are provided with drawers  for that purpose.

When I said the French people were kept in good humour by the  fopperies of their religion, I did not mean that there were no  gloomy spirits among them. There will be fanatics in religion,  while there are people of a saturnine disposition, and melancholy  turn of mind. The character of a devotee, which is hardly known  in England, is very common here. You see them walking to and from  church at all hours, in their hoods and long camblet cloaks, with  a slow pace, demure aspect, and downcast eye. Those who are poor  become very troublesome to the monks, with their scruples and  cases of conscience: you may see them on their knees, at the  confessional, every hour in the day. The rich devotee has her  favourite confessor, whom she consults and regales in private, at  her own house; and this spiritual director generally governs the  whole family. For my part I never knew a fanatic that was not an  hypocrite at bottom. Their pretensions to superior sanctity, and  an absolute conquest over all the passions, which human reason  was never yet able to subdue, introduce a habit of dissimulation,  which, like all other habits, is confirmed by use, till at length  they become adepts in the art and science of hypocrisy.  Enthusiasm and hypocrisy are by no means incompatible. The  wildest fanatics I ever knew, were real sensualists in their way  of living, and cunning cheats in their dealings with mankind.

Among the lower class of people at Boulogne, those who take the  lead, are the sea-faring men, who live in one quarter, divided  into classes, and registered for the service of the king. They  are hardy and raw-boned, exercise the trade of fishermen and  boatmen, and propagate like rabbits. They have put themselves  under the protection of a miraculous image of the Virgin Mary,  which is kept in one of their churches, and every year carried in  procession. According to the legend, this image was carried off,  with other pillage, by the English, when they took Boulogne, in  the reign of Henry VIII. The lady, rather than reside in England,  where she found a great many heretics, trusted herself alone in  an open boat, and crossed the sea to the road of Boulogne, where  she was seen waiting for a pilot. Accordingly a boat put off to  her assistance, and brought her safe into the harbour: since  which time she has continued to patronize the watermen of  Boulogne. At present she is very black and very ugly, besides  being cruelly mutilated in different parts of her body, which I  suppose have been amputated, and converted into tobacco-stoppers;  but once a year she is dressed in very rich attire, and carried  in procession, with a silver boat, provided at the expence of the  sailors. That vanity which characterises the French extends even  to the canaille. The lowest creature among them is sure to have  her ear-rings and golden cross hanging about her neck. Indeed  this last is an implement of superstition as well as of dress,  without which no female appears. The common people here, as in  all countries where they live poorly and dirtily, are hard-featured,  and of very brown, or rather tawny complexions. As they  seldom eat meat, their juices are destitute of that animal oil  which gives a plumpness and smoothness to the skin, and defends  those fine capillaries from the injuries of the weather, which  would otherwise coalesce, or be shrunk up, so as to impede the  circulation on the external surface of the body. As for the dirt,  it undoubtedly blocks up the pores of the skin, and disorders the  perspiration; consequently must contribute to the scurvy, itch,  and other cutaneous distempers.

In the quarter of the matelots at Boulogne. there is a number of  poor Canadians, who were removed from the island of St. John, in  the gulph of St. Laurence. when it was reduced by the English.  These people are maintained at the expence of the king, who  allows them soldier's pay, that is five sols, or two-pence  halfpenny a day; or rather three sols and ammunition bread. How  the soldiers contrive to subsist upon this wretched allowance, I  cannot comprehend: but, it must be owned, that those invalids who  do duty at Boulogne betray no marks of want. They are hale and  stout, neatly and decently cloathed, and on the whole look better  than the pensioners of Chelsea.

About three weeks ago I was favoured with a visit by one Mr. M--,  an English gentleman, who seems far gone in a consumption. He  passed the last winter at Nismes in Languedoc, and found himself  much better in the beginning of summer, when he embarked at  Cette, and returned by sea to England. He soon relapsed, however,  and (as he imagines) in consequence of a cold caught at sea. He  told me, his intention was to try the South again, and even to go  as far as Italy. I advised him to make trial of the air of Nice,  where I myself proposed to reside. He seemed to relish my advice,  and proceeded towards Paris in his own carriage.

I shall to-morrow ship my great chests on board of a ship bound  to Bourdeaux; they are directed, and recommended to the care of a  merchant of that place, who will forward them by Thoulouse, and  the canal of Languedoc, to his correspondent at Cette, which is  the sea-port of Montpellier. The charge of their conveyance to  Bourdeaux does not exceed one guinea. They consist of two very  large chests and a trunk, about a thousand pounds weight; and the  expence of transporting them from Bourdeaux to Cette, will not  exceed thirty livres. They are already sealed with lead at the  customhouse, that they may be exempted from further visitation.  This is a precaution which every traveller takes, both by sea and  land: he must likewise provide himself with a passe-avant at the  bureau, otherwise he may be stopped, and rummaged at every town  through which he passes. I have hired a berline and four horses  to Paris, for fourteen loui'dores; two of which the voiturier is  obliged to pay for a permission from the farmers of the poste;  for every thing is farmed in this country; and if you hire a  carriage, as I have done, you must pay twelve livres, or half-a-guinea,  for every person that travels in it. The common coach  between Calais and Paris, is such a vehicle as no man would use,  who has any regard to his own case and convenience and it travels  at the pace of an English waggon.

In ten days I shall set out on my journey; and I shall leave  Boulogne with regret. I have been happy in the acquaintance of  Mrs. B--, and a few British families in the place; and it was my  good fortune to meet here with two honest gentlemen, whom I had  formerly known in Paris, as well as with some of my countrymen,  officers in the service of France. My next will be from Paris.  Remember me to our friends at A--'s. I am a little heavy-hearted  at the prospect of removing to such a distance from you. It is a  moot point whether I shall ever return. My health is very  precarious. Adieu.

LETTER VI 

PARIS, October 12, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--Of our journey from Boulogne I have little to say. The  weather was favourable, and the roads were in tolerable order. We  found good accommodation at Montreuil and Amiens; but in every  other place where we stopped, we met with abundance of dirt, and  the most flagrant imposition. I shall not pretend to describe the  cities of Abbeville and Amiens, which we saw only en passant; nor  take up your time with an account of the stables and palace of  Chantilly, belonging to the prince of Conde, which we visited the  last day of our journey; nor shall I detain you with a detail of  the Trefors de St. Denis, which, together with the tombs in the  abbey church, afforded us some amusement while our dinner was  getting ready. All these particulars are mentioned in twenty  different books of tours, travels, and directions, which you have  often perused. I shall only observe, that the abbey church is the  lightest piece of Gothic architecture I have seen, and the air  within seems perfectly free from that damp and moisture, so  perceivable in all our old cathedrals. This must be owing to the  nature of its situation. There are some fine marble statues that  adorn the tombs of certain individuals here interred; but they  are mostly in the French taste, which is quite contrary to the  simplicity of the antients. Their attitudes are affected,  unnatural, and desultory; and their draperies fantastic; or, as  one of our English artists expressed himself, they are all of a  flutter. As for the treasures, which are shewn on certain days to  the populace gratis, they are contained in a number of presses,  or armoires, and, if the stones are genuine, they must be  inestimable: but this I cannot believe. Indeed I have been told,  that what they shew as diamonds are no more than composition:  nevertheless, exclusive of these, there are some rough stones of  great value, and many curiosities worth seeing. The monk that  shewed them was the very image of our friend Hamilton, both in  his looks and manner.

I have one thing very extraordinary to observe of the French  auberges, which seems to be a remarkable deviation from the  general character of the nation. The landlords, hostesses, and  servants of the inns upon the road, have not the least dash of  complaisance in their behaviour to strangers. Instead of coming  to the door, to receive you as in England, they take no manner of  notice of you; but leave you to find or enquire your way into the  kitchen, and there you must ask several times for a chamber,  before they seem willing to conduct you up stairs. In general,  you are served with the appearance of the most mortifying  indifference, at the very time they are laying schemes for  fleecing you of your money. It is a very odd contrast between  France and England; in the former all the people are complaisant  but the publicans; in the latter there is hardly any complaisance  but among the publicans. When I said all the people in France, I  ought also to except those vermin who examine the baggage of  travellers in different parts of the kingdom. Although our  portmanteaus were sealed with lead, and we were provided  with a passe-avant from the douane, our coach was searched  at the gate of Paris by which we entered; and the women were  obliged to get out, and stand in the open street, till this  operation was performed.

I had desired a friend to provide lodgings for me at Paris, in  the Fauxbourg St. Germain; and accordingly we found ourselves  accommodated at the Hotel de Montmorency, with a first floor,  which costs me ten livres a day. I should have put up with it had  it been less polite; but as I have only a few days to stay in  this place, and some visits to receive, I am not sorry that my  friend has exceeded his commission. I have been guilty of another  piece of extravagance in hiring a carosse de remise, for which I  pay twelve livres a day. Besides the article of visiting, I could  not leave Paris, without carrying my wife and the girls to see  the most remarkable places in and about this capital, such as the  Luxemburg, the Palais-Royal, the Thuilleries, the Louvre, the  Invalids, the Gobelins, &c. together with Versailles, Trianon,  Marli, Meudon, and Choissi; and therefore, I thought the  difference in point of expence would not be great, between a  carosse de remise and a hackney coach. The first are extremely  elegant, if not too much ornamented, the last are very shabby and  disagreeable. Nothing gives me such chagrin, as the necessity I  am under to hire a valet de place, as my own servant does not  speak the language. You cannot conceive with what eagerness and  dexterity those rascally valets exert themselves in pillaging  strangers. There is always one ready in waiting on your arrival,  who begins by assisting your own servant to unload your baggage,  and interests himself in your affairs with such artful  officiousness, that you will find it difficult to shake him off,  even though you are determined beforehand against hiring any such  domestic. He produces recommendations from his former masters,  and the people of the house vouch for his honesty.

The truth is, those fellows are very handy, useful, and obliging;  and so far honest, that they will not steal in the usual way. You  may safely trust one of them to bring you a hundred loui'dores  from your banker; but they fleece you without mercy in every  other article of expence. They lay all your tradesmen under  contribution; your taylor, barber, mantua-maker, milliner,  perfumer, shoe-maker, mercer, jeweller, hatter, traiteur, and  wine-merchant: even the bourgeois who owns your coach pays him  twenty sols per day. His wages amount to twice as much, so that I  imagine the fellow that serves me, makes above ten shillings a  day, besides his victuals, which, by the bye, he has no right to  demand. Living at Paris, to the best of my recollection, is very  near twice as dear as it was fifteen years ago; and, indeed, this  is the case in London; a circumstance that must be undoubtedly  owing to an increase of taxes; for I don't find that in the  articles of eating and drinking, the French people are more  luxurious than they were heretofore. I am told the entrees, or  duties, payed upon provision imported into Paris, are very heavy.  All manner of butcher's meat and poultry are extremely good in  this place. The beef is excellent. The wine, which is generally  drank, is a very thin kind of Burgundy. I can by no means relish  their cookery; but one breakfasts deliciously upon their petit  pains and their pales of butter, which last is exquisite.

The common people, and even the bourgeois of Paris live, at this  season, chiefly on bread and grapes, which is undoubtedly very  wholsome fare. If the same simplicity of diet prevailed in  England, we should certainly undersell the French at all foreign  markets for they are very slothful with all their vivacity and  the great number of their holidays not only encourages this lazy  disposition, but actually robs them of one half of what their  labour would otherwise produce; so that, if our common people  were not so expensive in their living, that is, in their eating  and drinking, labour might be afforded cheaper in England than in  France. There are three young lusty hussies, nieces or daughters  of a blacksmith, that lives just opposite to my windows, who do  nothing from morning till night. They eat grapes and bread from  seven till nine, from nine till twelve they dress their hair, and  are all the afternoon gaping at the window to view passengers. I  don't perceive that they give themselves the trouble either to  make their beds, or clean their apartment. The same spirit of  idleness and dissipation I have observed in every part of France,  and among every class of people.

Every object seems to have shrunk in its dimensions since I was  last in Paris. The Louvre, the Palais-Royal, the bridges, and the  river Seine, by no means answer the ideas I had formed of them  from my former observation. When the memory is not very correct,  the imagination always betrays her into such extravagances. When  I first revisited my own country, after an absence of fifteen  years, I found every thing diminished in the same manner, and I  could scarce believe my own eyes.

Notwithstanding the gay disposition of the French, their houses  are all gloomy. In spite of all the ornaments that have been  lavished on Versailles, it is a dismal habitation. The apartments  are dark, ill-furnished, dirty, and unprincely. Take the castle,  chapel, and garden all together, they make a most fantastic  composition of magnificence and littleness, taste, and foppery.  After all, it is in England only, where we must look for cheerful  apartments, gay furniture, neatness, and convenience. There is a  strange incongruity in the French genius. With all their  volatility, prattle, and fondness for bons mots, they delight in  a species of drawling, melancholy, church music. Their most  favourite dramatic pieces are almost without incident; and the  dialogue of their comedies consists of moral, insipid  apophthegms, intirely destitute of wit or repartee. I know what  I hazard by this opinion among the implicit admirers of Lully,  Racine, and Moliere.

I don't talk of the busts, the statues, and pictures which abound  at Versailles, and other places in and about Paris, particularly  the great collection of capital pieces in the Palais-royal,  belonging to the duke of Orleans. I have neither capacity, nor  inclination, to give a critique on these chef d'oeuvres, which  indeed would take up a whole volume. I have seen this great  magazine of painting three times, with astonishment; but I should  have been better pleased, if there had not been half the number:  one is bewildered in such a profusion, as not to know where to  begin, and hurried away before there is time to consider one  piece with any sort of deliberation. Besides, the rooms are all  dark, and a great many of the pictures hang in a bad light. As  for Trianon, Marli, and Choissi, they are no more than pigeon-houses,  in respect to palaces; and, notwithstanding the  extravagant eulogiums which you have heard of the French king's  houses, I will venture to affirm that the king of England is  better, I mean more comfortably, lodged. I ought, however, to  except Fontainebleau, which I have not seen.

The city of Paris is said to be five leagues, or fifteen miles,  in circumference; and if it is really so, it must be much more  populous than London; for the streets are very narrow, and the  houses very high, with a different family on every floor. But I  have measured the best plans of these two royal cities, and am  certain that Paris does not take up near so much ground as  London and Westminster occupy; and I suspect the number of its  inhabitants is also exaggerated by those who say it amounts to  eight hundred thousand, that is two hundred thousand more than  are contained in the bills of mortality. The hotels of the French  noblesse, at Paris, take up a great deal of room, with their  courtyards and gardens; and so do their convents and churches. It  must be owned, indeed, that their streets are wonderfully crouded  with people and carriages.

The French begin to imitate the English, but only in such  particulars as render them worthy of imitation. When I was last  at Paris, no person of any condition, male or female, appeared, but in full dress, even when obliged to  come out early in the morning, and there was not such a thing to  be seen as a perruque ronde; but at present I see a number of  frocks and scratches in a morning, in the streets of this  metropolis. They have set up a petite poste, on the plan of our  penny-post, with some improvements; and I am told there is a  scheme on foot for supplying every house with water, by leaden  pipes, from the river Seine. They have even adopted our practice  of the cold bath, which is taken very conveniently, in wooden  houses, erected on the side of the river, the water of which is  let in and out occasionally, by cocks fixed in the sides of the  bath. There are different rooms for the different sexes: the  accommodations are good, and the expence is a trifle. The  tapestry of the Gobelins is brought to an amazing degree of  perfection; and I am surprised that this furniture is not more in  fashion among the great, who alone are able to purchase it. It  would be a most elegant and magnificent ornament, which would  always nobly distinguish their apartments from those, of an  inferior rank; and in this they would run no risk of being  rivalled by the bourgeois. At the village of Chaillot, in the  neighbourhood of Paris, they make beautiful carpets and screen-work;  and this is the more extraordinary, as there are hardly any  carpets used in this kingdom. In almost all the lodging-houses,  the floors are of brick, and have no other kind of cleaning, than  that of being sprinkled with water, and swept once a day. These  brick floors, the stone stairs, the want of wainscotting in the  rooms, and the thick party-walls of stone, are, however, good  preservatives against fire, which seldom does any damage in this  city. Instead of wainscotting, the walls are covered with  tapestry or damask. The beds in general are very good, and well  ornamented, with testers and curtains.

Twenty years ago the river Seine, within a mile of Paris, was as  solitary as if it had run through a desert. At present the banks  of it are adorned with a number of elegant houses and  plantations, as far as Marli. I need not mention the machine at  this place for raising water, because I know you are well  acquainted with its construction; nor shall I say any thing more  of the city of Paris, but that there is a new square, built upon  an elegant plan, at the end of the garden of the Thuilleries: it  is called Place de Louis XV. and, in the middle of it, there is a  good equestrian statue of the reigning king.

You have often heard that Louis XIV. frequently regretted, that  his country did not afford gravel for the walks of his gardens,  which are covered with a white, loose sand, very disagreeable  both to the eyes and feet of those who walk upon it; but this is  a vulgar mistake. There is plenty of gravel on the road between  Paris and Versailles, as well as in many other parts of this  kingdom; but the French, who are all for glare and glitter, think  the other is more gay and agreeable: one would imagine they did  not feel the burning reflexion from the white sand, which in  summer is almost intolerable.

In the character of the French, considered as a people, there are  undoubtedly many circumstances truly ridiculous. You know the  fashionable people, who go a hunting, are equipped with their  jack boots, bag wigs, swords and pistols: but I saw the other day  a scene still more grotesque. On the road to Choissi, a fiacre,  or hackney-coach, stopped, and out came five or six men, armed  with musquets, who took post, each behind a separate tree. I  asked our servant who they were imagining they might be archers,  or footpads of justice, in pursuit of some malefactor. But guess  my surprise, when the fellow told me, they were gentlemen a la  chasse. They were in fact come out from Paris, in this equipage,  to take the diversion of hare-hunting; that is, of shooting from  behind a tree at the hares that chanced to pass. Indeed, if they  had nothing more in view, but to destroy the game, this was a  very effectual method; for the hares are in such plenty in this  neighbourhood, that I have seen a dozen together, in the same  field. I think this way of hunting, in a coach or chariot, might  be properly adopted at London, in favour of those aldermen of the  city, who are too unwieldy to follow the hounds a horseback.

The French, however, with all their absurdities, preserve a  certain ascendancy over us, which is very disgraceful to our  nation; and this appears in nothing more than in the article of  dress. We are contented to be thought their apes in fashion; but,  in fact, we are slaves to their taylors, mantua-makers, barbers,  and other tradesmen. One would be apt to imagine that our own  tradesmen had joined them in a combination against us. When the  natives of France come to London, they appear in all public  places, with cloaths made according to the fashion of their own  country, and this fashion is generally admired by the English.  Why, therefore, don't we follow it implicitly? No, we pique  ourselves upon a most ridiculous deviation from the very modes we  admire, and please ourselves with thinking this deviation is a  mark of our spirit and liberty. But, we have not spirit enough to  persist in this deviation, when we visit their country:  otherwise, perhaps, they would come to admire and follow our  example: for, certainly, in point of true taste, the fashions of  both countries are equally absurd. At present, the skirts of the  English descend from the fifth rib to the calf of the leg, and  give the coat the form of a Jewish gaberdine; and our hats seem  to be modelled after that which Pistol wears upon the stage. In  France, the haunch buttons and pocketholes are within half a foot  of the coat's extremity: their hats look as if they had been  pared round the brims, and the crown is covered with a kind of  cordage, which, in my opinion, produces a very beggarly effect.  In every other circumstance of dress, male and female, the  contrast between the two nations, appears equally glaring. What  is the consequence? when an Englishman comes to Paris, he cannot  appear until he has undergone a total metamorphosis. At his first  arrival he finds it necessary to send for the taylor, perruquier,  hatter, shoemaker, and every other tradesman concerned in the  equipment of the human body. He must even change his buckles, and  the form of his ruffles; and, though at the risque of his life,  suit his cloaths to the mode of the season. For example, though  the weather should be never so cold, he must wear his habit  d'ete, or demi-saison. without presuming to put on a warm dress  before the day which fashion has fixed for that purpose; and  neither old age nor infirmity will excuse a man for wearing his  hat upon his head, either at home or abroad. Females are (if  possible) still more subject to the caprices of fashion; and as  the articles of their dress are more manifold, it is enough to  make a man's heart ake to see his wife surrounded by a multitude  of cotturieres, milliners, and tire-women. All her sacks and  negligees must be altered and new trimmed. She must have new  caps, new laces, new shoes, and her hair new cut. She must have  her taffaties for the summer, her flowered silks for the spring  and autumn, her sattins and damasks for winter. The good man, who  used to wear the beau drop d'Angleterre, quite plain all the year  round, with a long bob, or tye perriwig, must here provide  himself with a camblet suit trimmed with silver for spring and  autumn, with silk cloaths for summer, and cloth laced with gold,  or velvet for winter; and he must wear his bag-wig a la pigeon.  This variety of dress is absolutely indispensible for all those  who pretend to any rank above the meer bourgeois. On his return  to his own country, all this frippery is useless. He cannot  appear in London until he has undergone another thorough  metamorphosis; so that he will have some reason to think, that  the tradesmen of Paris and London have combined to lay him under  contribution: and they, no doubt, are the directors who regulate  the fashions in both capitals; the English, however, in a  subordinate capacity: for the puppets of their making will not  pass at Paris, nor indeed in any other part of Europe; whereas a  French petit maitre is reckoned a complete figure every where,  London not excepted. Since it is so much the humour of the  English at present to run abroad, I wish they had anti-gallican  spirit enough to produce themselves in their own genuine English  dress, and treat the French modes with the same philosophical  contempt, which was shewn by an honest gentleman, distinguished  by the name of Wig-Middleton. That unshaken patriot still appears  in the same kind of scratch perriwig, skimming-dish hat, and slit  sleeve, which were worn five-and-twenty years ago, and has  invariably persisted in this garb, in defiance of all the  revolutions of the mode. I remember a student in the temple, who,  after a long and learned investigation of the to kalon, or  beautiful, had resolution enough to let his beard grow, and wore  it in all public places, until his heir at law applied for a  commission of lunacy against him; then he submitted to the razor,  rather than run any risque of being found non compos.

Before I conclude, I must tell you, that the most reputable shop-keepers  and tradesmen of Paris think it no disgrace to practise  the most shameful imposition. I myself know an instance of one of  the most creditable marchands in this capital, who demanded six  francs an ell for some lutestring, laying his hand upon his  breast at the same time, and declaring en conscience, that it had  cost him within three sols of the money. Yet in less than three  minutes, he sold it for four and a half, and when the buyer  upbraided him with his former declaration, he shrugged up his  shoulders, saying, il faut marchander. I don't mention this as a  particular instance. The same mean disingenuity is universal all  over France, as I have been informed by several persons of  veracity.

The next letter you have from me will probably be dated at  Nismes, or Montpellier. Mean-while, I am ever--Yours.

LETTER VII

To MRS. M--. PARIS, October, 12, 1763.

MADAM,--I shall be much pleased if the remarks I have made on the  characters of the French people, can afford you the satisfaction  you require. With respect to the ladies I can only judge from  their exteriors: but, indeed, these are so characteristic, that  one can hardly judge amiss; unless we suppose that a woman of  taste and sentiment may be so overruled by the absurdity of what  is called fashion, as to reject reason, and disguise nature, in  order to become ridiculous or frightful. That this may be the  case with some individuals, is very possible. I have known it  happen in our own country, where the follies of the French are  adopted and exhibited in the most aukward imitation: but the  general prevalence of those preposterous modes, is a plain proof  that there is a general want of taste, and a general depravity of  nature. I shall not pretend to describe the particulars of a  French lady's dress. These you are much better acquainted with  than I can pretend to be: but this I will be bold to affirm, that  France is the general reservoir from which all the absurdities of  false taste, luxury, and extravagance have overflowed the  different kingdoms and states of Europe. The springs that fill  this reservoir, are no other than vanity and ignorance. It would  be superfluous to attempt proving from the nature of things, from  the first principles and use of dress, as well as from the  consideration of natural beauty, and the practice of the  ancients, who certainly understood it as well as the connoisseurs  of these days, that nothing can be more monstrous, inconvenient,  and contemptible, than the fashion of modern drapery. You  yourself are well aware of all its defects, and have often  ridiculed them in my hearing. I shall only mention one particular  of dress essential to the fashion in this country, which seems to  me to carry human affectation to the very farthest verge of folly  and extravagance; that is, the manner in which the faces of the  ladies are primed and painted. When the Indian chiefs were in  England every body ridiculed their preposterous method of  painting their cheeks and eye-lids; but this ridicule was wrong  placed. Those critics ought to have considered, that the Indians  do not use paint to make themselves agreeable; but in order to be  the more terrible to their enemies. It is generally supposed, I  think, that your sex make use of fard and vermillion for very  different purposes; namely, to help a bad or faded complexion, to  heighten the graces, or conceal the defects of nature, as well as  the ravages of time. I shall not enquire at present, whether it  is just and honest to impose in this manner on mankind: if it is  not honest, it may be allowed to be artful and politic, and  shews, at least, a desire of being agreeable. But to lay it on as  the fashion in France prescribes to all the ladies of condition,  who indeed cannot appear without this badge of distinction, is to  disguise themselves in such a manner, as to render them odious  and detestable to every spectator, who has the least relish left  for nature and propriety. As for the fard or white, with which  their necks and shoulders are plaistered, it may be in some  measure excusable, as their skins are naturally brown, or sallow;  but the rouge, which is daubed on their faces, from the chin up  to the eyes, without the least art or dexterity, not only  destroys all distinction of features, but renders the aspect  really frightful, or at best conveys nothing but ideas of disgust  and aversion. You know, that without this horrible masque no  married lady is admitted at court, or in any polite assembly; and  that it is a mark of distinction which no bourgeoise dare assume.  Ladies of fashion only have the privilege of exposing themselves  in these ungracious colours. As their faces are concealed under a  false complexion, so their heads are covered with a vast load of  false hair, which is frizzled on the forehead, so as exactly to  resemble the wooly heads of the Guinea negroes. As to the natural  hue of it, this is a matter of no consequence, for powder makes  every head of hair of the same colour; and no woman appears in  this country, from the moment she rises till night, without being  compleatly whitened. Powder or meal was first used in Europe by  the Poles, to conceal their scald heads; but the present fashion  of using it, as well as the modish method of dressing the hair,  must have been borrowed from the Hottentots, who grease their  wooly heads with mutton suet and then paste it over with the  powder called buchu. In like manner, the hair of our fine ladies  is frizzled into the appearance of negroes wool, and stiffened  with an abominable paste of hog's grease, tallow, and white  powder. The present fashion, therefore, of painting the face, and  adorning the head, adopted by the beau monde in France, is taken  from those two polite nations the Chickesaws of America and the  Hottentots of Africa. On the whole, when I see one of those fine  creatures sailing along, in her taudry robes of silk and gauze,  frilled, and flounced, and furbelowed, with her false locks, her  false jewels, her paint, her patches, and perfumes; I cannot help  looking upon her as the vilest piece of sophistication that art  ever produced.

This hideous masque of painting, though destructive of all  beauty, is, however, favourable to natural homeliness and  deformity. It accustoms the eyes of the other sex, and in time  reconciles them to frightfull objects; it disables them from  perceiving any distinction of features between woman and woman;  and, by reducing all faces to a level, gives every female an  equal chance for an admirer; being in this particular analogous  to the practice of the antient Lacedemonians, who were obliged to  chuse their helpmates in the dark. In what manner the insides of  their heads are furnished, I would not presume to judge from the  conversation of a very few to whom I have had access: but from  the nature of their education, which I have heard described, and  the natural vivacity of their tempers, I should expect neither  sense, sentiment, nor discretion. From the nursery they are  allowed, and even encouraged, to say every thing that comes  uppermost; by which means they acquire a volubility of tongue,  and a set of phrases, which constitutes what is called polite  conversation. At the same time they obtain an absolute conquest  over all sense of shame, or rather, they avoid acquiring this  troublesome sensation; for it is certainly no innate idea. Those  who have not governesses at home, are sent, for a few years, to a  convent, where they lay in a fund of superstition that serves  them for life: but I never heard they had the least opportunity  of cultivating the mind, of exercising the powers of reason, or  of imbibing a taste for letters, or any rational or useful  accomplishment. After being taught to prattle, to dance and play  at cards, they are deemed sufficiently qualified to appear in the  grand monde, and to perform all the duties of that high rank and  station in life. In mentioning cards, I ought to observe, that  they learn to play not barely for amusement, but also with a view  to advantage; and, indeed, you seldom meet with a native of  France, whether male or female, who is not a compleat gamester,  well versed in all the subtleties and finesses of the art. This  is likewise the case all over Italy. A lady of a great house in  Piedmont, having four sons, makes no scruple to declare, that the  first shall represent the family, the second enter into the army,  the third into the church, and that she will breed the fourth a  gamester. These noble adventurers devote themselves in a  particular manner to the entertainment of travellers from our  country, because the English are supposed to be full of money,  rash, incautious, and utterly ignorant of play. But such a  sharper is most dangerous, when he hunts in couple with a  female. I have known a French count and his wife, who found means  to lay the most wary under contribution. He was smooth, supple,  officious, and attentive: she was young, handsome, unprincipled,  and artful. If the Englishman marked for prey was found upon his  guard against the designs of the husband, then madam plied him on  the side of gallantry. She displayed all the attractions of her  person. She sung, danced, ogled, sighed, complimented, and  complained. If he was insensible to all her charms, she flattered  his vanity, and piqued his pride, by extolling the wealth and  generosity of the English; and if he proved deaf to all these  insinuations she, as her last stake, endeavoured to interest his  humanity and compassion. She expatiated, with tears in her eyes,  on the cruelty and indifference of her great relations;  represented that her husband was no more than the cadet of a  noble family --, that his provision was by no means suitable.  either to the dignity of his rank, or the generosity of his  disposition: that he had a law-suit of great consequence  depending, which had drained all his finances; and, finally, that  they should be both ruined, if they could not find some generous  friend, who would accommodate them with a sum of money to bring  the cause to a determination. Those who are not actuated by such  scandalous motives, become gamesters from meer habit, and, having  nothing more solid to engage their thoughts, or employ their  time, consume the best part of their lives, in this worst of all  dissipation. I am not ignorant that there are exceptions from  this general rule: I know that France has produced a Maintenon, a  Sevigine, a Scuderi, a Dacier, and a Chatelet; but I would no  more deduce the general character of the French ladies from these  examples, than I would call a field of hemp a flower-garden.  because there might be in it a few lillies or renunculas planted  by the hand of accident.

Woman has been defined a weaker man; but in this country the men  are, in my opinion, more ridiculous and insignificant than the  women. They certainly are more disagreeable to a rational  enquirer, because they are more troublesome. Of all the coxcombs  on the face of the earth, a French petit maitre is the most  impertinent: and they are all petit maitres from the marquis who  glitters in lace and embroidery, to the garcon barbier covered  with meal, who struts with his hair in a long queue, and his hat  under his arm. I have already observed, that vanity is the great  and universal mover among all ranks and degrees of people in this  nation; and as they take no pains to conceal or controul it, they  are hurried by it into the most ridiculous and indeed intolerable  extravagance.

When I talk of the French nation, I must again except a great  number of individuals, from the general censure. Though I have a  hearty contempt for the ignorance, folly, and presumption which  characterise the generality, I cannot but respect the talents of  many great men, who have eminently distinguished themselves in  every art and science: these I shall always revere and esteem as  creatures of a superior species, produced, for the wise purposes  of providence, among the refuse of mankind. It would be absurd to  conclude that the Welch or Highlanders are a gigantic people,  because those mountains may have produced a few individuals near  seven feet high. It would be equally absurd to suppose the French  are a nation of philosophers, because France has given birth to a  Des Cartes, a Maupertuis, a Reaumur, and a Buffon.

I shall not even deny, that the French are by no means deficient  in natural capacity; but they are at the same time remarkable for  a natural levity, which hinders their youth from cultivating that  capacity. This is reinforced by the most preposterous education,  and the example of a giddy people, engaged in the most frivolous  pursuits. A Frenchman is by some Jesuit, or other monk, taught to  read his mother tongue, and to say his prayers in a language he  does not understand. He learns to dance and to fence, by the  masters of those noble sciences. He becomes a compleat  connoisseur in dressing hair, and in adorning his own person,  under the hands and instructions of his barber and valet de  chambre. If he learns to play upon the flute or the fiddle, he is  altogether irresistible. But he piques himself upon being  polished above the natives of any other country by his  conversation with the fair sex. In the course of this  communication, with which he is indulged from his tender years,  he learns like a parrot, by rote, the whole circle of French  compliments, which you know are a set of phrases ridiculous even  to a proverb; and these he throws out indiscriminately to all  women, without distinction in the exercise of that kind of  address, which is here distinguished by the name of gallantry: it  is no more than his making love to every woman who will give him  the hearing. It is an exercise, by the repetition of which he  becomes very pert, very familiar, and very impertinent. Modesty,  or diffidence, I have already said, is utterly unknown among  them, and therefore I wonder there should be a term to express  it in their language.

If I was obliged to define politeness, I should call it, the art  of making one's self agreeable. I think it an art that  necessarily implies a sense of decorum, and a delicacy of  sentiment. These are qualities, of which (as far as I have been  able to observe) a Frenchman has no idea; therefore he never can  be deemed polite, except by those persons among whom they are as  little understood. His first aim is to adorn his own person with  what he calls fine cloaths, that is the frippery of the fashion.  It is no wonder that the heart of a female, unimproved by reason,  and untinctured with natural good sense, should flutter at the  sight of such a gaudy thing, among the number of her admirers:  this impression is enforced by fustian compliments, which her own  vanity interprets in a literal sense, and still more confirmed by  the assiduous attention of the gallant, who, indeed, has nothing  else to mind. A Frenchman in consequence of his mingling with the  females from his infancy, not only becomes acquainted with all  their customs and humours; but grows wonderfully alert in  performing a thousand little offices, which are overlooked by  other men, whose time hath been spent in making more valuable  acquisitions. He enters, without ceremony, a lady's bed-chamber,  while she is in bed, reaches her whatever she wants, airs her  shift, and helps to put it on. He attends at her toilette,  regulates the distribution of her patches, and advises where to  lay on the paint. If he visits her when she is dressed, and  perceives the least impropriety in her coeffure, he insists upon  adjusting it with his own hands: if he sees a curl, or even a  single hair amiss, he produces his comb, his scissars, and  pomatum, and sets it to rights with the dexterity of a professed  friseur. He 'squires her to every place she visits, either on  business, or pleasure; and, by dedicating his whole time to her,  renders himself necessary to her occasions. This I take to be the  most agreeable side of his character: let us view him on the  quarter of impertinence. A Frenchman pries into all your secrets  with the most impudent and importunate curiosity, and then  discloses them without remorse. If you are indisposed, he  questions you about the symptoms of your disorder, with more  freedom than your physician would presume to use; very often in  the grossest terms. He then proposes his remedy (for they are all  quacks), he prepares it without your knowledge, and worries you  with solicitation to take it, without paying the least regard to  the opinion of those whom you have chosen to take care of your  health. Let you be ever so ill, or averse to company, he forces  himself at all times into your bed-chamber, and if it is  necessary to give him a peremptory refusal, he is affronted. I  have known one of those petit maitres insist upon paying regular  visits twice a day to a poor gentleman who was delirious; and he  conversed with him on different subjects, till he was in his  last agonies. This attendance is not the effect of attachment, or  regard, but of sheer vanity, that he may afterwards boast of his  charity and humane disposition: though, of all the people I have  ever known, I think the French are the least capable of feeling  for the distresses of their fellow creatures. Their hearts are  not susceptible of deep impressions; and, such is their levity,  that the imagination has not time to brood long over any  disagreeable idea, or sensation. As a Frenchman piques himself on  his gallantry, he no sooner makes a conquest of a female's heart,  than he exposes her character, for the gratification of his  vanity. Nay, if he should miscarry in his schemes, he will forge  letters and stories, to the ruin of the lady's reputation. This  is a species of perfidy which one would think should render them  odious and detestable to the whole sex; but the case is  otherwise. I beg your pardon, Madam; but women are never better  pleased, than when they see one another exposed; and every  individual has such confidence in her own superior charms and  discretion, that she thinks she can fix the most volatile, and  reform the most treacherous lover.

If a Frenchman is admitted into your family, and distinguished by  repeated marks of your friendship and regard, the first return he  makes for your civilities is to make love to your wife, if she is  handsome; if not, to your sister, or daughter, or niece. If he  suffers a repulse from your wife, or attempts in vain to debauch  your sister, or your daughter, or your niece, he will, rather  than not play the traitor with his gallantry, make his addresses  to your grandmother; and ten to one, but in one shape or another,  he will find means to ruin the peace of a family, in which he has  been so kindly entertained. What he cannot accomplish by dint of  compliment, and personal attendance, he will endeavour to effect,  by reinforcing these with billets-doux, songs, and verses, of  which he always makes a provision for such purposes. If he is  detected in these efforts of treachery, and reproached with his  ingratitude, he impudently declares, that what he had done was no  more than simple gallantry, considered in France as an  indispensible duty on every man who pretended to good breeding.  Nay, he will even affirm, that his endeavours to corrupt your  wife, or your daughter, were the most genuine proofs he could  give of his particular regard for your family.

If a Frenchman is capable of real friendship, it must certainly  be the most disagreeable present he can possibly make to a man of  a true English character, You know, Madam, we are naturally  taciturn, soon tired of impertinence, and much subject to fits of  disgust. Your French friend intrudes upon you at all hours: he  stuns you with his loquacity: he teases you with impertinent  questions about your domestic and private affairs: he attempts to  meddle in all your concerns; and forces his advice upon you with  the most unwearied importunity: he asks the price of every thing  you wear, and, so sure as you tell him undervalues it, without  hesitation: he affirms it is in a bad taste, ill-contrived, ill-made;  that you have been imposed upon both with respect to the  fashion and the price; that the marquise of this, or the countess  of that, has one that is perfectly elegant, quite in the bon ton,  and yet it cost her little more than you gave for a thing that  nobody would wear.

If there were five hundred dishes at table, a Frenchman will eat  of all of them, and then complain he has no appetite. This I have  several times remarked. A friend of mine gained a considerable  wager upon an experiment of this kind: the petit maitre ate of  fourteen different plats, besides the dessert; then disparaged  the cook, declaring he was no better than a marmiton, or  turnspit.

The French have the most ridiculous fondness for their hair, and  this I believe they inherit from their remote ancestors. The  first race of French kings were distinguished by their long hair,  and certainly the people of this country consider it as an  indispensible ornament. A Frenchman will sooner part with his  religion than with his hair, which, indeed, no consideration will  induce him to forego. I know a gentleman afflicted with a  continual head-ach, and a defluxion on his eyes, who was told by  his physician that the best chance he had for being cured, would  be to have his head close shaved, and bathed every day in cold  water. "How (cried he) cut my hair? Mr. Doctor, your most humble  servant!" He dismissed his physician, lost his eye-sight, and  almost his senses, and is now led about with his hair in a bag,  and a piece of green silk hanging like a screen before his face.  Count Saxe, and other military writers have demonstrated the  absurdity of a soldier's wearing a long head of hair;  nevertheless, every soldier in this country wears a long queue,  which makes a delicate mark on his white cloathing; and this  ridiculous foppery has descended even to the lowest class of  people. The decrotteur, who cleans your shoes at the corner of  the Pont Neuf, has a tail of this kind hanging down to his rump,  and even the peasant who drives an ass loaded with dung, wears  his hair en queue, though, perhaps, he has neither shirt nor  breeches. This is the ornament upon which he bestows much time  and pains, and in the exhibition of which he finds full  gratification for his vanity. Considering the harsh features of  the common people in this country, their diminutive stature,  their grimaces, and that long appendage, they have no small  resemblance to large baboons walking upright; and perhaps this  similitude has helped to entail upon them the ridicule of their  neighbours.

A French friend tires out your patience with long visits; and,  far from taking the most palpable hints to withdraw, when he  perceives you uneasy he observes you are low-spirited, and  therefore he will keep you company. This perseverance shews that  he must either be void of penetration, or that his disposition  must be truly diabolical. Rather than be tormented with such a  fiend, a man had better turn him out of doors, even though at the  hazard of being run thro' the body.

The French are generally counted insincere, and taxed with want  of generosity. But I think these reproaches are not well founded.  High-flown professions of friendship and attachment constitute  the language of common compliment in this country, and are never  supposed to be understood in the literal acceptation of the  words; and, if their acts of generosity are but very rare, we  ought to ascribe that rarity, not so much to a deficiency of  generous sentiments, as to their vanity and ostentation, which  engrossing all their funds, utterly disable them from exerting  the virtues of beneficence. Vanity, indeed, predominates among  all ranks, to such a degree, that they are the greatest egotists  in the world; and the most insignificant individual talks in  company with the same conceit and arrogance, as a person of the  greatest importance. Neither conscious poverty nor disgrace will  restrain him in the least either from assuming his full share of  the conversation, or making big addresses to the finest lady,  whom he has the smallest opportunity to approach: nor is he  restrained by any other consideration whatsoever. It is all one  to him whether he himself has a wife of his own, or the lady a  husband; whether she is designed for the cloister, or pre-ingaged  to his best friend and benefactor. He takes it for granted that  his addresses cannot but be acceptable; and, if he meets with a  repulse, he condemns her taste; but never doubts his own  qualifications.

I have a great many things to say of their military character,  and their punctilios of honour, which last are equally absurd and  pernicious; but as this letter has run to an unconscionable  length, I shall defer them till another opportunity. Mean-while,  I have the honour to be, with very particular esteem--Madam, Your  most obedient servant.

LETTER VIII

To MR. M--

LYONS, October 19, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--I was favoured with yours at Paris, and look upon your  reproaches as the proof of your friendship. The truth is, I  considered all the letters I have hitherto written on the subject  of my travels, as written to your society in general, though they  have been addressed to one individual of it; and if they contain  any thing that can either amuse or inform, I desire that  henceforth all I send may be freely perused by all the members.

With respect to my health, about which you so kindly enquire, I  have nothing new to communicate. I had reason to think that my  bathing in the sea at Boulogne  produced a good effect, in  strengthening my relaxed fibres. You know how subject I was to  colds in England; that I could not stir abroad after sun-set, nor  expose myself to the smallest damp, nor walk till the least  moisture appeared on my skin, without being laid up for ten days  or a fortnight. At Paris, however, I went out every day, with my  hat under my arm, though the weather was wet and cold: I walked  in the garden at Versailles even after it was dark, with my head  uncovered, on a cold evening, when the ground was far from being  dry: nay, at Marli, I sauntered above a mile through damp alleys,  and wet grass: and from none of these risques did I feel the  least inconvenience.

In one of our excursions we visited the manufacture for  porcelain, which the king of France has established at the  village of St. Cloud, on the road to Versailles, and which is,  indeed, a noble monument of his munificence. It is a very large  building, both commodious and magnificent, where a great number  of artists are employed, and where this elegant superfluity is  carried to as great perfection as it ever was at Dresden. Yet,  after all, I know not whether the porcelain made at Chelsea may  not vie with the productions either of Dresden, or St. Cloud. If  it falls short of either, it is not in the design, painting,  enamel, or other ornaments, but only in the composition of the  metal, and the method of managing it in the furnace. Our  porcelain seems to be a partial vitrification of levigated flint  and fine pipe clay, mixed together in a certain proportion; and  if the pieces are not removed from the fire in the very critical  moment, they will be either too little, or too much vitrified. In  the first case, I apprehend they will not acquire a proper degree  of cohesion; they will be apt to be corroded, discoloured, and to  crumble, like the first essays that were made at Chelsea; in the  second case, they will be little better than imperfect glass.

There are three methods of travelling from Paris to Lyons, which,  by the shortest road is a journey of about three hundred and  sixty miles. One is by the diligence, or stagecoach, which  performs it in five days; and every passenger pays one hundred  livres, in consideration of which, he not only has a seat in the  carriage, but is maintained on the road. The inconveniences  attending this way of travelling are these. You are crouded into  the carriage, to the number of eight persons, so as to sit very  uneasy, and sometimes run the risque of being stifled among very  indifferent company. You are hurried out of bed, at four, three,  nay often at two o'clock in the morning. You are obliged to eat  in the French way, which is very disagreeable to an English  palate; and, at Chalons, you must embark upon the Saone in a  boat, which conveys you to Lyons, so that the two last days of  your journey are by water. All these were insurmountable  objections to me, who am in such a bad state of health, troubled  with an asthmatic cough, spitting, slow fever, and restlessness,  which demands a continual change of place, as well as free air,  and room for motion. I was this day visited by two young  gentlemen, sons of Mr. Guastaldi, late minister from Genoa at  London. I had seen them at Paris, at the house of the dutchess of  Douglas. They came hither, with their conductor, in the  diligence, and assured me, that nothing could be more  disagreeable than their situation in that carriage.

Another way of travelling in this country is to hire a coach and  four horses; and this method I was inclined to take: but when I  went to the bureau, where alone these voitures are to be had, I  was given to understand, that it would cost me six-and-twenty  guineas, and travel so slow that I should be ten days upon the  road. These carriages are let by the same persons who farm the  diligence; and for this they have an exclusive privilege, which  makes them very saucy and insolent. When I mentioned my servant,  they gave me to understand, that I must pay two loui'dores more  for his seat upon the coach box. As I could not relish these  terms, nor brook the thoughts of being so long upon the road, I  had recourse to the third method, which is going post.

In England you know I should have had nothing to do, but to hire  a couple of post-chaises from stage to stage, with two horses in  each; but here the case is quite otherwise. The post is farmed  from the king, who lays travellers under contribution for his own  benefit, and has published a set of oppressive ordonnances, which  no stranger nor native dares transgress. The postmaster finds  nothing but horses and guides: the carriage you yourself must  provide. If there are four persons within the carriage, you are  obliged to have six horses, and two postillions; and if your  servant sits on the outside, either before or behind, you must  pay for a seventh. You pay double for the first stage from Paris,  and twice double for passing through Fontainbleau when the court  is there, as well as at coming to Lyons, and at leaving this  city. These are called royal posts, and are undoubtedly a  scandalous imposition.

There are two post roads from Paris to Lyons, one of sixty-five  posts, by the way of Moulins; the other of fifty-nine, by the way  of Dijon in Burgundy. This last I chose, partly to save sixty  livres, and partly to see the wine harvest of Burgundy, which, I  was told, was a season of mirth and jollity among all ranks of  people. I hired a very good coach for ten loui'dores to Lyons,  and set out from Paris on the thirteenth instant, with six  horses, two postillions, and my own servant on horseback. We made  no stop at Fontainbleau, though the court was there; but lay at  Moret, which is one stage further, a very paltry little town  where, however, we found good accommodation.

I shall not pretend to describe the castle or palace of  Fontainbleau, of which I had only a glimpse in passing; but the  forest, in the middle of which it stands, is a noble chace of  great extent, beautifully wild and romantic, well stored with  game of all sorts, and abounding with excellent timber. It put me  in mind of the New Forest in Hampshire; but the hills, rocks, and  mountains, with which it is diversified, render it more  agreeable.

The people of this country dine at noon, and travellers always  find an ordinary prepared at every auberge, or public-house, on  the road. Here they sit down promiscuously, and dine at so much a  head. The usual price is thirty sols for dinner, and forty for  supper, including lodging; for this moderate expence they have  two courses and a dessert. If you eat in your own apartment, you  pay, instead of forty sols, three, and in some places, four  livres ahead. I and my family could not well dispense with our  tea and toast in the morning, and had no stomach to eat at noon.  For my own part, I hate French cookery, and abominate garlick,  with which all their ragouts, in this part of the country, are  highly seasoned: we therefore formed a different plan of living  upon the road. Before we left Paris, we laid in a stock of tea,  chocolate, cured neats' tongues, and saucissons, or Bologna  sausages, both of which we found in great perfection in that  capital, where, indeed, there are excellent provisions of all  sorts. About ten in the morning we stopped to breakfast at some  auberge, where we always found bread, butter, and milk. In the  mean time, we ordered a poulard or two to be roasted, and these,  wrapped in a napkin, were put into the boot of the coach,  together with bread, wine, and water. About two or three in the  afternoon, while the horses were changing, we laid a cloth upon  our knees, and producing our store, with a few earthen plates, discussed our short meal without further ceremony. This was  followed by a dessert of grapes and other fruit, which we had  also provided. I must own I found these transient refreshments  much more agreeable than any regular meal I ate upon the road.  The wine commonly used in Burgundy is so weak and thin, that you  would not drink it in England. The very best which they sell at  Dijon, the capital of the province, for three livres a bottle, is  in strength, and even in flavour, greatly inferior to what I have  drank in London. I believe all the first growth is either  consumed in the houses of the noblesse, or sent abroad to foreign  markets. I have drank excellent Burgundy at Brussels for a florin  a bottle; that is, little more than twenty pence sterling.

The country from the forest of Fontainbleau to the Lyonnois,  through which we passed, is rather agreeable than fertile, being  part of Champagne and the dutchy of Burgundy, watered by three  pleasant pastoral rivers, the Seine, the Yonne, and the Saone.  The flat country is laid out chiefly for corn; but produces more  rye than wheat. Almost all the ground seems to be ploughed up, so  that there is little or nothing lying fallow. There are very few  inclosures, scarce any meadow ground, and, so far as I could  observe, a great scarcity of cattle. We sometimes found it very  difficult  to procure half a pint of milk for our tea. In  Burgundy I saw a peasant ploughing the ground with a jack-ass, a  lean cow, and a he-goat, yoked together. It is generally  observed, that a great number of black cattle are bred and fed on  the mountains of Burgundy, which are the highest lands in France;  but I saw very few. The peasants in France are so wretchedly  poor, and so much oppressed by their landlords, that they cannot  afford to inclose their grounds, or give a proper respite to  their lands; or to stock their farms with a sufficient number of  black cattle to produce the necessary manure, without which  agriculture can never be carried to any degree of perfection.  Indeed, whatever efforts a few individuals may make for the  benefit of their own estates, husbandry in France will never be  generally improved, until the farmer is free and independent.

From the frequency of towns and villages, I should imagine this  country is very populous; yet it must be owned, that the towns  are in general thinly inhabited. I saw a good number of country  seats and plantations near tile banks of the rivers, on each  side; and a great many convents, sweetly situated, on rising  grounds, where the air is most pure, and the prospect most  agreeable. It is surprising to see how happy the founders of  those religious houses have been in their choice of situations,  all the world over.

In passing through this country, I was very much struck with the  sight of large ripe clusters of grapes, entwined with the briars  and thorns of common hedges on the wayside. The mountains of  Burgundy are covered with vines from the bottom to the top, and  seem to be raised by nature on purpose to extend the surface, and  to expose it the more advantageously to the rays of the sun. The  vandange was but just begun, and the people were employed in  gathering the grapes; but I saw no signs of festivity among them.  Perhaps their joy was a little damped by the bad prospect of  their harvest; for they complained that the weather had been so  unfavourable as to hinder the grapes from ripening. I thought,  indeed, there was something uncomfortable in seeing the vintage  thus retarded till the beginning of winter: for, in some parts, I  found the weather extremely cold; particularly at a place called  Maison-neuve, where we lay, there was a hard frost, and in the  morning the pools were covered with a thick crust of ice. My  personal adventures on the road were such as will not bear a  recital. They consisted of petty disputes with landladies, post- masters, and postillions. The highways seem to be perfectly safe.  We did not find that any robberies were ever committed, although  we did not see one of the marechaussee from Paris to Lyons. You  know the marechaussee are a body of troopers well mounted,  maintained in France as safe-guards to the public roads. It is a  reproach upon England that some such patrol is not appointed for  the protection of travellers.

At Sens in Champagne, my servant, who had rode on before to  bespeak fresh horses, told me, that the domestic of another  company had been provided before him, altho' it was not his turn,  as he had arrived later at the post. Provoked at this partiality,  I resolved to chide the post-master, and accordingly addressed  myself to a person who stood at the door of the auberge. He was a  jolly figure, fat and fair, dressed in an odd kind of garb, with  a gold laced cap on his head, and a cambric handkerchief pinned  to his middle. The sight of such a fantastic petit maitre, in the  character of a post-master, increased my spleen. I called to him  with an air of authority, mixed with indignation, and when he  came up to the coach, asked in a peremptory tone, if he did not  understand the king's ordonnance concerning the regulation of the  posts? He laid his hand upon his breast; but before he could make  any answer, I pulled out the post-book, and began to read, with  great vociferation, the article which orders, that the traveller  who comes first shall be first served. By this time the fresh  horses being put to the carriage, and the postillions mounted,  the coach set off all of a sudden, with uncommon speed. I  imagined the post-master had given the fellows a signal to be  gone, and, in this persuasion, thrusting my head out at the  window, I bestowed some epithets upon him, which must have  sounded very harsh in the ears of a Frenchman. We stopped for a  refreshment at a little town called Joigne-ville, where (by the  bye) I was scandalously imposed upon, and even abused by a virago  of a landlady; then proceeding to the next stage, I was given to  understand we could not be supplied with fresh horses. Here I  perceived at the door of the inn, the same person whom I had  reproached at Sens. He came up to the coach, and told me, that  notwithstanding what the guides had said, I should have fresh  horses in a few minutes. I imagined he was master both of this  house and the auberge at Sens, between which he passed and  repassed occasionally; and that he was now desirous of making me  amends for the affront he had put upon me at the other place.  Observing that one of the trunks behind was a little displaced,  he assisted my servant in adjusting it: then he entered into  conversation with me, and gave me to understand, that in a post-chaise,  which we had passed, was an English gentleman on his  return from Italy. I wanted to know who he was, and when he said  he could not tell, I asked him, in a very abrupt manner, why he  had not enquired of his servant. He shrugged up his shoulders, and retired to the inn door. Having waited  about half an hour, I beckoned to him, and when he approached,  upbraided him with having told me that I should be supplied with  fresh horses in a few minutes: he seemed shocked, and answered,  that he thought he had reason for what he said, observing, that  it was as disagreeable to him as to me to wait for a relay. As it  began to rain, I pulled up the glass in his face, and he withdrew  again to the door, seemingly ruffled at my deportment. In a  little time the horses arrived, and three of them were  immediately put to a very handsome post-chaise, into which he  stepped, and set out, accompanied by a man in a rich livery on  horseback. Astonished at this circumstance, I asked the hostler  who he was, and he replied, that he was a man of fashion (un  seigneur) who lived in the neighbourhood of Auxerre. I was much  mortified to find that I had treated a nobleman so scurvily, and  scolded my own people for not having more penetration than  myself. I dare say he did not fail to descant upon the brutal  behaviour of the Englishman; and that my mistake served with him  to confirm the national reproach of bluntness, and ill breeding,  under which we lie in this country. The truth is, I was that day  more than usually peevish, from the bad weather, as well as from  the dread of a fit of the asthma, with which I was threatened:  and I dare say my appearance seemed as uncouth to him, as his  travelling dress appeared to me. I had a grey mourning frock  under a wide great coat, a bob wig without powder, a very large  laced hat, and a meagre, wrinkled, discontented countenance.

The fourth night of our journey we lay at Macon, and the next day  passed through the Lyonnois, which is a fine country, full of  towns, villages, and gentlemen's houses. In passing through the  Maconnois, we saw a great many fields of Indian corn, which grows  to the height of six or seven feet: it is made into flour for the  use of the common people, and goes by the name of Turkey wheat.  Here likewise, as well as in Dauphine, they raise a vast quantity  of very large pompions, with the contents of which they thicken  their soup and ragouts.

As we travelled only while the sun was up, on account of my ill  health, and the post horses in France are in bad order, we seldom  exceeded twenty leagues a day.

I was directed to a lodging-house at Lyons, which being full they  shewed us to a tavern, where I was led up three pair of stairs,  to an apartment consisting of three paltry chambers, for which  the people demanded twelve livres a day: for dinner and supper  they asked thirty-two, besides three livres for my servant; so  that my daily expence would have amounted to about forty-seven  livres, exclusive of breakfast and coffee in the afternoon. I was  so provoked at this extortion, that, without answering one word,  I drove to another auberge, where I now am, and pay at the rate  of two-and-thirty livres a day, for which I am very badly lodged,  and but very indifferently entertained. I mention these  circumstances to give you an idea of the imposition to which  strangers are subject in this country. It must be owned, however,  that in the article of eating, I might save half the money by  going to the public ordinary; but this is a scheme of oeconomy,  which (exclusive of other disagreeable circumstances) neither my  own health, nor that of my wife permits me to embrace. My journey  from Paris to Lyons, including the hire of the coach, and all  expences on the road, has cost me, within a few shillings, forty  loui'dores. From Paris our baggage (though not plombe) was not  once examined till we arrived in this city, at the gate of which  we were questioned by one of the searchers, who, being tipt with  half a crown, allowed us to proceed without further enquiry,

I purposed to stay in Lyons until I should receive some letters I  expected from London, to be forwarded by my banker at Paris: but  the enormous expence of living in this manner has determined me  to set out in a day or two for Montpellier, although that place  is a good way out of the road to Nice. My reasons for taking that  route I shall communicate in my next. Mean-while, I am ever,-- Dear Sir, Your affectionate and obliged humble servant.

LETTER IX

MONTPELLIER, November 5, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--The city of Lyons has been so often and so  circumstantially described, that I cannot pretend to say any  thing new on the subject. Indeed, I know very little of it, but  what I have read in books; as I had but one day to make a tour of  the streets, squares, and other remarkable places. The bridge  over the Rhone seems to be so slightly built, that I should  imagine it would be one day carried away by that rapid river;  especially as the arches are so small, that, after great rains  they are sometimes bouchees, or stopped up; that is, they do not  admit a sufficient passage for the encreased body of the water.  In order to remedy this dangerous defect, in some measure, they  found an artist some years ago, who has removed a middle pier,  and thrown two arches into one. This alteration they looked upon  as a masterpiece in architecture, though there is many a common  mason in England, who would have undertaken and performed the  work, without valuing himself much upon the enterprize. This  bridge, as well as that of St. Esprit, is built, not in a strait  line across the river, but with a curve, which forms a convexity  to oppose the current. Such a bend is certainly calculated for  the better resisting the general impetuosity of the stream, and  has no bad effect to the eye.

Lyons is a great, populous, and flourishing city but I am  surprised to find it is counted a healthy place, and that the air  of it is esteemed favourable to pulmonic disorders. It is  situated on the confluence of two large rivers, from which there  must be a great evaporation, as well as from the low marshy  grounds, which these rivers often overflow. This must render the  air moist, frouzy, and even putrid, if it was not well ventilated  by winds from the mountains of Swisserland; and in the latter end  of autumn, it must be subject to fogs. The morning we set out  from thence, the whole city and adjacent plains were covered with  so thick a fog, that we could not distinguish from the coach the  head of the foremost mule that drew it. Lyons is said to be very  hot in summer, and very cold in winter; therefore I imagine must  abound with inflammatory and intermittent disorders in the spring  and fall of the year.

My reasons for going to Montpellier, which is out of the strait  road to Nice, were these. Having no acquaintance nor  correspondents in the South of France, I had desired my credit  might be sent to the same house to which my heavy baggage was  consigned. I expected to find my baggage at Cette, which is the  sea-port of Montpellier; and there I also hoped to find a vessel,  in which I might be transported by sea to Nice, without further  trouble. I longed to try what effect the boasted air of  Montpellier would have upon my constitution; and I had a great  desire to see the famous monuments of antiquity in and about the  ancient city of Nismes, which is about eight leagues short of  Montpellier.

At the inn where we lodged, I found a return berline, belonging  to Avignon, with three mules, which are the animals commonly used  for carriages in this country. This I hired for five loui'dores.  The coach was large, commodious, and well-fitted; the mules were  strong and in good order; and the driver, whose name was Joseph,  appeared to be a sober, sagacious, intelligent fellow, perfectly  well acquainted with every place in the South of France. He told  me he was owner of the coach, but I afterwards learned, he was no  other than a hired servant. I likewise detected him in some  knavery, in the course of our journey; and plainly perceived he  had a fellow-feeling with the inn-keepers on the road; but, in  other respects, he was very obliging, serviceable, and even  entertaining. There are some knavish practices of this kind, at  which a traveller will do well to shut his eyes, for his own ease  and convenience. He will be lucky if he has to do with a sensible  knave, like Joseph, who understood his interest too well to be  guilty of very flagrant pieces of imposition.

A man, impatient to be at his journey's end, will find this a  most disagreeable way of travelling. In summer it must be quite  intolerable. The mules are very sure, but very slow. The journey  seldom exceeds eight leagues, about four and twenty miles a day:  and as those people have certain fixed stages, you are sometimes  obliged to rise in a morning before day; a circumstance very  grievous to persons in ill health. These inconveniences, however,  were over-balanced by other agreemens. We no, sooner quitted  Lyons, than we got into summer weather, and travelling through a  most romantic country, along the banks of the Rhone, had  opportunities (from the slowness of our pace) to contemplate its  beauties at leisure.

The rapidity of the Rhone is, in a great measure, owing to its  being confined within steep banks on each side. These are formed  almost through its whole course, by a double chain of mountains,  which rise with all abrupt ascent from both banks of the river.  The mountains are covered with vineyards, interspersed with small  summer-houses, and in many places they are crowned with churches,  chapels, and convents, which add greatly to the romantic beauty  of the prospect. The highroad, as far as Avignon, lies along the  side of the river, which runs almost in a straight line, and  affords great convenience for inland commerce. Travellers, bound  to the southern parts of France, generally embark in the  diligence at Lyons, and glide down this river with great  velocity, passing a great number of towns and villages on each  side, where they find ordinaries every day at dinner and supper.  In good weather, there is no danger in this method of travelling,  'till you come to the Pont St. Esprit, where the stream runs  through the arches with such rapidity, that the boat is sometimes  overset. But those passengers who are under any apprehension are  landed above-bridge, and taken in again, after the boat has  passed, just in the same manner as at London Bridge. The boats  that go up the river are drawn against the stream by oxen, which  swim through one of the arches of this bridge, the driver sitting  between the horns of the foremost beast. We set out from Lyons  early on Monday morning, and as a robbery had been a few days  before committed in that neighbourhood, I ordered my servant to  load my musquetoon with a charge of eight balls. By the bye, this  piece did not fail to attract the curiosity and admiration of the  people in every place through which we passed. The carriage no  sooner halted, than a crowd immediately surrounded the man to  view the blunderbuss, which they dignified with the title of  petit canon. At Nuys in Burgundy, he fired it in the air, and the  whole mob dispersed, and scampered off like a flock of sheep. In  our journey hither, we generally set out in a morning at eight  o'clock, and travelled 'till noon, when the mules were put up and  rested a couple of hours. During this halt, Joseph went to  dinner, and we went to breakfast, after which we ordered  provision for our refreshment in the coach, which we took about  three or four in the afternoon, halting for that purpose, by the  side of some transparent brook, which afforded excellent water to  mix with our wine. In this country I was almost poisoned with  garlic, which they mix in their ragouts, and all their sauces;  nay, the smell of it perfumes the very chambers, as well as every  person you approach. I was also very sick of been ficas, grives,  or thrushes, and other little birds, which are served up twice a  day at all ordinaries on the road. They make their appearance in  vine-leaves, and are always half raw, in which condition the  French choose to eat them, rather than run the risque of losing  the juice by over-roasting.

The peasants on the South of France are poorly clad, and look as  if they were half-starved, diminutive, swarthy, and meagre; and  yet the common people who travel, live luxuriously on the road.  Every carrier and mule-driver has two meals a day, consisting  each of a couple of courses and a dessert, with tolerable small  wine. That which is called hermitage, and grows in this province  of Dauphine, is sold on the spot for three livres a bottle. The  common draught, which you have at meals in this country, is  remarkably strong, though in flavour much inferior to that of  Burgundy. The accommodation is tolerable, though they demand  (even in this cheap country) the exorbitant price of four livres  a head for every meal, of those who choose to eat in their own  apartments. I insisted, however, upon paying them with three,  which they received, though not without murmuring and seeming  discontented. In this journey, we found plenty of good mutton,  pork, poultry, and game, including the red partridge, which is  near twice as big as the partridge of England. Their hares are  likewise surprisingly large and juicy. We saw great flocks of  black turkeys feeding in the fields, but no black cattle; and  milk was so scarce, that sometimes we were obliged to drink our  tea without it.

One day perceiving a meadow on the side of the road, full of a  flower which I took to be the crocus, I desired my servant to  alight and pull some of them. He delivered the musquetoon to  Joseph, who began to tamper with it, and off it went with a  prodigious report, augmented by an eccho from the mountains that  skirted the road. The mules were so frightened, that they went  off at the gallop; and Joseph, for some minutes, could neither  manage the reins, nor open his mouth. At length he recollected  himself, and the cattle were stopt, by the assistance of the  servant, to whom he delivered the musquetoon, with a significant  shake of the head. Then alighting from the box, he examined the  heads of his three mules, and kissed each of them in his turn.  Finding they had received no damage, he came up to the coach, with a pale visage and staring eyes, and  said it was God's mercy he had not killed his beasts. I answered,  that it was a greater mercy he had not killed his passengers; for  the muzzle of the piece might have been directed our way as well  as any other, and in that case Joseph might have been hanged for  murder. "I had as good be hanged (said he) for murder, as be  ruined by the loss of my cattle." This adventure made such an  impression upon him, that he recounted it to every person we met;  nor would he ever touch the blunderbuss from that day. I was  often diverted with the conversation of this fellow, who was very  arch and very communicative. Every afternoon, he used to stand  upon the foot-board, at the side of the coach, and discourse with  us an hour together. Passing by the gibbet of Valencia, which  stands very near the high-road, we saw one body hanging quite  naked, and another lying broken on the wheel. I recollected, that  Mandrin had suffered in this place, and calling to Joseph to  mount the foot-board, asked if he had ever seen that famous  adventurer. At mention of the name of Mandrin, the tear started  in Joseph's eye, he discharged a deep sigh, or rather groan, and  told me he was his dear friend. I was a little startled at this  declaration; however, I concealed my thoughts, and began to ask  questions about the character and exploits of a man who had made  such noise in the world.

He told me, Mandrin was a native of Valencia, of mean extraction:  that he had served as a soldier in the army, and afterwards acted  as maltotier, or tax-gatherer: that at length he turned  contrebandier, or smuggler, and by his superior qualities, raised  himself to the command of a formidable gang, consisting of five  hundred persons well armed with carbines and pistols. He had  fifty horses for his troopers, and three hundred mules for the  carriage of his merchandize. His head-quarters were in Savoy: but  he made incursions into Dauphine, and set the marechaussee at  defiance. He maintained several bloody skirmishes with these  troopers, as well as with other regular detachments, and in all  those actions signalized himself by his courage and conduct.  Coming up at one time with fifty of the marechaussee who were in  quest of him, he told them very calmly, he had occasion for their  horses and acoutrements, and desired them to dismount. At that  instant his gang appeared, and the troopers complied with his  request, without making the least opposition. Joseph said he was  as generous as he was brave, and never molested travellers, nor  did the least injury to the poor; but, on the contrary, relieved  them very often. He used to oblige the gentlemen in the country  to take his merchandize, his tobacco, brandy, and muslins, at his  own price; and, in the same manner, he laid the open towns under  contribution. When he had no merchandize, he borrowed money off  them upon the credit of what he should bring when he was better  provided. He was at last betrayed, by his wench, to the colonel  of a French regiment, who went with a detachment in the night to  the place where he lay in Savoy, and surprized him in a wood-house,  while his people were absent in different parts of the  country. For this intrusion, the court of France made an apology  to the king of Sardinia, in whose territories he was taken.  Mandrin being conveyed to Valencia, his native place, was for  some time permitted to go abroad, under a strong guard, with  chains upon his legs; and here he conversed freely with all sorts  of people, flattering himself with the hopes of a pardon, in  which, however, he was disappointed. An order came from court to  bring him to his trial, when he was found guilty, and condemned  to be broke on the wheel. Joseph said he drank a bottle of wine  with him the night before his execution. He bore his fate with  great resolution, observing that if the letter which he had  written to the King had been delivered, he certainly should have  obtained his Majesty's pardon. His executioner was one of his own  gang, who was pardoned on condition of performing this office.  You know, that criminals broke upon the wheel are first  strangled, unless the sentence imports, that they shall be broke  alive. As Mandrin had not been guilty of cruelty in the course of  his delinquency, he was indulged with this favour. Speaking to  the executioner, whom he had formerly commanded, "Joseph (dit  il), je ne veux pas que tu me touche, jusqu'a ce que je sois roid  mort," "Joseph," said he, "thou shalt not touch me till I am  quite dead."--Our driver had no sooner pronounced these words,  than I was struck with a suspicion, that he himself was the  executioner of his friend Mandrin. On that suspicion, I  exclaimed, "Ah! ah! Joseph!" The fellow blushed up to the eyes,  and said, Oui, son nom etoit Joseph aussi bien que le mien, "Yes,  he was called Joseph, as I am." I did not think proper to  prosecute the inquiry; but did not much relish the nature of  Joseph's connexions. The truth is, he had very much the looks of  a ruffian; though, I must own, his behaviour was very obliging  and submissive.

On the fifth day of our journey, in the morning, we passed the  famous bridge at St. Esprit, which to be sure is a great  curiosity, from its length, and the number of its arches: but  these arches are too small: the passage above is too narrow; and  the whole appears to be too slight, considering the force and  impetuosity of the river. It is not comparable to the bridge at  Westminster, either for beauty or solidity. Here we entered  Languedoc, and were stopped to have our baggage examined; but the  searcher, being tipped with a three-livre piece, allowed it to  pass. Before we leave Dauphine, I must observe, that I was not a  little surprized to see figs and chestnuts growing in the open  fields, at the discretion of every passenger. It was this day I  saw the famous Pont du Garde; but as I cannot possibly include,  in this letter, a description of that beautiful bridge, and of  the other antiquities belonging to Nismes, I will defer it till  the next opportunity, being, in the mean time, with equal truth  and affection,--Dear Sir, Your obliged humble Servant.

LETTER X

MONTPELLIER, November 10, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--By the Pont St. Esprit we entered the province of  Languedoc, and breakfasted at Bagniole, which is a little paltry  town; from whence, however, there is an excellent road through a  mountain, made at a great expence, and extending about four  leagues. About five in the afternoon, I had the first glimpse of  the famous Pont du Garde, which stands on the right hand, about  the distance of a league from the post-road to Nismes, and about  three leagues from that city. I would not willingly pass for a  false enthusiast in taste; but I cannot help observing, that from  the first distant view of this noble monument, till we came near  enough to see it perfectly, I felt the strongest emotions of  impatience that I had ever known; and obliged our driver to put  his mules to the full gallop, in the apprehension that it would  be dark before we reached the place. I expected to find the  building, in some measure, ruinous; but was agreeably  disappointed, to see it look as fresh as the bridge at  Westminster. The climate is either so pure and dry, or the free-stone,  with which it is built, so hard, that the very angles of  them remain as acute as if they had been cut last year. Indeed,  some large stones have dropped out of the arches; but the whole  is admirably preserved, and presents the eye with a piece of  architecture, so unaffectedly elegant, so simple, and majestic,  that I will defy the most phlegmatic and stupid spectator to  behold it without admiration. It was raised in the Augustan age,  by the Roman colony of Nismes, to convey a stream of water  between two mountains, for the use of that city. It stands over  the river Gardon, which is a beautiful pastoral stream, brawling  among rocks, which form a number of pretty natural cascades, and  overshadowed on each side with trees and shrubs, which greatly  add to the rural beauties of the scene. It rises in the Cevennes,  and the sand of it produces gold, as we learn from Mr. Reaumur,  in his essay on this subject, inserted in the French Memoirs, for  the year 1718. If I lived at Nismes, or Avignon (which last city  is within four short leagues of it) I should take pleasure in  forming parties to come hither, in summer, to dine under one of  the arches of the Pont du Garde, on a cold collation.

This work consists of three bridges, or tire of arches, one above  another; the first of six, the second of eleven, and the third of  thirty-six. The height, comprehending the aqueduct on the top,  amounts to 174 feet three inches: the length between the two  mountains, which it unites, extends to 723. The order of  architecture is the Tuscan, but the symmetry of it is  inconceivable. By scooping the bases of the pilasters, of the  second tire of arches, they had made a passage for foot-travellers:  but though the antients far excelled us in beauty,  they certainly fell short of the moderns in point of conveniency.  The citizens of Avignon have, in this particular, improved the  Roman work with a new bridge, by apposition, constructed on the  same plan with that of the lower tire of arches, of which indeed  it seems to be a part, affording a broad and commodious passage  over the river, to horses and carriages of all kinds. The  aqueduct, for the continuance of which this superb work was  raised, conveyed a stream of sweet water from the fountain of  Eure, near the city of Uzes, and extended near six leagues in  length.

In approaching Nismes, you see the ruins of a Roman tower, built  on the summit of a hill, which over-looks the city. It seems to  have been intended, at first, as a watch, or signal-tower,  though, in the sequel, it was used as a fortress: what remains of  it, is about ninety feet high; the architecture of the Doric  order. I no sooner alighted at the inn, than I was presented with  a pamphlet, containing an account of Nismes and its antiquities,  which every stranger buys. There are persons too who attend in  order to shew the town, and you will always be accosted by some shabby antiquarian, who  presents you with medals for sale, assuring you they are genuine  antiques, and were dug out of the ruins of the Roman temple and  baths. All those fellows are cheats; and they have often laid  under contribution raw English travellers, who had more money  than discretion. To such they sell the vilest and most common  trash: but when they meet with a connoisseur, they produce some  medals which are really valuable and curious.

Nismes, antiently called Nemausis, was originally a colony of  Romans, settled by Augustus Caesar, after the battle of Actium.  It is still of considerable extent, and said to contain twelve  thousand families; but the number seems, by this account, to be  greatly exaggerated. Certain it is, the city must have been  formerly very extensive, as appears from the circuit of the  antient walls, the remains of which are still to be seen. Its  present size is not one third of its former extent. Its temples,  baths, statues, towers, basilica, and amphitheatre, prove it to  have been a city of great opulence and magnificence. At present,  the remains of these antiquities are all that make it respectable  or remarkable; though here are manufactures of silk and wool,  carried on with good success. The water necessary for these works  is supplied by a source at the foot of the rock, upon which the  tower is placed; and here were discovered the ruins of Roman  baths, which had been formed and adorned with equal taste and  magnificence. Among the rubbish they found a vast profusion of  columns, vases, capitals, cornices, inscriptions, medals,  statues, and among other things, the finger of a colossal statue  in bronze, which, according to the rules of proportion, must have  been fifteen feet high. From these particulars, it appears that  the edifices must have been spacious and magnificent. Part of a  tesselated pavement still remains. The antient pavement of the  bath is still intire; all the rubbish has been cleared away; and  the baths, in a great measure, restored on the old plan, though  they are not at present used for any thing but ornament. The  water is collected into two vast reservoirs, and a canal built  and lined with hewn stone. There are three handsome bridges  thrown over this vast canal. It contains a great body of  excellent water, which by pipes and other small branching canals,  traverses the town, and is converted to many different purposes  of oeconomy and manufacture. Between the Roman bath and these  great canals, the ground is agreeably laid out in pleasure-walks.  for the recreation of the inhabitants. Here are likewise  ornaments of architecture, which savour much more of French  foppery, than of the simplicity and greatness of the antients. It  is very surprizing, that this fountain should produce such a  great body of water, as fills the basin of the source, the Roman  basin, two large deep canals three hundred feet in length, two  vast basins that make part of the great canal, which is eighteen  hundred feet long. eighteen feet deep, and forty-eight feet  broad. When I saw it, there was in it about eight or nine feet of  water, transparent as crystal. It must be observed, however, for  the honour of French cleanliness, that in the Roman basin,  through which this noble stream of water passes, I perceived two  washerwomen at work upon children's clouts and dirty linnen.  Surprized, and much disgusted at this filthy phaenomenon, I asked  by what means, and by whose permission, those dirty hags had got  down into the basin, in order to contaminate the water at its  fountain-head; and understood they belonged to the commandant of  the place, who had keys of the subterranean passage.

Fronting the Roman baths are the ruins of an antient temple,  which, according to tradition, was dedicated to Diana: but it has  been observed by connoisseurs, that all the antient temples of  this goddess were of the Ionic order; whereas, this is partly  Corinthian, and partly composite. It is about seventy foot long,  and six and thirty in breadth, arched above, and built of large  blocks of stone, exactly joined together without any cement. The walls are still  standing, with three great tabernacles at the further end,  fronting the entrance. On each side, there are niches in the  intercolumniation of the walls, together with pedestals and  shafts of pillars, cornices, and an entablature, which indicate  the former magnificence of the building. It was destroyed during  the civil war that raged in the reign of Henry III. of France.

It is amazing, that the successive irruptions of barbarous  nations, of Goths, Vandals, and Moors; of fanatic croisards,  still more sanguinary and illiberal than those Barbarians, should  have spared this temple, as well as two other still more noble  monuments of architecture, that to this day adorn the city of  Nismes: I mean the amphitheatre and the edifice, called Maison  Carree--The former of these is counted the finest monument of the  kind, now extant; and was built in the reign of Antoninus Pius,  who contributed a large sum of money towards its erection. It is  of an oval figure, one thousand and eighty feet in circumference,  capacious enough to hold twenty thousand spectators. The  architecture is of the Tuscan order, sixty feet high, composed of  two open galleries, built one over another, consisting each of  threescore arcades. The entrance into the arena was by four great  gates, with porticos; and the seats, of which there were thirty,  rising one above another, consisted of great blocks of stone,  many of which still remain. Over the north gate, appear two  bulls, in alto-relievo, extremely well executed, emblems which,  according to the custom of the Romans, signified that the  amphitheatre was erected at the expence of the people. There are  in other parts of it some work in bas-relief, and heads or busts  but indifferently carved. It stands in the lower part of the  town, and strikes the spectator with awe and veneration. The  external architecture is almost intire in its whole circuit; but  the arena is filled up with houses--This amphitheatre was  fortified as a citadel by the Visigoths, in the beginning of the  sixth century. They raised within it a castle, two towers of  which are still extant; and they surrounded it with a broad and  deep fossee, which was filled up in the thirteenth century. In  all the subsequent wars to which this city was exposed, it served  as the last resort of the citizens, and sustained a great number  of successive attacks; so that its preservation is almost  miraculous. It is likely, however, to suffer much more from the  Gothic avarice of its own citizens, some of whom are mutilating  it every day, for the sake of the stones, which they employ in  their own private buildings. It is surprizing, that the King's  authority has not been exerted to put an end to such sacrilegious  violation.

If the amphitheatre strikes you with an idea of greatness, the  Maison Carree enchants you with the most exquisite beauties of  architecture and sculpture. This is an edifice, supposed formerly  to have been erected by Adrian, who actually built a basilica in  this city, though no vestiges of it remain: but the following  inscription, which was discovered on the front of it, plainly  proves, that it was built by the inhabitants of Nismes, in honour  of Caius and Lucius Caesar, the grandchildren of Augustus by his  daughter Julia, the wife of Agrippa. 		

C. CAESARI. AVGVSTI. F. COS. L CAESARI. AVGMI. F. COS. DESIGNATO. PRINCIPIBVS IVVENTUTIS.

To Caius and Lucius Caesar, sons of Augustus, consuls elect,  Princes of the Roman youth.

This beautiful edifice, which stands upon a pediment six feet  high, is eighty-two feet long, thirty-five broad, and thirty-seven  high, without reckoning the pediment. The body of it is  adorned with twenty columns engaged in the wall, and the  peristyle, which is open, with ten detached pillars that support  the entablature. They are all of the Corinthian order, fluted and  embellished with capitals of the most exquisite sculpture, the  frize and cornice are much admired, and the foliage is esteemed  inimitable. The proportions of the building are so happily  united, as to give it an air of majesty and grandeur, which the  most indifferent spectator cannot behold without emotion. A man  needs not be a connoisseur in architecture, to enjoy these  beauties. They are indeed so exquisite that you may return to  them every day with a fresh appetite for seven years together.  What renders them the more curious, they are still entire, and  very little affected, either by the ravages of time, or the havoc  of war. Cardinal Alberoni declared, that it was a jewel that  deserved a cover of gold to preserve it from external injuries.  An Italian painter, perceiving a small part of the roof repaired  by modern French masonry, tore his hair, and exclaimed in a rage,  "Zounds! what do I see? harlequin's hat on the head of Augustus!"

Without all doubt it is ravishingly beautiful. The whole world  cannot parallel it; and I am astonished to see it standing  entire, like the effects of inchantment, after such a succession  of ages, every one more barbarous than another. The history of  the antiquities of Nismes takes notice of a grotesque statue,  representing two female bodies and legs, united under the head of  an old man; but, as it does not inform us where it is kept, I did  not see it.

The whole country of Languedoc is shaded with olive trees, the  fruit of which begins to ripen, and appears as black as sloes;  those they pickle are pulled green, and steeped for some time in  a lye made of quick lime or wood ashes, which extracts the bitter  taste, and makes the fruit tender. Without this preparation it is  not eatable. Under the olive and fig trees, they plant corn and  vines, so that there is not an inch of ground unlaboured: but  here are no open fields, meadows, or cattle to be seen. The  ground is overloaded; and the produce of it crowded to such a  degree, as to have a bad effect upon the eye, impressing the  traveller with the ideas of indigence and rapacity. The heat in  summer is so excessive, that cattle would find no green forage,  every blade of grass being parched up and destroyed. The weather  was extremely hot when we entered Montpellier, and put up at the  Cheval Blanc, counted the best auberge in the place, tho' in fact  it is a most wretched hovel, the habitation of darkness, dirt,  and imposition. Here I was obliged to pay four livres a meal for  every person in my family, and two livres at night for every bed,  though all in the same room: one would imagine that the further  we advance to the southward the living is the dearer, though in  fact every article of housekeeping is cheaper in Languedoc than  many other provinces of France. This imposition is owing to the  concourse of English who come hither, and, like simple birds of  passage, allow themselves to be plucked by the people of the  country, who know their weak side, and make their attacks  accordingly. They affect to believe, that all the travellers of  our country are grand seigneurs, immensely rich and incredibly  generous; and we are silly enough to encourage this opinion, by  submitting quietly to the most ridiculous extortion, as well as  by committing acts of the most absurd extravagance. This folly of  the English, together with a concourse of people from different  quarters, who come hither for the re-establishment of their  health, has rendered Montpellier one of the dearest places in the  South of France. The city, which is but small, stands upon a  rising ground fronting the Mediterranean, which is about three  leagues to the southward: on the other side is an agreeable  plain, extending about the same distance towards the mountains of  the Cevennes. The town is reckoned well built, and what the  French call bien percee; yet the streets are in general narrow,  and the houses dark. The air is counted salutary in catarrhous  consumptions, from its dryness and elasticity: but too sharp in  cases of pulmonary imposthumes.

It was at Montpellier that we saw for the first time any signs of  that gaiety and mirth for which the people of this country are  celebrated. In all other places through which we passed since our  departure from Lyons, we saw nothing but marks of poverty and  chagrin. We entered Montpellier on a Sunday, when the people were  all dressed in their best apparel. The streets were crowded; and  a great number of the better sort of both sexes sat upon stone  seats at their doors, conversing with great mirth and  familiarity. These conversations lasted the greatest part of the  night; and many of them were improved with musick both vocal and  instrumental: next day we were visited by the English residing in  the place, who always pay this mark of respect to new comers.  They consist of four or five families, among whom I could pass  the winter very agreeably, if the state of my health and other  reasons did not call me away.

Mr. L-- had arrived two days before me, troubled with the same  asthmatic disorder, under which I have laboured so long. He told  me he had been in quest of me ever since he left England. Upon  comparing notes, I found he had stopped at the door of a country  inn in Picardy, and drank a glass of wine and water, while I was  at dinner up stairs; nay, he had even spoke to my servant, and  asked who was his master, and the man, not knowing him, replied,  he was a gentleman from Chelsea. He had walked by the door of the  house where I lodged at Paris, twenty times, while I was in that  city; and the very day before he arrived at Montpellier, he had  passed our coach on the road.

The garrison of this city consists of two battalions, one of  which is the Irish regiment of Berwick, commanded by lieutenant  colonel Tents, a gentleman with whom we contracted an  acquaintance at Boulogne. He treats us with great politeness, and  indeed does every thing in his power to make the place agreeable  to us. The duke of Fitz-James, the governor, is expected here in  a little time. We have already a tolerable concert twice a week;  there will be a comedy in the winter; and the states of Provence  assemble in January, so that Montpellier will be extremely gay  and brilliant. These very circumstances would determine me to  leave it. I have not health to enjoy these pleasures: I cannot  bear a croud of company such as pours in upon us unexpectedly at  all hours; and I foresee, that in staying at Montpellier, I  should be led into an expence, which I can ill afford. I have  therefore forwarded the letter I received from general P--n, to  Mr. B--d, our consul at Nice, signifying my intention of going  thither, and explaining the kind of accommodation I would choose  to have at that place.

The day after our arrival, I procured tolerable lodgings in the  High Street, for which I pay fifty sols, something more than two  shillings per day; and I am furnished with two meals a day by a  traiteur for ten livres: but he finds neither the wine nor the  dessert; and indeed we are but indifferently served. Those  families who reside here find their account in keeping house.  Every traveller who comes to this, or any other, town in France  with a design to stay longer than a day or two, ought to write  beforehand to his correspondent to procure furnished lodgings, to  which he may be driven immediately, without being under the  necessity of lying in an execrable inn; for all the inns of this  country are execrable.

My baggage is not yet arrived by the canal of Languedoc; but that  gives me no disturbance, as it is consigned to the care of Mr.  Ray, an English merchant and banker of this place; a gentleman of  great probity and worth, from whom I have received repeated marks  of uncommon friendship and hospitality.

The next time you hear of me will be from Nice: mean-while, I  remain always,--Dear Sir, Your affectionate humble servant.

LETTER XI

MONTPELLIER, November 12.

DEAR DOCTOR--I flattered myself with the hope of much amusement  during my short stay at Montpellier.--The University, the  Botanical Garden, the State of Physic in this part of the world, and the information I received  of a curious collection of manuscripts, among which I hoped to  find something for our friend Dr. H--r; all these particulars  promised a rich fund of entertainment, which, however, I cannot  enjoy.

A few days after my arrival, it began to rain with a southerly  wind, and continued without ceasing the best part of a week,  leaving the air so loaded with vapours, that there was no walking  after sun-set; without being wetted by the dew almost to the  skin. I have always found a cold and damp atmosphere the most  unfavourable of any to my constitution. My asthmatical disorder.  which had not given me much disturbance since I left Boulogne,  became now very troublesome, attended with fever, cough spitting,  and lowness of spirits; and I wasted visibly every day. I was  favoured with the advice of Dr. Fitzmaurice, a very worthy  sensible physician settled in this place: but I had the curiosity  to know the opinion of the celebrated professor F--, who is the  Boerhaave of Montpellier. The account I had of his private  character and personal deportment, from some English people to  whom he was well known, left me no desire to converse with him:  but I resolved to consult with him on paper. This great lanthorn  of medicine is become very rich and very insolent; and in  proportion as his wealth increases, he is said to grow the more  rapacious. He piques himself upon being very slovenly, very  blunt, and very unmannerly; and perhaps to these qualifications  be owes his reputation rather than to any superior skill in  medicine. I have known them succeed in our own country; and seen  a doctor's parts estimated by his brutality and presumption.

F-- is in his person and address not unlike our old acquaintance  Dr. Sm--ie; he stoops much, dodges along, and affects to speak  the Patois, which is a corruption of the old Provencial tongue,  spoken by the vulgar in Languedoc and Provence. Notwithstanding  his great age and great wealth, he will still scramble up two  pair of stairs for a fee of six livres; and without a fee he will  give his advice to no person whatsoever.

He is said to have great practice in the venereal branch and to  be frequented by persons of both sexes infected with this  distemper, not only from every part of France, but also from  Spain, Italy, Germany, and England. I need say nothing of the  Montpellier method of cure, which is well known at London; but I  have some reason to think the great professor F--, has, like the  famous Mrs. Mapp, the bone-setter, cured many patients that were  never diseased.

Be that as it may, I sent my valet de place, who was his townsman  and acquaintance, to his house, with the following case, and a  loui'dore.

Annum aetatis, post quadragesimum, tertium, Temperamentum  humidum, crassum, pituitarepletum, catarrhis saepissime  profligatum. Catarrhus, febre, anxietate et dyspnoea, nunquam non  comitatus. Irritatio membranae piuitariae trachaealis, tussim  initio aridam, siliquosam, deinde vero excreationem copiosam  excitat: sputum albumini ovi simillimum.

Accedente febre, urina pallida, limpida: ad akmen flagrante,  colorem rubrum, subflavum induit: coctione peracta, sedimentum  lateritium deponit.

Appetitus raro deest: digestio segnior sed secura, non autem sine  ructu perfecta. Alvus plerumque stipata: excretio intestinalis  minima, ratione ingestorum habita. Pulsus frequens, vacillans,  exilis, quandoquidem etiam intermittens.

Febre una extincta, non deficit altera. Aliaque et eadem statim  nascitur. Aer paulo frigidior, vel humidior, vestimentum  inusitatum indutum; exercitatio paulullum nimia; ambulatio,  equitatio, in quovis vehiculo jactatio; haec omnia novos motus  suscitant. Systema nervosum maxime irritabile, organos patitur.  Ostiola in cute hiantia, materiei perspirabili, exitum  praebentia, clauduntur. Materies obstructa cumulatur; sanguine  aliisque humoribus circumagitur: fit plethora. Natura opprimi  nolens, excessus huius expulsionem conatur. Febris nova accenditur. Pars oneris, in membranam trachaealem laxatam ac  debilitatam transfertur. Glandulae pituitariae turgentes bronchia  comprimunt. Liber aeri transitus negatur: hinc respiratio  difficilis. Hac vero translatione febris minuitur: interdiu  remittitur. Dyspnoea autem aliaque symptomata vere  hypochondriaca, recedere nolunt. Vespere febris exacerbatur.  Calor, inquietudo, anxietas et asthma, per noctem grassantur. Ita  quotidie res agitur, donec. Vis vitae paulatim crisim efficit.  Seminis joctura, sive in somniis effusi, seu in gremio veneris  ejaculati, inter causas horum malorum nec non numeretur.

Quibusdam abhinc annis, exercitationibus juvenilibus subito  remissis, in vitam sedentariam lapsum. Animo in studia severiora  converso, fibre gradatim laxabantur. Inter legendum, et  scribendum inclinato corpore in pectus malum, ruebat. Morbo  ingruenti affectio scorbutica auxilium tulit. Invasio prima  nimium aspernata. Venientibus hostibus non occursum. Cunctando  res non restituta. Remedia convenientia stomachus perhorrescebat.  Gravescente dyspnoea phlebotomia frustra tentata. Sanguinis  missione vis vitae diminuta: fiebat pulsitis debilior, respiratio  difficilior. In pejus ruunt omnia. Febris anomala in febriculam  continuam mutata. Dyspnoea confirmata. Fibrarum compages soluta.  Valetudo penitus eversa.

His agitatus furiis, aeger ad mare provolat: in fluctus se  precipitem, dat: periculum factum spem non fefellit: decies  iteratum, felix faustumque evasit. Elater novus fibris  conciliatur. Febricula fugatur. Acris dyspnoea solvitur.  Beneficium dextra ripa partum, sinistra perditum. Superficie  corporis, aquae marine frigore et pondere, compressa et  contracta, interstitia fibrarum occluduntur: particulis  incrementi novis partes abrasas reficientibus, locus non datur.  Nutritio corporis, via pristina clausa, qua data porta ruit: in  membranam pulmonum, minus firmatam facile fertur, et glandulis  per sputum rejicitur.

Hieme pluviosa, regnante dolores renovantur; tametsi tempore  sereno equitatio profuit. Aestate morbus vix ullum  progrediebatur. Autumno, valetudine plus declinata, thermis  Bathoniensibus solatium haud frustra quaesitum. Aqua ista mire  medicata, externe aeque ac interne adhibita, malis levamen  attulit. Hiems altera, frigida, horrida, diuturna, innocua tamen  successit. Vere novo casus atrox diras procellas animo immisit:  toto corpore, tota mente tumultuatur. Patria relicta, tristitia,  sollecitudo, indignatio, et saevissima recordatio sequuntur.  Inimici priores furore inveterato revertuntur. Rediit febris  hectica: rediit asthma cum anxietate, tusse et dolore lateris  lancinanti.

Desperatis denique rebus, iterum ad mare, veluti ad anceps  remedium recurritur. Balneum hoc semper benignum. Dolor statim  avolat. Tertio die febris, retrocessit. Immersio quotidiana  antemeridiana, ad vices quinquaginta repetita, symptomata  graviora subjugavit.-- Manet vero tabes pituitaria: manet  temperamentum in catarrhos proclive. Corpus macrescit. Vires  delabuntur.

The professor's eyes sparkled at sight of the fee; and he desired  the servant to call next morning for his opinion of the case,  which accordingly I received in these words:

"On voit par cette relation que monsieur le consultant dont on  n'a pas juge a propos de dire l'age, mais qui nous paroit etre  adulte et d'un age passablement avance, a ete sujet cy devant a  des rhumes frequens accompagnes de fievre; on ne detaille point  (aucune epoque), on parle dans la relation d'asthme auquel il a  ete sujet, de scorbut ou affection scorbutique dont on ne dit pas  les symptomes. On nous fait scavoir qu'il s'est bien trouve de  l'immersion dans l'eau de la mer, et des eaux de Bath.

"On dit a present qu'il a une fievre pituitaire sans dire depuis  combien de temps. Qu'il lui reste toujours son temperament enclin  aux catharres. Que le corps maigrit, et que les forces se  perdent. On ne dit point s'il y a des exacerbations dans cette  fievre ou non, si le malade a appetit ou non, s'il tousse ou non,  s'il crache ou non, en un mot on n'entre dans aucun detail sur  ces objets, sur quoi le conseil soussigne estime que monsieur le  consultant est en fievre lente, et que vraisemblable le poumon  souffre de quelque tubercules qui peut-etre sont en fonte, ce que  nous aurions determine si dans la relation on avoit marque les  qualites de crachats.

"La cause fonchere de cette maladie doit etre imputee a une  lymphe epaisse et acrimonieuse, qui donne occasion a des  tubercules au pomon, qui etant mis on fonte fournissent au sang  des particules acres et le rendent tout acrimonieux.

"Les vues que l'on doit avoir dans ce cas sent de procurer des  bonnes digestions (quoique dans la relation ou ne dit pas un mot  sur les digestions) de jetter un douce detrempe dans la masse du  sang, d'en ebasser l'acrimonie et de l'adoucir, de diviser fort  doucement a lymphe, et de deterger le poumon, lui procurant meme  du calme suppose que la toux l'inquiete, quoique cependant on ne  dit pas un mot sur la toux dans la relation. C'est pourquoi on le  purgera avec 3 onces de manne, dissoutes dans un verre de  decoction de 3 dragmes de polypode de chesne, on passera ensuite  a des bouillons qui seront faits avec un petit poulet, la chair,  le sang, le coeur et le foye d'une tortue de grandeur mediocre  c'est a dire du poid de 8 a 12 onces avec sa coquille, une  poignee de chicoree amere de jardin, et une pincee de feuilles de  lierre terrestre vertes on seches. Ayant pris ces bouillons 15  matins on se purgera comme auparavant, pour en venir a des  bouillons qui seront faits avec la moitie d'un mou de veau, une  poignee de pimprenelle de jardin, et une dragme de racine  d'angelique concassee.

Ayant pris ces bouillons 15 matins, on se purgera somme  auparavant pour en venir an lait d'anesse que l'on prendra le  matin a jeun, a la dose de 12 a 16 onces y ajoutant un cuilleree  de sucre rape, on prendra ce lait le matin a jeun observant de  prendre pendant son usage de deux jours l'un un moment avant le  lait un bolus fait avec 15 grains de craye de Braincon en poudre  fine, 20 grains de corail prepare, 8 grains d'antihectique de  poterius, et ce qu'il faut de syrop de lierre terrestre, mais les  jour on ou ne prendra pas le bolus on prendra un moment avant le  lait 3 on 4 gouttes de bon baume de Canada detrempees dans un  demi cuilleree de syrop de lierre terrestre. Si le corps maigrit  de plus en plus, je suis d'avis que pendant l'usage du lait  d'anesse on soupe tous les soirs avec une soupe au lait de vache.

"On continuera l'usage du lait d'anesse tant, que le malade  pourra le supporter, ne le purgeant que par necessite et toujours  avec la medecine ordonnee.

"Au reste, si monsieur le consultant ne passe les nuits bien  calmes, il prendra chaque soir a l'heure de sommeil six grains  des pilules de cynoglosse, dent il augmentera la dose d'un grain  de plus toutes les fois que la dose du jour precedent, n'aura pas  ete suffisante pour lui faire passer la nuit bien calme.

"Si les malade tousse il usera soit de jour soit de nuit par  petites cuillerees a casse d'un looch, qui sera fait avec un once  de syrop de violat et un dragme de blanc de baleine.

"Si les crachats sent epais et qu'il crache difficilement, en ce  cas il prendra une ou deux fois le jour, demi dragme de blanc de  baleine reduit on poudre avec un pen de sucre candit qu'il  avalera avec une cuilleree d'eau.

"Enfin il doit observer un bon regime de vivre, c'est pourquoi il  fera toujours gras et seulement en soupes, bouilli et roti, il ne  mangera pas les herbes des soupes, et on salera peu son pot, il  se privera du beuf, cochon, chair noir, oiseaux d'eau, ragouts,  fritures, patisseries, alimens sales, epices, vinaigres, salades,  fruits, cruds, et autres crudites, alimens grossiers, ou de  difficille digestion, la boisson sera de l'eau tant soit peu  rougee de bon vin au diner seulement, et il ne prendra a souper  qu'une soupe.

Delibere a MONTPELLIER le 11 Novembre. F--. Professeur en l'universite honoraire.

Receu vingt et quatre livres.

I thought it was a little extraordinary that a learned professor  should reply in his mother tongue, to a case put in Latin: but I  was much more surprised, as you will also be, at reading his  answer, from which I was obliged to conclude, either that he did  not understand Latin; or that he had not taken the trouble to  read my memoire. I shall not make any remarks upon the stile of  his prescription, replete as it is with a disgusting repetition  of low expressions: but I could not but, in justice to myself,  point out to him the passages in my case which he had overlooked.  Accordingly, having marked them with letters, I sent it back,  with the following billet.

"Apparement Mons. F-- n'a pas donne beaucoup d'attention au  memoire de ma sante que j'ai on l'honneur de lui presenter-- 'Monsieur le consultant (dit il) dont on n'a pas juge it propos  de dire l'age.'--Mais on voit dans le memoire a No. 1. 'Annum  aetatis post quadragesimum tertium.'

"Mr. F-- dit que 'je n'ai pas marque aucune epoque. Mais a No. 2  du memoire il trouvera ces mots. 'Quibusdam abbinc annis.' J'ai  meme detaille le progres de la maladie pour trois ans  consecutifs.

"Mons. F-- observe, 'On no dit point s'il y a des exacerbations  dans cette fievre ou non.' Qu'il. Regarde la lettre B, il verra,  Vespere febris exacerbatur. Calor, inquietudo, anxietas et asthma  per noctem grassantur.'

"Mons. F-- remarque, 'On ne dit point si le malade a appetit ou non, s'il tousse ou non, s'il crache ou non, en un mot on n'entre  dans aucun detail sur ces objets.' Mais on voit toutes ces  circonstances detaillees dans la memoire a lettre A, 'Irritatio  membranae trachaealis tussim, initio aridam, siliquosam, deinde  vero excreationem copiosam excitat. Sputum albumini ovi  simillimum. Appetitus raro deest. Digestio segnior sed secura.'

"Mons. F-- observe encore, 'qu'on ne dit pas un mot sur la toux  dans la relation.' Mais j'ai dit encore a No. 3 de memoire,  'rediit febris hectica; rediit asthma cum anxietate, tusse et  dolore lateris lancinante.'

"Au reste, je ne puis pas me persuader qu'il y ait des tubercules  au poumon, parce que j'ai ne jamais crache de pus, ni autre chose  que de la pituite qui a beaucoup de ressemblance au blanc des  oeufs. Sputum albumini ovi simillimum. Il me paroit done que ma  maladie doit son origine a la suspension de l'exercice du corps,  au grand attachement d'esprit, et a une vie sedentaire qui a  relache le sisteme fibreux; et qu'a present on pent l'appeller  tubes pituitaria, non tubes purulenta. J'espere que Mons. Faura  la bonte de faire revision du memoire, et de m'en dire encore son  sentiment."

Considering the nature of the case, you see I could not treat him  more civilly. I desired the servant to ask when he should return  for an answer, and whether he expected another fee. He desired  him to come next morning, and, as the fellow assured me, gave him  to understand, that whatever monsieur might solicit, should be for  his (the servant's) advantage. In all probability he did not  expect another gratification, to which, indeed, he had no title.  Mons. F-- was undoubtedly much mortified to find himself detected  in such flagrant instances of unjustifiable negligence, arid like  all other persons in the same ungracious dilemma, instead of  justifying himself by reason or argument, had recourse to  recrimination. In the paper which he sent me next day, he  insisted in general that he had carefully perused the case (which  you will perceive was a self-evident untruth); he said the theory  it contained was idle; that he was sure it could not be written  by a physician; that, with respect to the disorder, he was still  of the same opinion; and adhered to his former prescription; but  if I had any doubts I might come to his house, and he would  resolve them.

I wrapt up twelve livres in the following note, and sent it to  his house.

"C'est ne pas sans raison que monsieur F-- jouit d'une si grande  reputation. Je n'ai plus de doutes, graces a Dieu et a monsieur  F--e. " "It is not without reason that monsieur Fizes enjoys such  a large share of reputation. I have no doubts remaining; thank  Heaven and monsieur Fizes."

To this I received for answer. "Monsieur n'a plus de doutes: j'en  suis charme. Receu douze livres. F--, &c." "Sir, you have no  doubts remaining; I am very glad of it. Received twelve livres.  Fizes, &c."

Instead of keeping his promise to the valet, he put the money in  his pocket; and the fellow returned in a rage, exclaiming that he  was un gros cheval de carosse, a great coach-horse.

I shall make no other comment upon the medicines, and the regimen  which this great Doctor prescribed; but that he certainly mistook  the case: that upon the supposition I actually laboured under a  purulent discharge from the lungs, his remedies savour strongly  of the old woman; and that there is a total blank with respect to  the article of exercise, which you know is so essential in all  pulmonary disorders. But after having perused my remarks upon his  first prescription, he could not possibly suppose that I had  tubercules, and was spitting up pus; therefore his persisting in  recommending the same medicines he had prescribed on that  supposition, was a flagrant absurdity.--If, for example, there  was no vomica in the lungs; and the business was to attenuate the  lymph, what could be more preposterous than to advise the chalk  of Briancon, coral, antihecticum poterii, and the balm of Canada?  As for the turtle-soupe, it is a good restorative and balsamic;  but, I apprehend, will tend to thicken rather than attenuate the  phlegm. He mentions not a syllable of the air, though it is  universally allowed, that the climate of Montpellier is  pernicious to ulcerated lungs; and here I cannot help recounting  a small adventure which our doctor had with a son of Mr. O--d,  merchant in the city of London. I had it from Mrs. St--e who was  on the spot. The young gentleman, being consumptive, consulted  Mr. F--, who continued visiting and prescribing for him a whole  month. At length, perceiving that he grew daily worse, "Doctor  (said he) I take your prescriptions punctually; but, instead of  being the better for them, I have now not an hour's remission  from the fever in the four-and-twenty.--I cannot conceive the  meaning of it." F--, who perceived he had not long to live, told  him the reason was very plain: the air of Montpellier was too  sharp for his lungs, which required a softer climate. "Then  you're a sordid villain (cried the young man) for allowing me to  stay here till my constitution is irretrievable." He set out  immediately for Tholouse, and in a few weeks died in the  neighbourhood of that city.

I observe that the physicians in this country pay no regard to  the state of the solids in chronical disorders, that exercise and  the cold bath are never prescribed, that they seem to think the  scurvy is entirely an English disease; and that, in all  appearance, they often confound the symptoms of it, with those of  the venereal distemper. Perhaps I may be more particular on this  subject in a subsequent letter. In the mean time, I am ever,-- Dear Sir, Yours sincerely.

LETTER XII

NICE, December 6, 1763.

DEAR SIR,--The inhabitants of Montpellier are sociable, gay, and  good-tempered. They have a spirit of commerce, and have erected  several considerable manufactures, in the neighbourhood of the  city. People assemble every day to take the air on the esplanade,  where there is a very good walk, just without the gate of the  citadel: but, on the other side of the town, there is another  still more agreeable, called the peirou, from whence there is a  prospect of the Mediterranean on one side, and of the Cevennes on  the other. Here is a good equestrian statue of Louis XIV, fronting one gate of the city, which is built in form of a  triumphal arch, in honour of the same monarch. Immediately under  the pierou is the physic garden, and near it an arcade just  finished for an aqueduct, to convey a stream of water to the  upper parts of the city. Perhaps I should have thought this a  neat piece of work, if I had not seen the Pont du Garde: but,  after having viewed the Roman arches, I could not look upon this  but with pity and contempt. It is a wonder how the architect  could be so fantastically modern, having such a noble model, as  it were, before his eyes.

There are many protestants at this place, as well as at Nismes,  and they are no longer molested on the score of religion. They  have their conventicles in the country, where they assemble  privately for worship. These are well known; and detachments are  sent out every Sunday to intercept them; but the officer has  always private directions to take another route. Whether this  indulgence comes from the wisdom and lenity of the government, or  is purchased with money of the commanding officer, I cannot  determine: but certain it is, the laws of France punish capitally  every protestant minister convicted of having performed the  functions of his ministry in this kingdom; and one was hanged  about two years ago, in the neighbourhood of Montauban.

The markets in Montpellier are well supplied with fish, poultry,  butcher's meat, and game, at reasonable rates. The wine of the  country is strong and harsh, and never drank, but when mixed with  water. Burgundy is dear, and so is the sweet wine of Frontignan,  though made in the neighbourhood of Cette. You know it is famous  all over Europe, and so are the liqueurs, or drams of various  sorts, compounded and distilled at Montpellier. Cette is the sea-port,  about four leagues from that city: but the canal of  Languedoc comes up within a mile of it; and is indeed a great  curiosity: a work in all respects worthy of a Colbert, under  whose auspices it was finished. When I find such a general  tribute of respect and veneration paid to the memory of that  great man, I am astonished to see so few monuments of public  utility left by other ministers. One would imagine, that even the  desire of praise would prompt a much greater number to exert  themselves for the glory and advantage of their country; yet in  my opinion, the French have been ungrateful to Colbert, in the  same proportion as they have over-rated the character of his  master. Through all France one meets with statues and triumphal  arches erected to Louis XIV, in consequence of his victories; by  which, likewise, he acquired the title of Louis le Grand. But how  were those victories obtained? Not by any personal merit of  Louis. It was Colbert who improved his finances, and enabled him  to pay his army. It was Louvois that provided all the necessaries  of war. It was a Conde, a Turenne, a Luxemburg, a Vendome, who  fought his battles; and his first conquests, for which he was  deified by the pen of adulation, were obtained almost without  bloodshed, over weak, dispirited, divided, and defenceless  nations. It was Colbert that improved the marine, instituted  manufactures, encouraged commerce, undertook works of public  utility, and patronized the arts and sciences. But Louis (you  will say) had the merit of choosing and supporting those  ministers, and those generals. I answer, no. He found Colbert and  Louvois already chosen: he found Conde and Turenne in the very  zenith of military reputation. Luxemburg was Conde's pupil; and  Vendome, a prince of the blood, who at first obtained the command  of armies in consequence of his high birth, and happened to turn  out a man of genius. The same Louis had the sagacity to revoke  the edict of Nantz; to entrust his armies to a Tallard, a  Villeroy, and a Marsin. He had the humanity to ravage the  country, burn the towns, and massacre the people of the  Palatinate. He had the patriotism to impoverish and depopulate  his own kingdom, in order to prosecute schemes of the most  lawless ambition. He had the Consolation to beg a peace from  those he had provoked to war by the most outrageous insolence;  and he had the glory to espouse Mrs. Maintenon in her old age,  the widow of the buffoon Scarron. Without all doubt, it was from  irony he acquired the title le Grand.

Having received a favourable answer from Mr. B--, the English  consul at Nice, and recommended the care of my heavy baggage to  Mr. Ray, who undertook to send it by sea from Cette to  Villefranche, I hired a coach and mules for seven loui'dores, and  set out from Montpellier on the 13th of November, the weather  being agreeable, though the air was cold and frosty. In other  respects there were no signs of winter: the olives were now ripe,  and appeared on each side of the road as black as sloes; and the  corn was already half a foot high. On the second day of our  journey, we passed the Rhone on a bridge of boats at Buccaire,  and lay on the other side at Tarrascone. Next day we put up at a  wretched place called Orgon, where, however, we were regaled with  an excellent supper; and among other delicacies, with a dish of  green pease. Provence is a pleasant country, well cultivated; but  the inns are not so good here as in Languedoc, and few of them  are provided with a certain convenience which an English  traveller can very ill dispense with. Those you find are  generally on the tops of houses, exceedingly nasty; and so much  exposed to the weather, that a valetudinarian cannot use them  without hazard of his life. At Nismes in Languedoc, where we  found the Temple of Cloacina in a most shocking condition, the  servant-maid told me her mistress had caused it to be made on  purpose for the English travellers; but now she was very sorry  for what she had done, as all the French who frequented her  house, instead of using the seat, left their offerings on the  floor, which she was obliged to have cleaned three or four times  a day. This is a degree of beastliness, which would appear  detestable even in the capital of North-Britain. On the fourth  day of our pilgrimage, we lay in the suburbs of Aix, but did not  enter the city, which I had a great curiosity to see. The  villainous asthma baulked me of that satisfaction. I was pinched  with the cold, and impatient to reach a warmer climate. Our next  stage was at a paltry village, where we were poorly entertained.  I looked so ill in the morning, that the good woman of the house,  who was big with child, took me by the hand at parting, and even  shed tears, praying fervently that God would restore me to my  health. This was the only instance of sympathy, compassion, or  goodness of heart, that I had met with among the publicans of  France. Indeed at Valencia, our landlady, understanding I was  travelling to Montpellier for my health would have dissuaded me  from going thither; and exhorted me, in particular, to beware of  the physicians, who were all a pack of assassins. She advised me  to eat fricassees of chickens, and white meat, and to take a good  bouillon every morning.

A bouillon is an universal remedy among the good people of  France; insomuch, that they have no idea of any person's dying,  after having swallowed un bon bouillon. One of the English  gentlemen, who were robbed and murdered about thirty years ago  between Calais and Boulogne, being brought to the post-house of  Boulogne with some signs of life, this remedy was immediately  administered. "What surprises me greatly, (said the post-master,  speaking of this melancholy story to a friend of mine, two years  after it happened) I made an excellent bouillon, and poured it  down his throat with my own hands, and yet he did not recover."  Now, in all probability, this bouillon it was that stopped his  breath. When I was a very young man, I remember to have seen a  person suffocated by such impertinent officiousness. A young man  of uncommon parts and erudition, very well esteemed at the  university of G--ow was found early one morning in a subterranean  vault among the ruins of an old archiepiscopal palace, with his  throat cut from ear to ear. Being conveyed to a public-house in  the neighbourhood, he made signs for pen, ink, and paper, and in  all probability would have explained the cause of this terrible  catastrophe, when an old woman, seeing the windpipe, which was  cut, sticking out of the wound, and mistaking it for the gullet,  by way of giving him a cordial to support his spirits, poured  into it, through a small funnel, a glass of burnt brandy, which  strangled him in the tenth part of a minute. The gash was so hideous, and  formed by so many repeated strokes of a razor, that the surgeons  believed he could not possibly be the perpetrator himself;  nevertheless this was certainly the case.

At Brignolles, where we dined, I was obliged to quarrel with the  landlady, and threaten to leave her house, before she would  indulge us with any sort of flesh-meat. It was meagre day, and  she had made her provision accordingly. She even hinted some  dissatisfaction at having heretics in her house: but, as I was  not disposed to eat stinking fish, with ragouts of eggs and  onions, I insisted upon a leg of mutton, and a brace of fine  partridges, which I found in the larder. Next day, when we set  out in the morning from Luc, it blew a north-westerly wind so  extremely cold and biting, that even a flannel wrapper could not  keep me tolerably warm in the coach. Whether the cold had put our  coachman in a bad humour, or he had some other cause of  resentment against himself, I know not; but we had not gone above  a quarter of a mile, when he drove the carriage full against the  corner of a garden wall, and broke the axle-tree, so that we were  obliged to return to the inn on foot, and wait a whole day, until  a new piece could be made and adjusted. The wind that blew, is  called Maestral, in the Provencial dialect, and indeed is the  severest that ever I felt. At this inn, we met with a young  French officer who had been a prisoner in England, and spoke our  language pretty well. He told me, that such a wind did not blow  above twice or three times in a winter, and was never of long  continuance, that in general, the weather was very mild and  agreeable during the winter months; that living was very cheap in  this part of Provence, which afforded great plenty of game. Here,  too, I found a young Irish recollet, in his way from Rome to his  own country. He complained, that he was almost starved by the  inhospitable disposition of the French people; and that the  regular clergy, in particular, had treated him with the most  cruel disdain. I relieved his necessities, and gave him a letter  to a gentleman of his own country at Montpellier.

When I rose in the morning, and opened a window that looked into  the garden, I thought myself either in a dream, or bewitched. All  the trees were cloathed with snow, and all the country covered at  least a foot thick. "This cannot be the south of France, (said I  to myself) it must be the Highlands of Scotland!" At a wretched  town called Muy, where we dined, I had a warm dispute with our  landlord, which, however, did not terminate to my satisfaction. I  sent on the mules before, to the next stage, resolving to take  post-horses, and bespoke them accordingly of the aubergiste, who  was, at the same time, inn-keeper and post-master. We were  ushered into the common eating-room, and had a very indifferent  dinner; after which, I sent a loui'dore to be changed, in order  to pay the reckoning. The landlord, instead of giving the full  change, deducted three livres a head for dinner, and sent in the  rest of the money by my servant. Provoked more at his ill  manners, than at his extortion, I ferreted him out of a bed-chamber,  where he had concealed himself, and obliged him to  restore the full change, from which I paid him at the rate of two  livres a head. He refused to take the money, which I threw down  on the table; and the horses being ready, stepped into the coach,  ordering the postillions to drive on. Here I had certainly  reckoned without my host. The fellows declared they would not  budge, until I should pay their master; and as I threatened them  with manual chastisement, they alighted, and disappeared in a  twinkling. I was now so incensed, that though I could hardly  breathe; though the afternoon was far advanced, and the street  covered with wet snow, I walked to the consul of the town, and  made my complaint in form. This magistrate, who seemed to be a  taylor, accompanied me to the inn, where by this time the whole  town was assembled, and endeavoured to persuade me to compromise  the affair. I said, as he was the magistrate, I would stand to  his award. He answered, "that he would not presume to determine  what I was to pay." I have already paid him a reasonable price  for his dinner, (said I) and now I demand post-horses according  to the king's ordonnance. The aubergiste said the horses were  ready, but the guides were run away; and he could not find others  to go in their place. I argued with great vehemence, offering to  leave a loui'dore for the poor of the parish, provided the consul  would oblige the rascal to do his duty. The consul shrugged up  his shoulders, and declared it was not in his power. This was a  lie, but I perceived he had no mind to disoblige the publican. If  the mules had not been sent away, I should certainly have not  only payed what I thought proper, but corrected the landlord into  the bargain, for his insolence and extortion; but now I was  entirely at his mercy, and as the consul continued to exhort me  in very humble terms, to comply with his demands, I thought  proper to acquiesce. Then the postillions immediately appeared:  the crowd seemed to exult in the triumph of the aubergiste; and I  was obliged to travel in the night, in very severe weather, after  all the fatigue and mortification I had undergone.

We lay at Frejus, which was the Forum Julianum of the antients,  and still boasts of some remains of antiquity; particularly the  ruins of an amphitheatre, and an aqueduct. The first we passed in  the dark, and next morning the weather was so cold that I could  not walk abroad to see it. The town is at present very  inconsiderable, and indeed in a ruinous condition. Nevertheless,  we were very well lodged at the post-house, and treated with more  politeness than we had met with in any other part of France.

As we had a very high mountain to ascend in the morning, I  ordered the mules on before to the next post, and hired six  horses for the coach. At the east end of Frejus, we saw close to  the road on our left-hand, the arcades of the antient aqueduct,  and the ruins of some Roman edifices, which seemed to have been  temples. There was nothing striking in the architecture of the  aqueduct. The arches are small and low, without either grace or  ornament, and seem to have been calculated for mere utility.

The mountain of Esterelles, which is eight miles over, was  formerly frequented by a gang of desperate banditti, who are now  happily exterminated: the road is very good, but in some places  very steep and bordered by precipices. The mountain is covered  with pines, and the laurus cerasus, the fruit of which being now  ripe, made a most romantic appearance through the snow that lay  upon the branches. The cherries were so large that I at first  mistook them for dwarf oranges. I think they are counted  poisonous in England, but here the people eat them without  hesitation. In the middle of the mountain is the post-house,  where we dined in a room so cold, that the bare remembrance of it  makes my teeth chatter. After dinner I chanced to look into  another chamber that fronted the south, where the sun shone; and  opening a window perceived, within a yard of my hand, a large  tree loaded with oranges, many of which were ripe. You may judge  what my astonishment was to find Winter in all his rigour  reigning on one side of the house, and Summer in all her glory  on the other. Certain it is, the middle of this mountain seemed  to be the boundary of the cold weather. As we proceeded slowly in  the afternoon we were quite enchanted. This side of the hill is a  natural plantation of the most agreeable ever-greens, pines,  firs, laurel, cypress, sweet myrtle, tamarisc, box, and juniper,  interspersed with sweet marjoram, lavender, thyme, wild thyme,  and sage. On the right-hand the ground shoots up into agreeable  cones, between which you have delightful vistas of the  Mediterranean, which washes the foot of the rock; and between two  divisions of the mountains, there is a bottom watered by a  charming stream, which greatly adds to the rural beauties of the  scene.

This night we passed at Cannes, a little fishing town, agreeably  situated on the beach of the sea, and in the same place lodged  Monsieur Nadeau d'Etrueil, the unfortunate French governor of Guadeloupe, condemned to be  imprisoned for life in one of the isles Marguerite, which lie  within a mile of this coast.

Next day we journeyed by the way of Antibes, a small maritime  town, tolerably well fortified; and passing the little river  Loup, over a stone-bridge, arrived about noon at the village of  St. Laurent, the extremity of France, where we passed the Var,  after our baggage had undergone examination. From Cannes to this  village the road lies along the sea-side; and sure nothing can be  more delightful. Though in the morning there was a frost upon the  ground, the sun was as warm as it is in May in England. The sea  was quite smooth, and the beach formed of white polished pebbles;  on the left-hand the country was covered with green olives, and  the side of the road planted with large trees of sweet myrtle  growing wild like the hawthorns in England. From Antibes we had  the first view of Nice, lying on the opposite side of the bay,  and making a very agreeable appearance. The author of the Grand  Tour says, that from Antibes to Nice the roads are very bad,  through rugged mountains bordered with precipices On the left,  and by the sea to the right; whereas, in fact, there is neither  precipice nor mountain near it.

The Var, which divides the county of Nice from Provence, is no  other than a torrent fed chiefly by the snow that melts on the  maritime Alps, from which it takes its origin. In the summer it  is swelled to a dangerous height, and this is also the case after  heavy rains: but at present the middle of it is quite dry, and  the water divided into two or three narrow streams, which,  however, are both deep and rapid. This river has been absurdly  enough by some supposed the Rubicon, in all probability from the  description of that river in the Pharsalia of Lucan, who makes it  the boundary betwixt Gaul and Italy--

                       --et Gallica certus Limes ab Ausoniis disterminat arva colonis.

A sure Frontier that parts the Gallic plains From the rich meadows of th' Ansonian swains.

whereas, in fact, the Rubicon, now called Pisatello, runs between  Ravenna and Rimini.--But to return to the Var. At the village of  St. Laurent, famous for its Muscadine wines, there is a set of  guides always in attendance to conduct you in your passage over  the river. Six of those fellows, tucked up above the middle, with  long poles in their hands, took charge of our coach, and by many  windings guided it safe to the opposite shore. Indeed there was  no occasion for any; but it is a sort of a perquisite, and I did  not choose to run any risque, how small soever it might be, for  the sake of saving half a crown, with which they were satisfied.  If you do not gratify the searchers at St. Laurent with the same  sum, they will rummage your trunks, and turn all your cloaths  topsy turvy. And here, once for all, I would advise every  traveller who consults his own case and convenience, to be  liberal of his money to all that sort of people; and even to wink  at the imposition of aubergistes on the road, unless it be very  flagrant. So sure as you enter into disputes with them, you will  be put to a great deal of trouble, and fret yourself to no manner  of purpose. I have travelled with oeconomists in England, who  declared they would rather give away a crown than allow  themselves to be cheated of a farthing. This is a good maxim, but  requires a great share of resolution and self-denial to put it in  practice. In one excursion of about two hundred miles my fellow-traveller  was in a passion, and of consequence very bad company  from one end of the journey to the other. He was incessantly  scolding either at landlords, landladies, waiters, hostlers, or  postilions. We had bad horses, and bad chaises; set out from  every stage with the curses of the people; and at this expence I  saved about ten shillings in the whole journey. For such a paltry  consideration, he was contented to be miserable himself, and to  make every other person unhappy with whom he had any concern.  When I came last from Bath it rained so hard, that the postilion  who drove the chaise was wet to the skin before we had gone a  couple of miles. When we arrived at the Devises, I gave him two  shillings instead of one, out of pure compassion. The consequence  of this liberality was, that in the next stage we seemed rather  to fly than to travel upon solid ground. I continued my bounty to  the second driver, and indeed through the whole journey, and  found myself accommodated in a very different manner from what I  had experienced before. I had elegant chaises, with excellent  horses; and the postilions of their own accord used such  diligence, that although the roads were broken by the rain, I  travelled at the rate of twelve miles an hour; and my  extraordinary expence from Bath to London, amounted precisely to  six shillings.

The river Var falls into the Mediterranean a little below St.  Laurent, about four miles to the westward of Nice. Within the  memory of persons now living, there have been three wooden  bridges thrown over it, and as often destroyed in consequence of  the jealousy subsisting between the kings of France and Sardinia;  this river being the boundary of their dominions on the side of  Provence. However, this is a consideration that ought not to  interfere with the other advantages that would accrue to both  kingdoms from such a convenience. If there was a bridge over the  Var, and a post-road made from Nice to Genoa, I am very confident  that all those strangers who now pass the Alps in their way to  and from Italy, would choose this road as infinitely more safe,  commodious, and agreeable. This would also be the case with all  those who hire felucas from Marseilles or Antibes, and expose  themselves to the dangers and inconveniences of travelling by sea  in an open boat.

In the afternoon we arrived at Nice, where we found Mr. M--e, the  English gentleman whom I had seen at Boulogne, and advised to  come hither. He had followed my advice, and reached Nice about a  month before my arrival, with his lady, child, and an old  gouvernante. He had travelled with his own post-chaise and  horses, and is now lodged just without one of the gates of the  city, in the house of the count de V--n, for which he pays five  loui'dores a month. I could hire one much better in the  neighbourhood of London, for the same money. Unless you will  submit to this extortion, and hire a whole house for a length of  time, you will find no ready-furnished lodgings at Nice. After  having stewed a week in a paltry inn, I have taken a ground floor  for ten months at the rate of four hundred livres a year, that is  twenty pounds sterling, for the Piedmontese livre is about an  English shilling. The apartments are large, lofty, and commodious  enough, with two small gardens, in which there is plenty of  sallad, and a great number of oranges and lemons: but as it  required some time to provide furniture, our consul Mr. B--d, one  of the best natured and most friendly men in the world, has lent  me his lodgings, which are charmingly situated by the sea-side,  and open upon a terrace, that runs parallel to the beach, forming  part of the town wall. Mr. B--d himself lives at Villa Franca,  which is divided from Nice by a single mountain, on the top of  which there is a small fort, called the castle of Montalban.  Immediately after our arrival we were visited by one Mr. de  Martines, a most agreeable young fellow, a lieutenant in the  Swiss regiment, which is here in garrison. He is a Protestant,  extremely fond of our nation, and understands our language  tolerably well. He was particularly recommended to our  acquaintance by general P-- and his lady; we are happy in his  conversation; find him wonderfully obliging, and extremely  serviceable on many occasions. We have likewise made acquaintance  with some other individuals, particularly with Mr. St. Pierre,  junior, who is a considerable merchant, and consul for Naples. He  is a well-bred, sensible young man, speaks English, is an  excellent performer on the lute and mandolin, and has a pretty  collection of books. In a word, I hope we shall pass the winter  agreeably enough, especially if Mr. M--e should hold out; but I am  afraid he is too far gone in a consumption to recover. He spent  the last winter at Nismes, and consulted F-- at Montpellier. I  was impatient to see the prescription, and found it almost  verbatim the same he had sent to me; although I am persuaded  there is a very essential difference between our disorders. Mr.  M--e has been long afflicted with violent spasms, colliquative  sweats, prostration of appetite, and a disorder in his bowels. He  is likewise jaundiced all over, and I am confident his liver is  unsound. He tried the tortoise soup, which he said in a fortnight  stuffed him up with phlegm. This gentleman has got a smattering  of physic, and I am afraid tampers with his own constitution, by  means of Brookes's Practice of Physic, and some dispensatories,  which he is continually poring over. I beg pardon for this  tedious epistle, and am--Very sincerely, dear Sir, Your  affectionate, humble servant.

LETTER XIII

NICE, January 15, 1764.

DEAR SIR,--I am at last settled at Nice, and have leisure to give  you some account of this very remarkable place. The county of  Nice extends about fourscore miles in length, and in some places  it is thirty miles broad. It contains several small towns, and a  great number of villages; all of which, this capital excepted,  are situated among mountains, the most extensive plain of the  whole country being this where I now am, in the neighbourhood of  Nice. The length of it does not exceed two miles, nor is the  breadth of it, in any part, above one. It is bounded by the  Mediterranean on the south. From the sea-shore, the maritime Alps  begin with hills of a gentle ascent, rising into mountains that  form a sweep or amphitheatre ending at Montalban, which overhangs  the town of Villa Franca. On the west side of this mountain, and  in the eastern extremity of the amphitheatre, stands the city of  Nice, wedged in between a steep rock and the little river  Paglion, which descends from the mountains, and washing the town-walls  on the west side, falls into the sea, after having filled  some canals for the use of the inhabitants. There is a stone-bridge  of three arches over it, by which those who come from  Provence enter the city. The channel of it is very broad, but  generally dry in many places; the water (as in the Var) dividing  itself into several small streams. The Paglion being fed by  melted snow and rain in the mountains, is quite dry in summer;  but it is sometimes swelled by sudden rains to a very formidable  torrent. This was the case in the year 1744, when the French and  Spanish armies attacked eighteen Piedmontese battalions, which  were posted on the side of Montalban. The assailants were  repulsed with the loss of four thousand men, some hundreds of  whom perished in repassing the Paglion, which had swelled to a  surprising degree during the battle, in consequence of a heavy  continued rain. This rain was of great service to the  Piedmontese, as it prevented one half of the enemy from passing  the river to sustain the other. Five hundred were taken  prisoners: but the Piedmontese, foreseeing they should be  surrounded next day by the French, who had penetrated behind  them, by a pass in the mountains, retired in the night. Being  received on board the English Fleet, which lay at Villa Franca,  they were conveyed to Oneglia. In examining the bodies of those  that were killed in the battle, the inhabitants of Nice  perceived, that a great number of the Spanish soldiers were  circumcised; a circumstance, from which they concluded, that a  great many Jews engage in the service of his Catholic majesty. I  am of a different opinion. The Jews are the least of any people  that I know, addicted to a military life. I rather imagine they  were of the Moorish race, who have subsisted in Spain, since the  expulsion of their brethren; and though they conform externally  to the rites of the Catholic religion, still retain in private  their attachment to the law of Mahomet.

The city of Nice is built in form of an irregular isosceles  triangle, the base of which fronts the sea.  On the west side it  is surrounded by a wall and rampart; on the east, it is over-hung  by a rock, on which we see the ruins of an old castle, which,  before the invention of artillery, was counted impregnable. It  was taken and dismantled by marechal Catinat, in the time of  Victor Amadaeus, the father of his Sardinian majesty. It was  afterwards finally demolished by the duke of Berwick towards the  latter end of queen Anne's war. To repair it would be a very  unnecessary expence, as it is commanded by Montalban, and several  other eminences.

The town of Nice is altogether indefensible, and therefore  without fortifications. There are only two iron guns upon a  bastion that fronts the beach; and here the French had formed a  considerable battery against the English cruisers, in the war of  1744, when the Mareschal Duke de Belleisle had his headquarters  at Nice. This little town, situated in the bay of Antibes, is  almost equidistant from Marseilles, Turin, and Genoa, the first  and last being about thirty leagues from hence by sea; and the  capital of Piedmont at the same distance to the northward, over  the mountains. It lies exactly opposite to Capo di Ferro, on the  coast of Barbary; and, the islands of Sardinia and Corsica are  laid down about two degrees to the eastward, almost exactly in a  line with Genoa. This little town, hardly a mile in  circumference, is said to contain twelve thousand inhabitants.  The streets are narrow; the houses are built of stone, and the  windows in general are fitted with paper instead of glass. This  expedient would not answer in a country subject to rain and  storms; but here, where there is very little of either, the paper  lozenges answer tolerably well. The bourgeois, however, begin to  have their houses sashed with glass. Between the town-wall and  the sea, the fishermen haul up their boats upon the open beach;  but on the other side of the rock, where the castle stood, is the  port or harbour of Nice, upon which some money has been expended.  It is a small basin, defended to seaward by a mole of free-stone,  which is much better contrived than executed: for the sea has  already made three breaches in it; and in all probability, in  another winter, the extremity of it will be carried quite away.  It would require the talents of a very skilful architect to lay  the foundation of a good mole, on an open beach like this;  exposed to the swell of the whole Mediterranean, without any  island or rock in the offing, to break the force of the waves.  Besides, the shore is bold, and the bottom foul. There are  seventeen feet of water in the basin, sufficient to float vessels  of one hundred and fifty ton; and this is chiefly supplied by a  small stream of very fine water; another great convenience for  shipping. On the side of the mole, there is a constant guard of  soldiers, and a battery of seven cannon, pointing to the sea. On  the other side, there is a curious manufacture for twisting or  reeling silk; a tavern, a coffee-house, and several other  buildings, for the convenience of the sea-faring people. Without  the harbour, is a lazarette, where persons coming from infected  places, are obliged to perform quarantine. The harbour has been  declared a free-port, and it is generally full of tartans,  polacres, and other small vessels, that come from Sardinia,  Ivica, Italy, and Spain, loaded with salt, wine, and other  commodities; but here is no trade of any great consequence.

The city of Nice is provided with a senate, which administers  justice under the auspices of an avocat-general, sent hither by  the king. The internal oeconomy of the town is managed by four  consuls; one for the noblesse. another for the merchants, a third  for the bourgeois, and a fourth for the peasants. These are  chosen annually from the town-council. They keep the streets and  markets in order, and superintend the public works. There is also  an intendant, who takes care of his majesty's revenue: but there  is a discretionary power lodged in the person of the commandant,  who is always an officer of rank in the service, and has under  his immediate command the regiment which is here in garrison.  That which is here now is a Swiss battalion, of which the king  has five or six in his service. There is likewise a regiment of  militia, which is exercised once a year. But of all these  particulars, I shall speak more fully on another occasion.

When I stand upon the rampart, and look round me, I can scarce  help thinking myself inchanted. The small extent of country which  I see, is all cultivated like a garden. Indeed, the plain  presents nothing but gardens, full of green trees, loaded with  oranges, lemons, citrons, and bergamots, which make a delightful  appearance. If you examine them more nearly, you will find  plantations of green pease ready to gather; all sorts of  sallading, and pot-herbs, in perfection; and plats of roses,  carnations, ranunculas, anemonies, and daffodils, blowing in full  glory, with such beauty, vigour, and perfume, as no flower in  England ever exhibited.

I must tell you, that presents of carnations are sent from hence,  in the winter, to Turin and Paris; nay, sometimes as far as  London, by the post. They are packed up in a wooden box, without  any sort of preparation, one pressed upon another: the person who  receives them, cuts off a little bit of the stalk, and steeps  them for two hours in vinegar and water, when they recover their  full bloom and beauty. Then he places them in water-bottles, in  an apartment where they are screened from the severities of the  weather; and they will continue fresh and unfaded the best part  of a month.

Amidst the plantations in the neighbourhood of Nice, appear a  vast number of white bastides, or country-houses, which make a  dazzling shew. Some few of these are good villas, belonging to  the noblesse of this county; and even some of the bourgeois are  provided with pretty lodgeable cassines; but in general, they are  the habitations of the peasants, and contain nothing but misery  and vermin. They are all built square; and, being whitened with  lime or plaister, contribute greatly to the richness of the view.  The hills are shaded to the tops with olive-trees, which are  always green; and those hills are over-topped by more distant  mountains, covered with snow. When I turn myself towards the sea,  the view is bounded by the horizon; yet in a clear morning, one  can perceive the high lands of Corsica. On the right hand, it is  terminated by Antibes, and the mountain of Esterelles, which I  described in my last. As for the weather, you will conclude, from  what I have said of the oranges, flowers, etc. that it must be  wonderfully mild and serene: but of the climate, I shall speak  hereafter. Let me only observe, en passant, that the houses in  general have no chimnies, but in their kitchens; and that many  people, even of condition, at Nice, have no fire in their  chambers, during the whole winter. When the weather happens to be  a little more sharp than usual, they warm their apartments with a  brasiere or pan of charcoal.

Though Nice itself retains few marks of antient splendor, there  are considerable monuments of antiquity in its neighbourhood.  About two short miles from the town, upon the summit of a pretty  high hill, we find the ruins of the antient city Cemenelion, now  called Cimia, which was once the metropolis of the Maritime Alps,  and the scat of a Roman president. With respect to situation,  nothing could be more agreeable or salubrious. It stood upon the  gentle ascent and summit of a hill, fronting the Mediterranean;  from the shore of which, it is distant about half a league; and,  on the other side, it overlooked a bottom, or narrow vale,  through which the Paglion (antiently called Paulo) runs towards  the walls of Nice. It was inhabited by a people, whom Ptolomy and  Pliny call the Vedantij: but these were undoubtedly mixed with a  Roman colony, as appears by the monuments which still remain; I  mean the ruins of an amphitheatre, a temple of Apollo, baths,  aqueducts, sepulchral, and other stones, with inscriptions, and a  great number of medals which the peasants have found by accident,  in digging and labouring the vineyards and cornfields, which now  cover the ground where the city stood.

Touching this city, very little is to be learned from the antient  historians: but that it was the seat of a Roman praeses, is  proved by the two following inscriptions, which are still extant.

P. AELIO. SEVERINO. V. E. P. PRAESIDI. OPTIMO. ORDO. CEMEN. PATRONO.

By the Senate of Cemenelion, Dedicated to His Excellency P.  Aelius Severinus, the best of Governors and Patrons.

This is now in the possession of the count de Gubernatis, who has  a country-house upon the spot. The other, found near the same  place, is in praise of the praeses Marcus Aurelius Masculus.

M. AVRELIO. MASCVLO. V. E. OB. EXIMIAM. PRAESIDATVS EIVS. INTEGRITATEM. ET EGREGIAM. AD OMNES HOMINES MANSVETVDINEM. ET. VRGENTIS ANNONAE. SINCERAM. PRAEBITIONEM. AC. MVNIFICENTIAM. ET. QVOD. AQVAE VSVM. VETVSTATE. LAPSVM. REQVI- SITVM. AC. REPERTVM. SAECVLI FELICITATE. CVRSVI. PRISTINO REDDIDERIT. COLLEG. III. QVIB. EX. SCC. P. EST PATRONO. DIGNISS.

Inscribed by the three corporations under the authority of the  Senate, to their most worthy Patron, His Excellency M. Aurelius  Masculus, in testimony of their gratitude for the blessings of  his incorruptible administration, his wonderful affability to all  without Distinction, his generous Distribution of Corn in time of  Dearth, his munificence in repairing the ruinous aqueduct, in  searching for, discovering and restoring the water to its former  course for the Benefit of the Community.

This president well deserved such a mark of respect from a people  whom he had assisted in two such essential articles, as their  corn and their water. You know the praeses of a Roman province  had the jus sigendi clavi, the right to drive a nail in the  Kalendar, the privilege of wearing the latus clavus, or broad  studs on his garment, the gladius, infula, praetexta, purpura &  annulus aureus, the Sword, Diadem, purple Robe, and gold Ring, he  had his vasa, vehicula, apparitores, Scipio eburneus, & sella  curulis, Kettledrums, [I know the kettledrum is a modern  invention; but the vasa militari modo conclamata was something  analogous.] Chariots, Pursuivants, ivory staff, and chair of  state.

I shall give you one more sepulchral inscription on a marble,  which is now placed over the gate of the church belonging to the  convent of St. Pont, a venerable building, which stands at the  bottom of the hill, fronting the north side of the town of Nice.  This St. Pont, or Pontius, was a Roman convert to Christianity,  who suffered martyrdom at Cemenelion in the year 261, during the  reigns of the emperors Valerian and Gallienus. The legends  recount some ridiculous miracles wrought in favour of this saint,  both before and after his death. Charles V. emperor of Germany  and king of Spain, caused this monastery to be built on the spot  where Pontius suffered decapitation. But to return to the  inscription: it appears in these words.

M. M. A. FLAVIAE. BASILLAE. CONIVG. CARISSIM. DOM. ROMA. MIRAE. ERGA. MARITUM. AMORIS. ADQ. CASTITAT. FAEMINAE. QVAE. VIXIT ANN. XXXV. M. III. DIEB. XII. AVRELIVS RHODISMANVS. AVG. LIB. COMMEM. ALP. MART. ET. AVRELIA, ROMVLA. FILII. IMPATIENTISSIM. DOLOR. EIVS. ADFLICTI ADQ. DESOLATI. CARISSIM. AC MERENT. FERET. FEC. ET. DED,

Freely consecrated by Aurelius Rhodismanus, the Emperor's  Freedman, to the much honoured memory of his dear Consort Flavia  Aurelia of Rome, a woman equally distinguished by her unblemished  Virtue and conjugal affection. His children Martial and Aurelia  Romula deeply affected and distressed by the Violence of his  Grief, erected and dedicated a monument to their dear deserving  Parent.  [I don't pretend to translate these inscriptions  literally, because I am doubtful about the meaning of some  abbreviations.]

The amphitheatre of Cemenelion is but very small, compared to  that of Nismes. The arena is ploughed up, and bears corn: some of  the seats remain, and part of two opposite porticos; but all the  columns, and the external facade of the building, are taken away  so that it is impossible to judge of the architecture, all we can  perceive is, that it was built in an oval form. About one hundred  paces from the amphitheatre stood an antient temple, supposed to  have been dedicated to Apollo. The original roof is demolished,  as well as the portico; the vestiges of which may still be  traced. The part called the Basilica, and about one half of the  Cella Sanctior, remain, and are converted into the dwelling-house  and stable of the peasant who takes care of the count de  Gubernatis's garden, in which this monument stands. In the Cella  Sanctior, I found a lean cow, a he-goat, and a jack-ass; the very  same conjunction of animals which I had seen drawing a plough in  Burgundy. Several mutilated statues have been dug up from the  ruins of this temple; and a great number of medals have been  found in the different vineyards which now occupy the space upon  which stood the antient city of Cemenelion. These were of gold,  silver, and brass. Many of them were presented to Charles Emanuel  I. duke of Savoy. The prince of Monaco has a good number of them  in his collection; and the rest are in private hands. The  peasants, in digging, have likewise found many urns,  lachrymatories, and sepulchral stones, with epitaphs, which are  now dispersed among different convents and private houses. All  this ground is a rich mine of antiquities, which, if properly  worked, would produce a great number of valuable curiosities.  Just by the temple of Apollo were the ruins of a bath, composed  of great blocks of marble, which have been taken away for the  purposes of modern building. In all probability, many other noble  monuments of this city have been dilapidated by the same  barbarous oeconomy. There are some subterranean vaults, through  which the water was conducted to this bath, still extant in the  garden of the count de Gubernatis. Of the aqueduct that conveyed  water to the town, I can say very little, but that it was scooped  through a mountain: that this subterranean passage was discovered  some years ago, by removing the rubbish which choaked it up: that  the people penetrating a considerable way, by the help of lighted  torches, found a very plentiful stream of water flowing in an aqueduct, as high as an ordinary man, arched over head, and lined  with a sort of cement. They could not, however, trace this stream  to its source; and it is again stopped up with earth and rubbish.  There is not a soul in this country, who has either spirit or  understanding to conduct an inquiry of this kind. Hard by the  amphitheatre is a convent of Recollets, built in a very romantic  situation, on the brink of a precipice. On one side of their  garden, they ascend to a kind of esplanade, which they say was  part of the citadel of Cemenelion. They have planted it with  cypress-trees, and flowering-shrubs. One of the monks told me,  that it is vaulted below, as they can plainly perceive by the  sound of their instruments used in houghing the ground. A very  small expence would bring the secrets of this cavern to light.  They have nothing to do, but to make a breach in the wall, which  appears uncovered towards the garden.

The city of Cemenelion was first sacked by the Longobards, who  made an irruption into Provence, under their king Alboinus, about  the middle of the sixth century. It was afterwards totally destroyed by the Saracens, who, at  different times, ravaged this whole coast. The remains of the  people are supposed to have changed their habitation, and formed  a coalition with the inhabitants of Nice.

What further I have to say of Nice, you shall know in good time;  at present, I have nothing to add, but what you very well know,  that I am always your affectionate humble servant.

LETTER, XIV

NICE, January 20, 1764.

DEAR SIR,--Last Sunday I crossed Montalban on horseback, with  some Swiss officers, on a visit to our consul, Mr. B--d, who  lives at Ville Franche, about half a league from Nice. It is a  small town, built upon the side of a rock, at the bottom of the  harbour, which is a fine basin, surrounded with hills on every  side, except to the south, where it lies open to the sea. If  there was a small island in the mouth of it, to break off the  force of the waves, when the wind is southerly, it would be one  of the finest harbours in the world; for the ground is exceeding  good for anchorage: there is a sufficient depth of water, and  room enough for the whole navy of England. On the right hand, as  you enter the port, there is an elegant fanal, or lighthouse,  kept in good repair: but in all the charts of this coast which I  have seen, this lanthorn is laid down to the westward of the  harbour; an error equally absurd and dangerous, as it may mislead  the navigator, and induce him to run his ship among the rocks, to  the eastward of the lighthouse, where it would undoubtedly  perish. Opposite to the mouth of the harbour is the fort, which  can be of no service, but in defending the shipping and the town  by sea; for, by land, it is commanded by Montalban, and all the  hills in the neighbourhood. In the war of 1744, it was taken and  retaken. At present, it is in tolerable good repair. On the left  of the fort, is the basin for the gallies, with a kind of dock,  in which they are built, and occasionally laid up to be refitted.  This basin is formed by a pretty stone mole; and here his  Sardinian majesty's two gallies lie perfectly secure, moored with  their sterns close to the jette. I went on board one of these  vessels, and saw about two hundred miserable wretches, chained to  the banks on which they sit and row, when the galley is at sea.  This is a sight which a British subject, sensible of the blessing  he enjoys, cannot behold without horror and compassion. Not but  that if we consider the nature of the case, with coolness and  deliberation, we must acknowledge the justice, and even sagacity,  of employing for the service of the public, those malefactors who  have forfeited their title to the privileges of the community.  Among the slaves at Ville Franche is a Piedmontese count,  condemned to the gallies for life, in consequence of having been  convicted of forgery. He is permitted to live on shore; and gets  money by employing the other slaves to knit stockings for sale.  He appears always in the Turkish habit, and is in a fair way of  raising a better fortune than that which he has forfeited.

It is a great pity, however, and a manifest outrage against the  law of nations, as well as of humanity, to mix with those  banditti, the Moorish and Turkish prisoners who are taken in the  prosecution of open war. It is certainly no justification of this  barbarous practice, that the Christian prisoners are treated as  cruelly at Tunis and Algiers. It would be for the honour of  Christendom, to set an example of generosity to the Turks; and,  if they would not follow it, to join their naval forces, and  extirpate at once those nests of pirates, who have so long  infested the Mediterranean. Certainly, nothing can be more  shameful, than the treaties which France and the Maritime Powers  have concluded with those barbarians. They supply them with  artillery, arms, and ammunition, to disturb their neighbours.  They even pay them a sort of tribute, under the denomination of  presents; and often put up with insults tamely, for the sordid  consideration of a little gain in the way of commerce. They know  that Spain, Sardinia, and almost all the Catholic powers in the  Mediterranean, Adriatic, and Levant, are at perpetual war with  those Mahometans; that while Algiers, Tunis, and Sallee, maintain  armed cruisers at sea, those Christian powers will not run the  risque of trading in their own bottoms, but rather employ as  carriers the maritime nations, who are at peace with the  infidels. It is for our share of this advantage, that we  cultivate the piratical States of Barbary, and meanly purchase  passports of them, thus acknowledging them masters of the  Mediterranean.

The Sardinian gallies are mounted each with five-and-twenty oars,  and six guns, six-pounders, of a side, and a large piece of  artillery amidships, pointing ahead, which (so far as I am able  to judge) can never be used point-blank, without demolishing the  head or prow of the galley. The accommodation on board for the  officers is wretched. There is a paltry cabin in the poop for the  commander; but all the other officers lie below the slaves, in a  dungeon, where they have neither light, air, nor any degree of  quiet; half suffocated by the heat of the place; tormented by  fleas, bugs, and lice; and disturbed by the incessant noise over  head. The slaves lie upon the naked banks, without any other  covering than a tilt. This, however, is no great hardship, in a  climate where there is scarce any winter. They are fed with a  very scanty allowance of bread, and about fourteen beans a day  and twice a week they have a little rice, or cheese, but most of  them, while they are in harbour knit stockings, or do some other  kind of work, which enables them to make some addition to this  wretched allowance. When they happen to be at sea in bad weather,  their situation is truly deplorable. Every wave breaks over the  vessel, and not only keeps them continually wet, but comes with  such force, that they are dashed against the banks with  surprising violence: sometimes their limbs are broke, and  sometimes their brains dashed out. It is impossible (they say) to  keep such a number of desperate people under any regular command,  without exercising such severities as must shock humanity. It is  almost equally impossible to maintain any tolerable degree of  cleanliness, where such a number of wretches are crouded together  without conveniences, or even the necessaries of life. They are  ordered twice a week to strip, clean, and bathe themselves in the  sea: but, notwithstanding all the precautions of discipline, they  swarm with vermin, and the vessel smells like an hospital, or  crouded jail. They seem, nevertheless, quite insensible of their  misery, like so many convicts in Newgate: they laugh and sing,  and swear, and get drunk when they can. When you enter by the  stern, you are welcomed by a band of music selected from the  slaves; and these expect a gratification. If you walk forwards,  you must take care of your pockets. You will be accosted by one  or other of the slaves, with a brush and blacking-ball for  cleaning your shoes; and if you undergo this operation, it is ten  to one but your pocket is picked. If you decline his service, and  keep aloof, you will find it almost impossible to avoid a colony  of vermin, which these fellows have a very dexterous method of  conveying to strangers. Some of the Turkish prisoners, whose  ransom or exchange is expected, are allowed to go ashore, under  proper inspection; and those forcats, who have served the best  part of the time for which they were condemned, are employed in  public works, under a guard of soldiers. At the harbour of Nice,  they are hired by ship-masters to bring ballast, and have a small  proportion of what they earn, for their own use: the rest belongs  to the king. They are distinguished by an iron shackle about one  of their legs. The road from Nice to Ville Franche is scarce  passable on horseback: a circumstance the more extraordinary, as  those slaves, in the space of two or three months, might even  make it fit for a carriage, and the king would not be one  farthing out of pocket, for they are quite idle the greatest  part of the year.

The gallies go to sea only in the summer. In tempestuous weather,  they could not live out of port. Indeed, they are good for  nothing but in smooth water during a calm; when, by dint of  rowing, they make good way. The king of Sardinia is so sensible  of their inutility, that he intends to let his gallies rot; and,  in lieu of them, has purchased two large frigates in England, one  of fifty, and another of thirty guns, which are now in the  harbour of Ville Franche. He has also procured an English  officer, one Mr. A--, who is second in command on board of one of  them, and has the title of captain consulteur, that is,  instructor to the first captain, the marquis de M--i, who knows  as little of seamanship as I do of Arabic.

The king, it is said, intends to have two or three more frigates,  and then he will be more than a match for the Barbary corsairs,  provided care be taken to man his fleet in a proper manner: but  this will never be done, unless he invites foreigners into his  service, officers as well as seamen; for his own dominions  produce neither at present. If he is really determined to make  the most of the maritime situation of his dominions, as well as  of his alliance with Great-Britain, he ought to supply his ships  with English mariners, and put a British commander at the head of  his fleet. He ought to erect magazines and docks at Villa Franca;  or if there is not conveniency for building, he may at least have  pits and wharfs for heaving down and careening; and these ought  to be under the direction of Englishmen, who best understand all  the particulars of marine oeconomy. Without all doubt, he will  not be able to engage foreigners, without giving them liberal  appointments; and their being engaged in his service will give  umbrage to his own subjects: but, when the business is to  establish a maritime power, these considerations ought to be  sacrificed to reasons of public utility. Nothing can be more  absurd and unreasonable, than the murmurs of the Piedmontese  officers at the preferment of foreigners, who execute those  things for the advantage of their country, of which they know  themselves incapable. When Mr. P--n was first promoted in the  service of his Sardinian majesty, he met with great opposition,  and numberless mortifications, from the jealousy of the  Piedmontese officers, and was obliged to hazard his life in many  rencounters with them, before they would be quiet. Being a man of  uncommon spirit, he never suffered the least insult or affront to  pass unchastised. He had repeated opportunities of signalizing  his valour against the Turks; and by dint of extraordinary merit,  and long services not only attained the chief command of the  gallies, with the rank of lieutenant-general, but also acquired a  very considerable share of the king's favour, and was appointed  commandant of Nice. His Sardinian majesty found his account more  ways than one, in thus promoting Mr. P--n. He made the  acquisition of an excellent officer, of tried courage and  fidelity, by whose advice he conducted his marine affairs. This  gentleman was perfectly well esteemed at the court of London. In the war of 1744, he lived in the utmost harmony with the British  admirals who commanded our fleet in the Mediterranean. In  consequence of this good understanding, a thousand occasional  services were performed by the English ships, for the benefit of  his master, which otherwise could not have been done, without a  formal application to our ministry; in which case, the  opportunities would have been lost. I know our admirals had  general orders and instructions, to cooperate in all things with  his Sardinian majesty; but I know, also, by experience, how  little these general instructions avail, when the admiral is not  cordially interested in the service. Were the king of Sardinia at  present engaged with England in a new war against France, and a  British squadron stationed upon this coast, as formerly, he would  find a great difference in this particular. He should therefore  carefully avoid having at Nice a Savoyard commandant, utterly  ignorant of sea affairs; unacquainted with the true interest of  his master; proud, and arbitrary; reserved to strangers, from a  prejudice of national jealousy; and particularly averse to the  English.

With respect to the antient name of Villa Franca, there is a  dispute among antiquarians. It is not at all mentioned in the  Itinerarium of Antoninus, unless it is meant as the port of Nice.  But it is more surprising, that the accurate Strabo, in  describing this coast, mentions no such harbour. Some people  imagine it is the Portus Herculis Monaeci. But this is  undoubtedly what is now called Monaco; the harbour of which  exactly tallies with what Strabo says of the Portus Monaeci-- neque magnas, neque multas capit naves, It holds but a few  vessels and those of small burthen. Ptolomy, indeed, seems to  mention it under the name of Herculis Portus, different from the  Portus Monaeci. His words are these: post vari ostium ad  Ligustrium mare, massiliensium, sunt Nicaea, Herculis Portus,  Trophaea Augusti, Monaeci Portus, Beyond the mouth of the Var  upon the Ligurian Coast, the Marsilian Colonies are Nice, Port  Hercules, Trophaea and Monaco. In that case, Hercules was  worshipped both here and at Monaco, and gave his name to both  places. But on this subject, I shall perhaps speak more fully in  another letter, after I have seen the Trophaea Augusti, now  called Tourbia, and the town of Monaco, which last is about three  leagues from Nice. Here I cannot help taking notice of the  following elegant description from the Pharsalia, which seems to  have been intended for this very harbour.

Finis et Hesperiae promoto milite varus,  Quaque sub Herculeo sacratus numine Portus  Urget rupe cava Pelagus, non Corus in illum  Jus habet, aut Zephirus, solus sua littora turbat  Circius, et tuta prohibet statione Monaeci.

The Troops advanc'd as far  As flows th' Hesperian Boundary, the Var;  And where the mountain scoop'd by nature's hands,  The spacious Port of Hercules, expands;

Here the tall ships at anchor safe remain  Tho' Zephyr blows, or Caurus sweeps the Plain;  The Southern Blast alone disturbs the Bay;  And to Monaco's safer Port obstructs the way.

The present town of Villa Franca was built and settled in the  thirteenth century, by order of Charles II. king of the Sicilies,  and count of Provence, in order to defend the harbour from the  descents of the Saracens, who at that time infested the coast.  The inhabitants were removed hither from another town, situated  on the top of a mountain in the neighbourhood, which those  pirates had destroyed. Some ruins of the old town are still  extant. In order to secure the harbour still more effectually,  Emanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, built the fort in the beginning  of the last century, together with the mole where the gallies are  moored. As I said before, Ville Franche is built on the face of a  barren rock, washed by the sea; and there is not an acre of plain  ground within a mile of it. In summer, the reflexion of the sun  from the rocks must make it intolerably hot; for even at this  time of the year, I walked myself into a profuse sweat, by going  about a quarter of a mile to see the gallies.

Pray remember me to our friends at A--'s, and believe me to be  ever yours.

LETTER XV

NICE, January 3, 1764.

MADAM,--In your favour which I received by Mr. M--l, you remind me  of my promise, to communicate the remarks I have still to make on  the French nation; and at the same time you signify your opinion,  that I am too severe in my former observations. You even hint a  suspicion, that this severity is owing to some personal cause of  resentment; but, I protest, I have no particular cause of  animosity against any individual of that country. I have neither  obligation to, nor quarrel with, any subject of France; and when  I meet with a Frenchman worthy of my esteem, I can receive him  into my friendship with as much cordiality, as I could feel for  any fellow-citizen of the same merit. I even respect the nation,  for the number of great men it has produced in all arts and  sciences. I respect the French officers, in particular, for their  gallantry and valour; and especially for that generous humanity  which they exercise towards their enemies, even amidst the  horrors of war. This liberal spirit is the only circumstance of  antient chivalry, which I think was worth preserving. It had  formerly flourished in England, but was almost extinguished in a  succession of civil wars, which are always productive of cruelty  and rancour. It was Henry IV. of France, (a real knight errant)  who revived it in Europe. He possessed that greatness of mind,  which can forgive injuries of the deepest dye: and as he had  also the faculty of distinguishing characters, he found his  account, in favouring with his friendship and confidence, some of  those who had opposed him in the field with the most inveterate  perseverance. I know not whether he did more service to mankind  in general, by reviving the practice of treating his prisoners  with generosity, than he prejudiced his own country by  patronizing the absurd and pernicious custom of duelling, and  establishing a punto, founded in diametrical opposition to common  sense and humanity.

I have often heard it observed, that a French officer is  generally an agreeable companion when he is turned of fifty.  Without all doubt, by that time, the fire of his vivacity, which  makes him so troublesome in his youth, will be considerably  abated, and in other respects, he must be improved by his  experience. But there is a fundamental error in the first  principles of his education, which time rather confirms than  removes. Early prejudices are for the most part converted into  habits of thinking; and accordingly you will find the old  officers in the French service more bigotted than their juniors,  to the punctilios of false honour.

A lad of a good family no sooner enters into the service, than he  thinks it incumbent upon him to shew his courage in a rencontre.  His natural vivacity prompts him to hazard in company every thing  that comes uppermost, without any respect to his seniors or  betters; and ten to one but he says something, which he finds it  necessary to maintain with his sword. The old officer, instead of  checking his petulance, either by rebuke or silent  disapprobation, seems to be pleased with his impertinence, and  encourages every sally of his presumption. Should a quarrel  ensue, and the parties go out, he makes no efforts to compromise  the dispute; but sits with a pleasing expectation to learn the  issue of the rencontre. If the young man is wounded, he kisses  him with transport, extols his bravery, puts him into the hands  of the surgeon, and visits him with great tenderness every day,  until he is cured. If he is killed on the spot, he shrugs up his  shoulders--says, quelle dommage! c'etoit un amiable enfant! ah,  patience! What pity! he was a fine Boy! It can't be helpt! and in  three hours the defunct is forgotten. You know, in France, duels  are forbid, on pain of death: but this law is easily evaded. The  person insulted walks out; the antagonist understands the hint,  and follows him into the street, where they justle as if by  accident, draw their swords, and one of them is either killed or  disabled, before any effectual means can be used to part them.  Whatever may be the issue of the combat, the magistrate takes no  cognizance of it; at least, it is interpreted into an accidental  rencounter, and no penalty is incurred on either side. Thus the  purpose of the law is entirely defeated, by a most ridiculous and  cruel connivance. The meerest trifles in conversation, a rash  word, a distant hint, even a look or smile of contempt, is  sufficient to produce one of these combats; but injuries of a  deeper dye, such as terms of reproach, the lie direct, a blow, or  even the menace of a blow, must be discussed with more formality.  In any of these cases, the parties agree to meet in the dominions  of another prince, where they can murder each other, without fear  of punishment. An officer who is struck, or even threatened with  a blow must not be quiet, until he either kills his antagonist,  or loses his own life. A friend of mine, (a Nissard) who was in  the service of France, told me, that some years ago, one of their  captains, in the heat of passion, struck his lieutenant. They  fought immediately: the lieutenant was wounded and disarmed. As  it was an affront that could not be made up, he no sooner  recovered of his wounds, than he called out the captain a second  time. In a word, they fought five times before the combat proved  decisive at last, the lieutenant was left dead on the spot. This  was an event which sufficiently proved the absurdity of the  punctilio that gave rise to it. The poor gentleman who was  insulted, and outraged by the brutality of the aggressor, found  himself under the necessity of giving him a further occasion to  take away his life. Another adventure of the same kind happened a  few years ago in this place. A French officer having threatened  to strike another, a formal challenge ensued; and it being agreed  that they should fight until one of them dropped, each provided  himself with a couple of pioneers to dig his grave on the spot.  They engaged just without one of the gates of Nice, in presence  of a great number of spectators, and fought with surprising fury,  until the ground was drenched with their blood. At length one of  them stumbled, and fell; upon which the other, who found himself  mortally wounded, advancing, and dropping his point, said, "Je te  donne ce que tu m'as ote." "I'll give thee that which thou hast  taken from me." So saying, he dropped dead upon the field. The  other, who had been the person insulted, was so dangerously  wounded that he could not rise. Some of the spectators carried  him forthwith to the beach, and putting him into a boat, conveyed  him by sea to Antibes. The body of his antagonist was denied  Christian burial, as he died without absolution, and every body  allowed that his soul went to hell: but the gentlemen of the army  declared, that he died like a man of honour. Should a man be  never so well inclined to make atonement in a peaceable manner,  for an insult given in the heat of passion, or in the fury of  intoxication, it cannot be received. Even an involuntary trespass  from ignorance, or absence of mind, must be cleansed with blood.  A certain noble lord, of our country, when he was yet a commoner,  on his travels, involved himself in a dilemma of this sort, at  the court of Lorrain. He had been riding out, and strolling along  a public walk, in a brown study, with his horse-whip in his hand,  perceived a caterpillar crawling on the back of a marquis, who  chanced to be before him. He never thought of the petit maitre;  but lifting up his whip, in order to kill the insect, laid it  across his shoulders with a crack, that alarmed all the company  in the walk. The marquis's sword was produced in a moment, and  the aggressor in great hazard of his life, as he had no weapon of  defence. He was no sooner waked from his reverie, than he begged  pardon, and offered to make all proper concessions for what he  had done through mere inadvertency. The marquis would have  admitted his excuses, had there been any precedent of such an  affront being washed away without blood. A conclave of honour was  immediately assembled; and after long disputes, they agreed, that  an involuntary offence, especially from such a kind of man, d'un  tel homme, might be attoned by concessions. That you may have  some idea of the small beginning, from which many gigantic  quarrels arise, I shall recount one that lately happened at  Lyons, as I had it from the mouth of a person who was an ear and  eye witness of the transaction. Two Frenchmen, at a public  ordinary, stunned the rest of the company with their loquacity.  At length, one of them, with a supercilious air, asked the  other's name. "I never tell my name, (said he) but in a whisper." "You may have very good reasons for keeping it  secret," replied the first. "I will tell you," (resumed the  other): with these words he rose; and going round to him,  pronounced, loud enough to be heard by the whole company, "Je  m'appelle Pierre Paysan; et vous etes un impertinent." "My name  is Peter Peasant, and you are an impertinent fellow." So saying,  he walked out: the interrogator followed him into the street,  where they justled, drew their swords, and engaged. He who asked  the question was run through the body; but his relations were so  powerful, that the victor was obliged to fly his country, was  tried and condemned in his absence; his goods were confiscated;  his wife broke her heart; his children were reduced to beggary;  and he himself is now starving in exile. In England we have not  yet adopted all the implacability of the punctilio. A gentleman  may be insulted even with a blow, and survive, after having once  hazarded his life against the aggressor. The laws of honour in  our country do not oblige him either to slay the person from whom  he received the injury, or even to fight to the last drop of his  own blood. One finds no examples of duels among the Romans, who  were certainly as brave and as delicate in their notions of  honour as the French. Cornelius Nepos tells us, that a famous  Athenian general, having a dispute with his colleague, who was of  Sparta, a man of a fiery disposition, this last lifted up his  cane to strike him. Had this happened to a French petit maitre,  death must have ensued: but mark what followed--The Athenian, far  from resenting the outrage, in what is now called a gentlemanlike  manner, said, "Do, strike if you please; but hear me." He never  dreamed of cutting the Lacedemonian's throat; but bore with his  passionate temper, as the infirmity of a friend who had a  thousand good qualities to overbalance that defect.

I need not expatiate upon the folly and the mischief which are  countenanced and promoted by the modern practice of duelling. I  need not give examples of friends who have murdered each other,  in obedience to this savage custom, even while their hearts were  melting with mutual tenderness; nor will I particularize the  instances which I myself know, of whole families ruined, of women  and children made widows and orphans, of parents deprived of only  sons, and of valuable lives lost to the community, by duels,  which had been produced by one unguarded expression, uttered  without intention of offence, in the heat of dispute and  altercation. I shall not insist upon the hardship of a worthy  man's being obliged to devote himself to death, because it is his  misfortune to be insulted by a brute, a bully, a drunkard, or a  madman: neither will I enlarge upon this side of the absurdity,  which indeed amounts to a contradiction in terms; I mean the  dilemma to which a gentleman in the army is reduced, when he  receives an affront: if he does not challenge and fight his  antagonist, he is broke with infamy by a court-martial; if he  fights and kills him, he is tried by the civil power, convicted  of murder, and, if the royal mercy does not interpose, he is  infallibly hanged: all this, exclusive of the risque of his own  life in the duel, and his conscience being burthened with the  blood of a man, whom perhaps he has sacrificed to a false  punctilio, even contrary to his own judgment. These are  reflections which I know your own good sense will suggest, but I  will make bold to propose a remedy for this gigantic evil, which  seems to gain ground everyday: let a court be instituted for  taking cognizance of all breaches of honour, with power to punish  by fine, pillory, sentence of infamy, outlawry, and exile, by  virtue of an act of parliament made for this purpose; and all  persons insulted, shall have recourse to this tribunal: let every  man who seeks personal reparation with sword, pistol, or other  instrument of death, be declared infamous, and banished the  kingdom: let every man, convicted of having used a sword or  pistol, or other mortal weapon, against another, either in duel  or rencountre, occasioned by any previous quarrel, be subject to  the same penalties: if any man is killed in a duel, let his body  be hanged upon a public gibbet, for a certain time, and then  given to the surgeons: let his antagonist be hanged as a  murderer, and dissected also; and some mark of infamy be set on  the memory of both. I apprehend such regulations would put an  effectual stop to the practice of duelling, which nothing but  the fear of infamy can support; for I am persuaded, that no  being, capable of reflection, would prosecute the trade of  assassination at the risque of his own life, if this hazard  was at the same time reinforced by the certain prospect of  infamy and ruin. Every person of sentiment would in that case  allow, that an officer, who in a duel robs a deserving woman  of her husband, a number of children of their father, a family  of its support, and the community of a fellow-citizen, has as  little merit to plead from exposing his own person, as a  highwayman, or housebreaker, who every day risques his life  to rob or plunder that which is not of half the importance  to society. I think it was from the Buccaneers of America,  that the English have learned to abolish one solecism in  the practice of duelling: those adventurers decided their  personal quarrels with pistols; and this improvement  has been adopted in Great Britain with good success; though  in France, and other parts of the continent, it is looked  upon as a proof of their barbarity. It is, however, the only  circumstance of duelling, which savours of common sense, as it  puts all mankind upon a level, the old with the young, the weak  with the strong, the unwieldy with the nimble, and the man who  knows not how to hold a sword with the spadassin, who has  practised fencing from the cradle. What glory is there in a man's  vanquishing an adversary over whom he has a manifest advantage?  To abide the issue of a combat in this case, does not even  require that moderate share of resolution which nature has  indulged to her common children. Accordingly, we have seen many  instances of a coward's provoking a man of honour to battle. In  the reign of our second Charles, when duels flourished in all  their absurdity, and the seconds fought while their principals  were engaged, Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, not content with  having debauched the countess of Shrewsbury and publishing her  shame, took all opportunities of provoking the earl to single  combat, hoping he should have an easy conquest, his lordship  being a puny little creature, quiet, inoffensive, and every way  unfit for such personal contests. He ridiculed him on all  occasions; and at last declared in public company, that there was  no glory in cuckolding Shrewsbury, who had not spirit to resent  the injury. This was an insult which could not be overlooked. The  earl sent him a challenge; and they agreed to fight, at Barns-Elms,  in presence of two gentlemen, whom they chose for their  seconds. All the four engaged at the same time; the first thrust  was fatal to the earl of Shrewsbury; and his friend killed the  duke's second at the same instant. Buckingham, elated with his  exploit, set out immediately for the earl's seat at Cliefden,  where he lay with his wife, after having boasted of the murder of  her husband, whose blood he shewed her upon his sword, as a  trophy of his prowess. But this very duke of Buckingham was  little better than a poltroon at bottom. When the gallant earl of  Ossory challenged him to fight in Chelsea fields, he crossed the  water to Battersea, where he pretended to wait for his lordship;  and then complained to the house of lords, that Ossory had given  him the rendezvous, and did not keep his appointment. He knew the  house would interpose in the quarrel, and he was not  disappointed. Their lordships obliged them both to give their  word of honour, that their quarrel should have no other  consequences.

I ought to make an apology for having troubled a lady with so  many observations on a subject so unsuitable to the softness of  the fair sex; but I know you cannot be indifferent to any thing  that so nearly affects the interests of humanity, which I can  safely aver have alone suggested every thing which has been said  by, Madam, Your very humble servant.

LETTER XVI

NICE, May 2, 1764.

DEAR DOCTOR,--A few days ago, I rode out with two gentlemen of  this country, to see a stream of water which was formerly  conveyed in an aqueduct to the antient city of Cemenelion, from  whence this place is distant about a mile, though separated by  abrupt rocks and deep hollows, which last are here honoured with  the name of vallies. The water, which is exquisitely cool, and  light and pure, gushes from the middle of a rock by a hole which  leads to a subterranean aqueduct carried through the middle of  the mountain. This is a Roman work, and the more I considered it,  appeared the more stupendous. A peasant who lives upon the spot  told us, he had entered by this hole at eight in the morning, and  advanced so far, that it was four in the afternoon before he came  out. He said he walked in the water, through a regular canal  formed of a hard stone, lined with a kind of cement, and vaulted  overhead; but so high in most parts he could stand upright, yet  in others, the bed of the canal was so filled with earth and  stones, that he was obliged to stoop in passing. He said that  there were air-holes at certain distances (and indeed I saw one  of these not far from the present issue) that there were some  openings and stone seats on the sides, and here and there figures  of men formed of stone, with hammers and working tools in their  hands. I am apt to believe the fellow romanced a little, in order  to render his adventure the more marvellous: but I am certainly  informed, that several persons have entered this passage, and  proceeded a considerable way by the light of torches, without  arriving at the source, which (if we may believe the tradition of  the country) is at the distance of eight leagues from this  opening; but this is altogether incredible. The stream is now  called la fontaine de muraille, and is carefully conducted by  different branches into the adjacent vineyards and gardens, for  watering the ground. On the side of the same mountain, more  southerly, at the distance of half a mile, there is another still  more copious discharge of the same kind of water, called la  source du temple. It was conveyed through the same kind of  passage, and put to the same use as the other; and I should  imagine they are both from the same source, which, though  hitherto undiscovered, must be at a considerable distance, as the  mountain is continued for several leagues to the westward,  without exhibiting the least signs of water in any other part.  But, exclusive of the subterranean conduits, both these streams  must have been conveyed through aqueducts extending from hence to  Cemenelion over steep rocks and deep ravines, at a prodigious  expence. The water from this source du temple, issues from a  stone building which covers the passage in the rock. It serves to  turn several olive, corn, and paper mills, being conveyed through  a modern aqueduct raised upon paultry arcades at the expence of  the public, and afterwards is branched off in very small streams,  for the benefit of this parched and barren country. The Romans  were so used to bathing, that they could not exist without a  great quantity of water; and this, I imagine, is one reason that  induced them to spare no labour and expence in bringing it from a  distance, when they had not plenty of it at home. But, besides  this motive, they had another: they were so nice and delicate in  their taste of water, that they took great pains to supply  themselves with the purest and lightest from afar, for drinking  and culinary uses, even while they had plenty of an inferior sort  for their bath, and other domestic purposes. There are springs of  good water on the spot where Cemenelion stood: but there is a  hardness in all well-water, which quality is deposited in running  a long course, especially, if exposed to the influence of the sun  and air. The Romans, therefore, had good reason to soften and  meliorate this element, by conveying it a good length of way in  open aqueducts. What was used in the baths of Cemenelion, they  probably brought in leaden pipes, some of which have been dug up  very lately by accident. You must know, I made a second excursion  to these antient ruins, and measured the arena of the  amphitheatre with packthread. It is an oval figure; the longest  diameter extending to about one hundred and thirteen feet, and  the shortest to eighty-eight; but I will not answer for the  exactness of the measurement. In the center of it, there was a  square stone, with an iron ring, to which I suppose the wild  beasts were tied, to prevent their springing upon the spectators.  Some of the seats remain, the two opposite entrances, consisting  each of one large gate, and two lateral smaller doors, arched:  there is also a considerable portion of the external wall; but no  columns, or other ornaments of architecture. Hard by, in the  garden of the count de Gubernatis, I saw the remains of a bath,  fronting the portal of the temple, which I have described in a  former letter; and here were some shafts of marble pillars,  particularly a capital of the Corinthian order beautifully cut,  of white alabaster. Here the count found a large quantity of fine  marble, which he has converted to various uses; and some  mutilated statues, bronze as well as marble. The peasant shewed  me some brass and silver medals, which he has picked up at  different times in labouring the ground; together with several  oblong beads of coloured glass, which were used as ear-rings by  the Roman ladies; and a small seal of agate, very much defaced.  Two of the medals were of Maximian and Gallienus; the rest were  so consumed, that I could not read the legend. You know, that on  public occasions, such as games, and certain sacrifices, handfuls  of medals were thrown among the people; a practice, which  accounts for the great number which have been already found in  this district. I saw some subterranean passages, which seemed to  have been common sewers; and a great number of old walls still  standing along the brink of a precipice, which overhangs the  Paglion. The peasants tell me, that they never dig above a yard  in depth, without finding vaults or cavities. All the vineyards  and garden-grounds, for a considerable extent, are vaulted  underneath; and all the ground that produces their grapes, fruit,  and garden-stuff, is no more than the crumpled lime and rubbish  of old Roman buildings, mixed with manure brought from Nice. This  antient town commanded a most noble prospect of the sea; but is  altogether inaccessible by any kind of wheel carriage. If you  make shift to climb to it on horseback, you cannot descend to the  plain again, without running the risk of breaking your neck.

About seven or eight miles on the other side of Nice, are the  remains of another Roman monument which has greatly suffered from  the barbarity of successive ages. It was a trophy erected by the  senate of Rome, in honour of Augustus Caesar, when he had totally  subdued all the ferocious nations of these Maritime Alps; such as  the Trumpilini Camuni, Vennontes, Isnarci, Breuni, etc. It stands  upon the top of a mountain which overlooks the town of Monaco,  and now exhibits the appearance of an old ruined tower. There is  a description of what it was, in an Italian manuscript, by which  it appears to have been a beautiful edifice of two stories,  adorned with columns and trophies in alto-relievo, with a statue  of Augustus Caesar on the top. On one of the sides was an  inscription, some words of which are still legible, upon the  fragment of a marble found close to the old building: but the  whole is preserved in Pliny, who gives it, in these words, lib.  iii. cap. 20.

IMPERATORI CAESARI DIVI. F. AVG. PONT. MAX. IMP. XIV. TRIBVNIC. POTEST. XVIII. S. P. Q. R. QVODEIVSDVCTV, AVSPICIISQ. GENIES ALPINAE OMNES, QVAE A MARI SVPERO AD INFERVM PERTINEBANT, SVB IMPERIVM PO. RO. SUNT REDAC. GENTES ALPINAE DEVICTAE. TRVMPILINI CAMVNI, VENNONETES, ISNARCI, BREVNI, NAVNES, FOCVNATES, VINDELICORVM GENTES QVATVOR, CONSVANETES, VIRVCINATES, LICATES, CATENATES, ABI- SONTES, RVGVSCI, SVANETES, CALVCONES, BRIXENTES, LEPONTII, VIBERI, NANTVATES, SEDVNI, VERAGRI, SALASSI, ACITAVONES MEDVLLI, VCINI, CATVRIGES, BRIGIANI, SOGIVNTII, NEMALONES, EDENETES, ESVBIANI, VEAMINI, GALLITAE, TRIVLLATI, ECTINI, VERGVNNI, EGVITVRI. NEMENTVRI, ORATELLI, NERVSCI, VELAVNI, SVETRI.

This Trophy is erected by the Senate and People of Rome to the  Emperor Caesar Augustus, son of the divine Julius, in the  fourteenth year of his imperial Dignity, and in the eighteenth of  his Tribunician Power, because under his command and auspices all  the nations of the Alps from the Adriatic to the Tuscanian Sea,  were reduced under the Dominion of Rome. The Alpine nations  subdued were the Trumpelini, etc.

Pliny, however, is mistaken in placing this inscription on a  trophy near the Augusta praetoria, now called Aosta, in Piedmont:  where, indeed, there is a triumphal arch, but no inscription.  This noble monument of antiquity was first of all destroyed by  fire; and afterwards, in Gothic times, converted into a kind of  fortification. The marbles belonging to it were either employed  in adorning the church of the adjoining village, which is still  called Turbia, a corruption of Trophaea; [This was formerly a  considerable town called Villa Martis, and pretends to the honour  of having given birth to Aulus Helvius, who succeeded Commodus as  emperor of Rome, by the name of Pertinax which he acquired from  his obstinate refusal of that dignity, when it was forced upon  him by the senate. You know this man, though of very low birth,  possessed many excellent qualities, and was basely murdered by  the praetorian guards, at the instigation of Didius Tulianus. For  my part, I could never read without emotion, that celebrated  eulogium of the senate who exclaimed after his death, Pertinace,  imperante, securi viximus neminem timuimus, patre pio, patre  senatus, patre omnium, honorum, We lived secure and were afraid  of nothing under the Government of Pertinax, our affectionate  Father, Father of the Senate, Father to all the children of  Virtue.] or converted into tomb-stones, or carried off to be  preserved in one or two churches of Nice. At present, the work  has the appearance of a ruinous watch-tower, with Gothic  battlements; and as such stands undistinguished by those who  travel by sea from hence to Genoa, and other ports of Italy. I  think I have now described all the antiquities in the  neighbourhood of Nice, except some catacombs or caverns, dug in a  rock at St. Hospice, which Busching, in his geography, has  described as a strong town and seaport, though in fact, there is  not the least vestige either of town or village. It is a point of  land almost opposite to the tower of Turbia, with the mountains  of which it forms a bay, where there is a great and curious  fishery of the tunny fish, farmed of the king of Sardinia. Upon  this point there is a watch-tower still kept in repair, to give  notice to the people in the neighbourhood, in case any Barbary  corsairs should appear on the coast. The catacombs were in all  probability dug, in former times, as places of retreat for the  inhabitants upon sudden descents of the Saracens, who greatly  infested these seas for several successive centuries. Many  curious persons have entered them and proceeded a considerable  way by torch-light, without arriving at the further extremity;  and the tradition of the country is, that they reach as far as  the ancient city of Cemenelion; but this is an idle supposition,  almost as ridiculous as that which ascribes them to the labour  and ingenuity of the fairies: they consist of narrow subterranean  passages, vaulted with stone and lined with cement. Here and  there one finds detached apartments like small chambers, where I  suppose the people remained concealed till the danger was over.  Diodorus Siculus tells us, that the antient inhabitants of this  country usually lived under ground. "Ligures in terra cubant ut  plurimum; plures ad cava, saxa speluncasque ab natura factas ubi  tegantur corpora divertunt," "The Ligurians mostly lie on the  bare ground; many of them lodge in bare Caves and Caverns where  they are sheltered from the inclemency of the weather." This was  likewise the custom of the Troglodytae, a people bordering upon  Aethiopia who, according to Aelian, lived in subterranean  caverns; from whence, indeed they took their name trogli,  signifying a cavern; and Virgil, in his Georgics, thus describes  the Sarmatae,

Ipsi in defossis specubus, secura sub alta  Ocia agunt terra.--

In Subterranean Caves secure they lie  Nor heed the transient seasons as they fly.

These are dry subjects; but such as the country affords. If we  have not white paper, we must snow with brown. Even that which I  am now scrawling may be useful, if, not entertaining: it is  therefore the more confidently offered by--Dear Sir, Yours  affectionately.

LETTER XVII

NICE, July 2, 1764.

DEAR SIR,--Nice was originally a colony from Marseilles. You know  the Phocians (if we may believe Justin and Polybius) settled in  Gaul, and built Marseilles, during the reign of Tarquinius  Priscus at Rome. This city flourished to such a degree, that long  before the Romans were in a condition to extend their dominion,  it sent forth colonies, and established them along the coast of  Liguria. Of these, Nice, or Nicaea, was one of the most  remarkable; so called, in all probability, from the Greek word  Nike, signifying Victoria, in consequence of some important  victory obtained over the Salii and Ligures, who were the antient  inhabitants of this country. Nice, with its mother city, being in  the sequel subdued by the Romans, fell afterwards successively  under the dominion of the Goths, Burgundians, and Franks, the  kings of Arles, and the kings of Naples, as counts of Provence.  In the year one thousand three hundred and eighty-eight, the city  and county of Nice being but ill protected by the family of  Durazzo, voluntarily surrendered themselves to Amadaeus, surnamed  the Red, duke of Savoy; and since that period, they have  continued as part of that potentate's dominions, except at such  times as they have been over-run and possessed by the power of  France, which hath always been a troublesome neighbour to this  country. The castle was begun by the Arragonian counts of  Provence, and afterwards enlarged by several successive dukes of  Savoy, so as to be deemed impregnable, until the modern method of  besieging began to take place. A fruitless attempt was made upon  it in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-three, by the  French and Turks in conjunction: but it was reduced several times  after that period, and is now in ruins. The celebrated engineer  Vauban, being commanded by Louis XIV to give in a plan for  fortifying Nice, proposed, that the river Paglion should be  turned into a new channel, so as to surround the town to the  north, and fall into the harbour; that where the Paglion now runs  to the westward of the city walls, there should be a deep ditch  to be filled with sea-water; and that a fortress should be built  to the westward of this fosse. These particulars might be  executed at no very great expence; but, I apprehend, they would  be ineffectual, as the town is commanded by every hill in the  neighbourhood; and the exhalations from stagnating sea-water  would infallibly render the air unwholesome. Notwithstanding the  undoubted antiquity of Nice, very few monuments of that antiquity  now remain. The inhabitants say, they were either destroyed by  the Saracens in their successive descents upon the coast, by the  barbarous nations in their repeated incursions, or used in  fortifying the castle, as well as in building other edifices. The  city of Cemenelion, however, was subject to the same disasters,  and even entirely ruined, nevertheless, we still find remains of  its antient splendor. There have been likewise a few stones found  at Nice, with antient inscriptions; but there is nothing of this  kind standing, unless we give the name of antiquity to a marble  cross on the road to Provence, about half a mile from the city.  It stands upon a pretty high pedestal with steps, under a pretty  stone cupola or dome, supported by four Ionic pillars, on the  spot where Charles V. emperor of Germany, Francis I. of France,  and pope Paul II. agreed to have a conference, in order to  determine all their disputes. The emperor came hither by sea,  with a powerful fleet, and the French king by land, at the head  of a numerous army. All the endeavours of his holiness, however,  could not effect a peace; but they agreed to a truce of ten  years. Mezerai affirms, that these two great princes never saw  one another on this occasion; and that this shyness was owing to  the management of the pope, whose private designs might have been  frustrated, had they come to a personal interview. In the front  of the colonade, there is a small stone, with an inscription in  Latin, which is so high, and so much defaced, that I cannot read  it.

In the sixteenth century there was a college erected at Nice, by  Emanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, for granting degrees to  students of law; and in the year one thousand six hundred and  fourteen, Charles Emanuel I. instituted the senate of Nice;  consisting of a president, and a certain number of senators, who  are distinguished by their purple robes, and other ensigns of  authority. They administer justice, having the power of life and  death, not only through the whole county of Nice, but causes are  evoked from Oneglia, and some other places, to their tribunal,  which is the dernier ressort, from whence there is no appeal. The  commandant, however, by virtue of his military power and  unrestricted authority, takes upon him to punish individuals by  imprisonment, corporal pains, and banishment, without consulting  the senate, or indeed, observing any form of trial. The only  redress against any unjust exercise of this absolute power, is by  complaint to the king; and you know, what chance a poor man has  for being redressed in this manner.

With respect to religion, I may safely say, that here  superstition reigns under the darkest shades of ignorance and  prejudice. I think there are ten convents and three nunneries  within and without the walls of Nice; and among them all, I never  could hear of one man who had made any tolerable advances in any  kind of human learning. All ecclesiastics are exempted from any  exertion of civil power, being under the immediate protection and  authority of the bishop, or his vicar. The bishop of Nice is  suffragan of the archbishop of Ambrun in France; and the revenues  of the see amount to between five and six hundred pounds  sterling. We have likewise an office of the inquisition, though I  do not hear that it presumes to execute any acts of jurisdiction,  without the king's special permission. All the churches are  sanctuaries for all kinds of criminals, except those guilty of  high treason; and the priests are extremely jealous of their  privileges in this particular. They receive, with open arms,  murderers, robbers, smugglers, fraudulent bankrupts, and felons  of every denomination; and never give them up, until after  having stipulated for their lives and liberty. I need not enlarge  upon the pernicious consequences of this infamous prerogative,  calculated to raise and extend the power and influence of the  Roman church, on the ruins of morality and good order. I saw a  fellow, who had three days before murdered his wife in the last  month of pregnancy, taking the air with great composure and  serenity, on the steps of a church in Florence; and nothing is  more common, than to see the most execrable villains diverting  themselves in the cloysters of some convents at Rome.

Nice abounds with noblesse, marquisses, counts, and barons. Of  these, three or four families are really respectable: the rest  are novi homines, sprung from Bourgeois, who have saved a little  money by their different occupations, and raised themselves to  the rank of noblesse by purchase. One is descended from an  avocat; another from an apothecary; a third from a retailer of  wine, a fourth from a dealer in anchovies; and I am told, there  is actually a count at Villefranche, whose father sold macaroni  in the streets. A man in this country may buy a marquisate, or a  county, for the value of three or four hundred pounds sterling,  and the title follows the fief; but he may purchase lettres de  noblesse for about thirty or forty guineas. In Savoy, there are  six hundred families of noblesse; the greater part of which have  not above one hundred crowns a year to maintain their dignity. In  the mountains of Piedmont, and even in this country of Nice,  there are some representatives of very antient and noble  families, reduced to the condition of common peasants; but they  still retain the antient pride of their houses, and boast of the  noble blood that runs in their veins. A gentleman told me, that  in travelling through the mountains, he was obliged to pass a  night in the cottage of one of these rusticated nobles, who  called to his son in the evening, "Chevalier, as-tu donne a  manger aux cochons?" "Have you fed the Hogs, Sir Knight?" This,  however, is not the case with the noblesse of Nice. Two or three  of them have about four or five hundred a year: the rest, in general,  may have about one hundred pistoles, arising from the silk, oil, wine,  and oranges, produced in their small plantations, where they have  also country houses. Some few of these are well built,  commodious, and situated; but, for the most part, they are  miserable enough. Our noblesse, notwithstanding their origin, and  the cheap rate at which their titles have been obtained, are  nevertheless extremely tenacious of their privileges, very  delicate in maintaining the etiquette, and keep at a very stately  distance from the Bourgeoisie. How they live in their families, I  do not choose to enquire; but, in public, Madame appears in her  robe of gold, or silver stuff, with her powder and frisure, her  perfumes, her paint and her patches; while Monsieur Le Comte  struts about in his lace and embroidery. Rouge and fard are more  peculiarly necessary in this country, where the complexion and  skin are naturally swarthy and yellow. I have likewise observed,  that most of the females are pot-bellied; a circumstance owing, I  believe, to the great quantity of vegetable trash which they eat.  All the horses, mules, asses, and cattle, which feed upon grass,  have the same distension. This kind of food produces such acid  juices in the stomach, as excite a perpetual sense of hunger. I  have been often amazed at the voracious appetites of these  people. You must not expect that I should describe the tables and  the hospitality of our Nissard gentry. Our consul, who is a very  honest man, told me, he had lived four and thirty years in the  country, without having once eat or drank in any of their houses.

The noblesse of Nice cannot leave the country without express  leave from the king; and this leave, when obtained, is for a  limited time, which they dare not exceed, on pain of incurring  his majesty's displeasure. They must, therefore, endeavour to  find amusements at home; and this, I apprehend, would be no easy  task for people of an active spirit or restless disposition. True  it is, the religion of the country supplies a never-failing fund  of pastime to those who have any relish for devotion; and this is  here a prevailing taste. We have had transient visits of a  puppet-shew, strolling musicians, and rope-dancers; but they did  not like their quarters, and decamped without beat of drum. In  the summer, about eight or nine at night, part of the noblesse  may be seen assembled in a place called the Pare; which is,  indeed, a sort of a street formed by a row of very paltry houses  on one side, and on the other, by part of the town-wall, which  screens it from a prospect of the sea, the only object that could  render it agreeable. Here you may perceive the noblesse stretched  in pairs upon logs of wood, like so many seals upon the rocks by  moon-light, each dame with her cicisbeo: for, you must  understand, this Italian fashion prevails at Nice among all ranks  of people; and there is not such a passion as jealousy known. The  husband and the cicisbeo live together as sworn brothers; and the  wife and the mistress embrace each other with marks of the  warmest affection. I do not choose to enter into particulars. I  cannot open the scandalous chronicle of Nice, without hazard of  contamination. With respect to delicacy and decorum, you may  peruse dean Swift's description of the Yahoos, and then you will  have some idea of the porcheria, that distinguishes the gallantry  of Nice. But the Pare is not the only place of public resort for  our noblesse in a summer's evening. Just without one of our  gates, you will find them seated in ditches on the highway side,  serenaded with the croaking of frogs, and the bells and braying  of mules and asses continually passing in a perpetual cloud of  dust. Besides these amusements, there is a public conversazione  every evening at the commandant's house called the Government,  where those noble personages play at cards for farthings. In  carnival time, there is also, at this same government, a ball  twice or thrice a week, carried on by subscription. At this  assembly every person, without distinction, is permitted to dance  in masquerade: but, after dancing, they are obliged to unmask,  and if Bourgeois, to retire. No individual can give a ball,  without obtaining a permission and guard of the commandant; and  then his house is open to all masques, without distinction, who  are provided with tickets, which tickets are sold by the  commandant's secretary, at five sols a-piece, and delivered to  the guard at the door. If I have a mind to entertain my  particular friends, I cannot have more than a couple of violins;  and, in that case, it is called a conversazione.

Though the king of Sardinia takes all opportunities to  distinguish the subjects of Great-Britain with particular marks  of respect, I have seen enough to be convinced, that our nation  is looked upon with an evil eye by the people of Nice; and this  arises partly from religious prejudices, and partly from envy,  occasioned by a ridiculous notion of our superior wealth. For my  own part, I owe them nothing on the score of civilities; and  therefore, I shall say nothing more on the subject, lest I should  be tempted to deviate from that temperance and impartiality which  I would fain hope have hitherto characterised the remarks of,-- Dear Sir, your faithful, humble servant.

LETTER XVIII

NICE, September 2, 1764.

DEAR DOCTOR,--I wrote in May to Mr. B-- at Geneva, and gave him  what information he desired to have, touching the conveniences of  Nice. I shall now enter into the same detail, for the benefit of  such of your friends or patients, as may have occasion to try  this climate.

The journey from Calais to Nice, of four persons in a coach, or  two post-chaises, with a servant on horseback, travelling post,  may be performed with ease, for about one hundred and twenty  pounds, including every expence. Either at Calais or at Paris,  you will always find a travelling coach or berline, which you may  buy for thirty or forty guineas, and this will serve very well to  reconvey you to your own country.

In the town of Nice, you will find no ready-furnished lodgings  for a whole family. Just without one of the gates, there are two  houses to be let, ready-furnished, for about five loui'dores per  month. As for the country houses in this neighbourhood, they are  damp in winter, and generally without chimnies; and in summer  they are rendered uninhabitable by the heat and the vermin. If  you hire a tenement in Nice, you must take it for a year certain;  and this will cost you about twenty pounds sterling. For this  price, I have a ground floor paved with brick, consisting of a  kitchen, two large halls, a couple of good rooms with chimnies,  three large closets that serve for bed-chambers, and dressing-rooms,  a butler's room, and three apartments for servants, lumber or stores, to which we ascend by narrow wooden stairs. I  have likewise two small gardens, well stocked with oranges,  lemons, peaches, figs, grapes, corinths, sallad, and pot-herbs.  It is supplied with a draw-well of good water, and there is  another in the vestibule of the house, which is cool, large, and  magnificent. You may hire furniture for such a tenement for about  two guineas a month: but I chose rather to buy what was  necessary; and this cost me about sixty pounds. I suppose it will  fetch me about half the money when I leave the place. It is very  difficult to find a tolerable cook at Nice. A common maid, who  serves the people of the country, for three or four livres a  month, will not live with an English family under eight or ten.  They are all slovenly, slothful, and unconscionable cheats. The  markets at Nice are tolerably well supplied. Their beef, which  comes from Piedmont, is pretty good, and we have it all the year.  In the winter we have likewise excellent pork, and delicate lamb;  but the mutton is indifferent. Piedmont, also, affords us  delicious capons, fed with maize; and this country produces  excellent turkeys, but very few geese. Chickens and pullets are  extremely meagre. I have tried to fatten them, without success.  In summer they are subject to the pip, and die in great numbers.  Autumn and winter are the seasons for game; hares, partridges,  quails, wild-pigeons, woodcocks, snipes, thrushes, beccaficas,  and ortolans. Wild-boar is sometimes found in the mountains: it  has a delicious taste, not unlike that of the wild hog in  Jamaica; and would make an excellent barbecue, about the  beginning of winter, when it is in good case: but, when meagre,  the head only is presented at tables. Pheasants are very scarce.  As for the heath-game, I never saw but one cock, which my servant  bought in the market, and brought home; but the commandant's cook  came into my kitchen, and carried it of, after it was half  plucked, saying, his master had company to dinner. The hares are  large, plump, and juicy. The partridges are generally of the red  sort; large as pullets, and of a good flavour: there are also  some grey partridges in the mountains; and another sort of a  white colour, that weigh four or five pounds each. Beccaficas are  smaller than sparrows, but very fat, and they are generally eaten  half raw. The best way of dressing them is to stuff them into a  roll, scooped of it's crum; to baste them well with butter, and  roast them, until they are brown and crisp. The ortolans are kept  in cages, and crammed, until they die of fat, then eaten as  dainties. The thrush is presented with the trail, because the  bird feeds on olives. They may as well eat the trail of a sheep,  because it feeds on the aromatic herbs of the mountain. In the  summer, we have beef, veal, and mutton, chicken, and ducks; which  last are very fat, and very flabby. All the meat is tough in this  season, because the excessive heat, and great number of flies,  will not admit of its being kept any time after it is killed.  Butter and milk, though not very delicate, we have all the year.  Our tea and fine sugar come from Marseilles, at a very reasonable  price.

Nice is not without variety of fish; though they are not counted  so good in their kinds as those of the ocean. Soals, and flat-fish  in general, are scarce. Here are some mullets, both grey and  red. We sometimes see the dory, which is called St Pierre; with  rock-fish, bonita, and mackarel. The gurnard appears pretty  often; and there is plenty of a kind of large whiting, which eats  pretty well; but has not the delicacy of that which is caught on  our coast. One of the best fish of this country, is called Le  Loup, about two or three pounds in weight; white, firm, and well-flavoured.  Another, no-way inferior to it, is the Moustel, about  the same size; of a dark-grey colour, and short, blunt snout;  growing thinner and flatter from the shoulders downwards, so as  to resemble a soal at the tail. This cannot be the mustela of the  antients, which is supposed to be the sea lamprey. Here too are  found the vyvre, or, as we call it, weaver; remarkable for its  long, sharp spines, so dangerous to the fingers of the fishermen.  We have abundance of the saepia, or cuttle-fish, of which the  people in this country make a delicate ragout; as also of the  polype de mer, which is an ugly animal, with long feelers, like  tails, which they often wind about the legs of the fishermen.  They are stewed with onions, and eat something like cow-heel. The  market sometimes affords the ecrivisse de mer, which is a lobster  without claws, of a sweetish taste; and there are a few rock  oysters, very small and very rank. Sometimes the fishermen find  under water, pieces of a very hard cement, like plaister of  Paris, which contain a kind of muscle, called la datte, from its  resemblance to a date. These petrifactions are commonly of a  triangular form and may weigh about twelve or fifteen pounds each  and one of them may contain a dozen of these muscles which have  nothing extraordinary in the taste or flavour, though extremely  curious, as found alive and juicy, in the heart of a rock, almost  as hard as marble, without any visible communication with the air  or water. I take it for granted, however, that the inclosing  cement is porous, and admits the finer parts of the surrounding  fluid. In order to reach the muscles, this cement must be broke  with large hammers; and it may be truly said, the kernal is not worth the trouble of cracking the shell. [These are found  in great plenty at Ancona and other parts of the Adriatic, where  they go by the name of Bollani, as we are informed by Keysler.]  Among the fish of this country, there is a very ugly animal of  the eel species, which might pass for a serpent: it is of a  dusky, black colour, marked with spots of yellow, about eighteen  inches, or two feet long. The Italians call it murena; but  whether it is the fish which had the same name among the antient  Romans, I cannot pretend to determine. The antient murena was  counted a great delicacy, and was kept in ponds for extraordinary  occasions. Julius Caesar borrowed six thousand for one  entertainment: but I imagined this was the river lamprey. The  murena of this country is in no esteem, and only eaten by the  poor people.

Craw-fish and trout are rarely found in the rivers among the  mountains. The sword-fish is much esteemed in Nice, and called  l'empereur, about six or seven feet long: but I have never seen  it. [Since I wrote the above letter, I have eaten several times  of this fish, which is as white as the finest veal, and extremely  delicate. The emperor associates with the tunny fish, and is  always taken in their company.] They are very scarce; and when  taken, are generally concealed, because the head belongs to the  commandant, who has likewise the privilege of buying the best  fish at a very low price. For which reason, the choice pieces are  concealed by the fishermen, and sent privately to Piedmont or  Genoa. But, the chief fisheries on this coast are of the  sardines, anchovies, and tunny. These are taken in small  quantities all the year; but spring and summer is the season when  they mostly abound. In June and July, a fleet of about fifty  fishing-boats puts to sea every evening about eight o'clock, and  catches anchovies in immense quantities. One small boat sometimes  takes in one night twenty-five rup, amounting to six hundred  weight; but it must be observed, that the pound here, as well as  in other parts of Italy, consists but of twelve ounces.  Anchovies, besides their making a considerable article in the  commerce of Nice, are a great resource in all families. The  noblesse and burgeois sup on sallad and anchovies, which are  eaten on all their meagre days. The fishermen and mariners all  along this coast have scarce any other food but dry bread, with a  few pickled anchovies; and when the fish is eaten, they rub their  crusts with the brine. Nothing can be more delicious than fresh  anchovies fried in oil: I prefer them to the smelts of the  Thames. I need not mention, that the sardines and anchovies are  caught in nets; salted, barrelled, and exported into all the  different kingdoms and states of Europe. The sardines, however,  are largest and fattest in the month of September. A company of  adventurers have farmed the tunny-fishery of the king, for six  years; a monopoly, for which they pay about three thousand pounds  sterling. They are at a very considerable expence for nets,  boats, and attendance. Their nets are disposed in a very curious  manner across the small bay of St. Hospice, in this  neighbourhood, where the fish chiefly resort. They are never  removed, except in the winter, and when they want repair: but  there are avenues for the fish to enter, and pass, from one  inclosure to another. There is a man in a boat, who constantly  keeps watch. When he perceives they are fairly entered, he has a  method for shutting all the passes, and confining the fish to one  apartment of the net, which is lifted up into the boat, until the  prisoners are taken and secured. The tunny-fish generally runs  from fifty to one hundred weight; but some of them are much  larger. They are immediately gutted, boiled, and cut in slices.  The guts and head afford oil: the slices are partly dried, to be  eaten occasionally with oil and vinegar, or barrelled up in oil,  to be exported. It is counted a delicacy in Italy and Piedmont,  and tastes not unlike sturgeon. The famous pickle of the  ancients, called garum, was made of the gills and blood of the  tunny, or thynnus. There is a much more considerable fishery of  it in Sardinia, where it is said to employ four hundred persons;  but this belongs to the duc de St. Pierre. In the neighbourhood  of Villa Franca, there are people always employed in fishing for  coral and sponge, which grow adhering to the rocks under water.  Their methods do not favour much of ingenuity. For the coral,  they lower down a swab, composed of what is called spunyarn on  board our ships of war, hanging in distinct threads, and sunk by  means of a great weight, which, striking against the coral in its  descent, disengages it from the rocks; and some of the pieces  being intangled among the threads of the swab, are brought up  with it above water. The sponge is got by means of a cross-stick,  fitted with hooks, which being lowered down, fastens upon it, and  tears it from the rocks. In some parts of the Adriatic and  Archipelago, these substances are gathered by divers, who can  remain five minutes below water. But I will not detain you one  minute longer; though I must observe, that there is plenty of  fine samphire growing along all these rocks, neglected and  unknown.--Adieu.

LETTER XIX

NICE, October 10, 1764.

DEAR SIR,--Before I tell you the price of provisions at Nice, it  will be necessary to say something of the money. The gold coin of  Sardinia consists of the doppia di savoia, value twenty-four  livres Piedmontese, about the size of a loui'dore; and the mezzo  doppia, or piece of twelve livres. In silver, there is the scudo  of six livres, the mezzo scudo of three; and the quarto, or pezza  di trenta soldi: but all these are very scarce. We seldom see any  gold and silver coin, but the loui'dore, and the six, and three-livre  Pieces of France; a sure sign that the French suffer by  their contraband commerce with the Nissards. The coin chiefly  used at market is a piece of copper silvered, that passes for  seven sols and a half; another of the same sort, valued two sols  and a half. They have on one side the impression of the king's  head; and on the other, the arms of Savoy, with a ducal crown,  inscribed with his name and titles. There are of genuine copper,  pieces of one sol, stamped on one side with a cross fleuree; and  on the reverse, with the king's cypher and crown, inscribed as  the others: finally, there is another small copper piece, called  piccalon, the sixth part of a sol, with a plain cross, and on the  reverse, a slip-knot surmounted with a crown; the legend as  above. The impression and legend on the gold and silver coins,  are the same as those on the pieces of seven sols and a half. The  livre of Piedmont consists of twenty sols, and is very near of  the same value as an English shilling: ten sols, therefore, are  equal to six-pence sterling. Butcher's meat in general sells at  Nice for three sols a pound; and veal is something dearer: but  then there are but twelve ounces in the pound, which being  allowed for, sixteen ounces, come for something less than twopence  halfpenny English. Fish commonly sells for four sols the  twelve ounces, or five for the English pound; and these five are  equivalent to three-pence of our money: but sometimes we are  obliged to pay five, and even six sols for the Piedmontese pound  of fish. A turkey that would sell for five or six shillings at  the London market, costs me but three at Nice. I can buy a good  capon for thirty sols, or eighteen-pence; and the same price I  pay for a brace of partridges, or a good hare. I can have a  woodcock for twenty-four sols; but the pigeons are dearer than in  London. Rabbits are very rare; and there is scarce a goose to be  seen in the whole county of Nice. Wild-ducks and teal are  sometimes to be had in the winter; and now I am speaking of sea-fowl,  it may not be amiss to tell you what I know of the halcyon,  or king's-fisher. It is a bird, though very rare in this country  about the size of a pigeon; the body brown, and the belly white:  by a wonderful instinct it makes its nest upon the surface of the  sea, and lays its eggs in the month of November, when the  Mediterranean is always calm and smooth as a mill-pond. The  people about here call them martinets, because they begin to  hatch about Martinmass. Their nests are sometimes seen floating  near the shore, and generally become the prize of the boys, who  are very alert in catching them.

You know all sea-birds are allowed by the church of Rome to be  eaten on meagre days, as a kind of fish; and the monks especially  do not fail to make use of this permission. Sea turtle, or  tortoises, are often found at sea by the mariners, in these  latitudes: but they are not the green sort, so much in request  among the aldermen of London. All the Mediterranean turtle are of  the kind called loggerhead, which in the West-Indies are eaten by  none but hungry seamen, negroes, and the lowest class of people.  One of these, weighing about two hundred pounds, was lately  brought on shore by the fishermen of Nice, who found it floating  asleep on the surface of the sea. The whole town was alarmed at  sight of such a monster, the nature of which they could not  comprehend. However, the monks, called minims, of St. Francesco  di Paolo, guided by a sure instinct, marked it as their prey, and  surrounded it accordingly. The friars of other convents, not  quite so hungry, crowding down to the beach, declared it should  not be eaten; dropped some hints about the possibility of its  being something praeternatural and diabolical, and even proposed  exorcisms and aspersions with holy water. The populace were  divided according to their attachment to this, or that convent: a  mighty clamour arose; and the police, in order to remove the  cause of their contention, ordered the tortoise to be recommitted  to the waves; a sentence which the Franciscans saw executed, not  without sighs and lamentation. The land-turtle, or terrapin, is  much better known at Nice, as being a native of this country; yet  the best are brought from the island of Sardinia. The soup or  bouillon of this animal is always prescribed here as a great  restorative to consumptive patients. The bread of Nice is very  indifferent, and I am persuaded very unwholesome. The flour is  generally musty, and not quite free of sand. This is either owing  to the particles of the mill-stone rubbed off in grinding, or to  what adheres to the corn itself, in being threshed upon the  common ground; for there are no threshing-floors in this country.  I shall now take notice of the vegetables of Nice. In the winter,  we have green pease, asparagus, artichoaks, cauliflower, beans,  French beans, celery, and endive; cabbage, coleworts, radishes,  turnips, carrots, betteraves, sorrel lettuce, onions, garlic, and  chalot. We have potatoes from the mountains, mushrooms,  champignons, and truffles. Piedmont affords white truffles,  counted the most delicious in the world: they sell for about  three livres the pound. The fruits of this season are pickled  olives, oranges, lemons, citrons, citronelles, dried figs,  grapes, apples, pears, almonds, chestnuts, walnuts, filberts,  medlars, pomegranates, and a fruit called azerolles, [The  Italians call them Lazerruoli.] about the size of a nutmeg, of an  oblong shape, red colour, and agreeable acid taste. I might  likewise add the cherry of the Laurus cerasus, which is sold in  the market; very beautiful to the eye, but insipid to the palate.  In summer we have all those vegetables in perfection. There is  also a kind of small courge, or gourd, of which the people of the  country make a very savoury ragout, with the help of eggs,  cheese, and fresh anchovies. Another is made of the badenjean,  which the Spaniards call berengena: [This fruit is called  Melanzana in Italy and is much esteemed by the Jews in Leghorn.  Perhaps Melanzana is a corruption of Malamsana.] it is much eaten  in Spain and the Levant, as well as by the Moors in Barbary. It  is about the size and shape of a hen's egg, inclosed in a cup  like an acorn; when ripe, of a faint purple colour. It grows on a  stalk about a foot high, with long spines or prickles. The people  here have different ways of slicing and dressing it, by broiling,  boiling, and stewing, with other ingredients: but it is at best  an insipid dish. There are some caperbushes in this  neighbourhood, which grow wild in holes of garden walls, and  require no sort of cultivation: in one or two gardens, there are  palm-trees; but the dates never ripen. In my register of the  weather, I have marked the seasons of the principal fruits in  this country. In May we have strawberries, which continue in  season two or three months. These are of the wood kind; very  grateful, and of a good flavour; but the scarlets and hautboys  are not known at Nice. In the beginning of June, and even sooner,  the cherries begin to be ripe. They are a kind of bleeding  hearts; large, fleshy, and high flavoured, though rather too  luscious. I have likewise seen a few of those we call Kentish  cherries which are much more cool, acid, and agreeable,  especially in this hot climate. The cherries are succeeded by the  apricots and peaches, which are all standards, and of consequence  better flavoured than what we call wall-fruit. The trees, as well  as almonds, grow and bear without care and cultivation, and may  be seen in the open fields about Nice. but without proper  culture, the fruit degenerates. The best peaches I have seen at  Nice are the amberges, of a yellow hue, and oblong shape, about  the size of a small lemon. Their consistence is much more solid  than that of our English peaches, and their taste more delicious.  Several trees of this kind I have in my own garden. Here is  likewise plenty of other sorts; but no nectarines. We have little  choice of plumbs. Neither do I admire the pears or apples of this  country: but the most agreeable apples I ever tasted, come from  Final, and are called pomi carli. The greatest fault I find with  most fruits in this climate, is, that they are too sweet and  luscious, and want that agreeable acid which is so cooling and so  grateful in a hot country. This, too, is the case with our  grapes, of which there is great plenty and variety, plump and  juicy, and large as plumbs. Nature, however, has not neglected to  provide other agreeable vegetable juices to cool the human body.  During the whole summer, we have plenty of musk melons. I can buy  one as large as my head for the value of an English penny: but  one of the best and largest, weighing ten or twelve pounds, I can  have for twelve sols, or about eight-pence sterling. From Antibes  and Sardinia, we have another fruit called a watermelon, which is  well known in Jamaica, and some of our other colonies. Those from  Antibes are about the size of an ordinary bomb-shell: but the  Sardinian and Jamaica watermelons are four times as large. The  skin is green, smooth, and thin. The inside is a purple pulp,  studded with broad, flat, black seeds, and impregnated with a  juice the most cool, delicate, and refreshing, that can well be  conceived. One would imagine the pulp itself dissolved in the  stomach; for you may eat of it until you are filled up to the tongue, without feeling the least inconvenience. It is so  friendly to the constitution, that in ardent inflammatory fevers,  it is drank as the best emulsion. At Genoa, Florence, and Rome,  it is sold in the streets, ready cut in slices; and the porters,  sweating under their burthens, buy, and eat them as they pass. A  porter of London quenches his thirst with a draught of strong  beer: a porter of Rome, or Naples, refreshes himself with a slice  of water-melon, or a glass of iced-water. The one costs three  half-pence; the last, half a farthing--which of them is most  effectual? I am sure the men are equally pleased. It is commonly  remarked, that beer strengthens as well as refreshes. But the  porters of Constantinople, who never drink any thing stronger  than water, and eat very little animal food, will lift and carry  heavier burthens than any other porters in the known world. If we  may believe the most respectable travellers, a Turk will carry a  load of seven hundred weight, which is more (I believe) than any  English porter ever attempted to carry any length of way.

Among the refreshments of these warm countries, I ought not to  forget mentioning the sorbettes, which are sold in coffee-houses,  and places of public resort. They are iced froth, made with juice  of oranges, apricots, or peaches; very agreeable to the palate,  and so extremely cold, that I was afraid to swallow them in this  hot country, until I found from information and experience, that  they may be taken in moderation, without any bad consequence.

Another considerable article in house-keeping is wine, which we  have here good and reasonable. The wine of Tavelle in Languedoc  is very near as good as Burgundy, and may be had at Nice, at the  rate of six-pence a bottle. The sweet wine of St. Laurent,  counted equal to that of Frontignan, costs about eight or nine-pence  a quart: pretty good Malaga may be had for half the money.  Those who make their own wine choose the grapes from different  vineyards, and have them picked, pressed, and fermented at home.

That which is made by the peasants, both red and white, is  generally genuine: but the wine-merchants of Nice brew and  balderdash, and even mix it with pigeons dung and quick-lime. It  cannot be supposed, that a stranger and sojourner should buy his  own grapes, and make his own provision of wine: but he may buy it  by recommendation from the peasants, for about eighteen or twenty  livres the charge, consisting of eleven rup five pounds; in other  words, of two hundred and eighty pounds of this country, so as to  bring it for something less than three-pence a quart. The Nice  wine, when mixed with water, makes an agreeable beverage. There  is an inferior sort for servants drank by the common people,  which in the cabaret does not cost above a penny a bottle. The  people here are not so nice as the English, in the management of  their wine. It is kept in flacons, or large flasks, without  corks, having a little oil at top. It is not deemed the worse for  having been opened a day or two before; and they expose it to the  hot sun, and all kinds of weather, without hesitation. Certain it  is, this treatment has little or no effect upon its taste,  flavour, and transparency.

The brandy of Nice is very indifferent: and the liqueurs are so  sweetened with coarse sugar, that they scarce retain the taste or  flavour of any other ingredient.

The last article of domestic oeconomy which I shall mention is  fuel, or wood for firing, which I buy for eleven sols (a little  more than six-pence halfpenny) a quintal, consisting of one  hundred and fifty pound Nice weight. The best, which is of oak,  comes from Sardinia. The common sort is olive, which being cut  with the sap in it, ought to be laid in during the summer;  otherwise, it will make a very uncomfortable fire. In my kitchen  and two chambers, I burned fifteen thousand weight of wood in  four weeks, exclusive of charcoal for the kitchen stoves, and of  pine-tops for lighting the fires. These last are as large as  pineapples, which they greatly resemble in shape, and to which,  indeed, they give their name; and being full of turpentine, make  a wonderful blaze. For the same purpose, the people of these  countries use the sarments, or cuttings of the vines, which they  sell made up in small fascines. This great consumption of wood is  owing to the large fires used in roasting pieces of beef, and  joints, in the English manner. The roasts of this country seldom  exceed two or three pounds of meat; and their other plats are  made over stove holes. But it is now high time to conduct you  from the kitchen, where you have been too long detained by--Your  humble servant.

P.S.--I have mentioned the prices of almost all the articles in  house-keeping, as they are paid by the English: but exclusive of  butcher's meat, I am certain the natives do not pay so much by  thirty per cent. Their imposition on us, is not only a proof of  their own villany and hatred, but a scandal on their government;  which ought to interfere in favour of the subjects of a nation,  to which they are so much bound in point of policy, as well as  gratitude.


LETTER XX

NICE, October 22, 1764.

SIR,--As I have nothing else to do, but to satisfy my own  curiosity, and that of my friends, I obey your injunctions with  pleasure; though not without some apprehension that my inquiries  will afford you very little entertainment. The place where I am  is of very little importance or consequence as a state or  community; neither is there any thing curious or interesting in  the character or oeconomy of its inhabitants.

There are some few merchants in Nice, said to be in good  circumstances. I know one of them, who deals to a considerable  extent, and goes twice a year to London to attend the sales of  the East-India company. He buys up a very large quantity of  muslins, and other Indian goods, and freights a ship in the river  to transport them to Villa Franca. Some of these are sent to  Swisserland; but, I believe, the greater part is smuggled into  France, by virtue of counterfeit stamps, which are here used  without any ceremony. Indeed, the chief commerce of this place is  a contraband traffick carried on to the disadvantage of France;  and I am told, that the farmers of the Levant company in that  kingdom find their account in conniving at it. Certain it is, a  great quantity of merchandize is brought hither every week by  mules from Turin and other parts in Piedmont, and afterwards  conveyed to the other side of the Var, either by land or water.  The mules of Piedmont are exceeding strong and hardy. One of them  will carry a burthen of near six hundred weight. They are easily  nourished, and require no other respite from their labour, but  the night's repose. They are the only carriage that can be used  in crossing the mountains, being very sure-footed: and it is  observed that in choosing their steps, they always march upon the  brink of the precipice. You must let them take their own way,  otherwise you will be in danger of losing your life; for they are  obstinate, even to desperation. It is very dangerous for a person  on horseback to meet those animals: they have such an aversion to  horses, that they will attack them with incredible fury, so as  even to tear them and their riders in pieces; and the best method  for avoiding this fate, is to clap spurs to your beast, and seek  your safety in flight. I have been more than once obliged to fly  before them. They always give you warning, by raising a hideous  braying as soon as they perceive the horse at a distance. The  mules of Provence are not so mischievous, because they are more  used to the sight and society of horses: but those of Piedmont  are by far the largest and the strongest I have seen.

Some very feasible schemes for improving the commerce of Nice  have been presented to the ministry of Turin; but hitherto  without success. The English import annually between two and  three thousand bales of raw silk, the growth of Piedmont; and  this declaration would be held legal evidence. In some parts of  France, the cure of the parish, on All Souls' day, which is  called le jour des morts, says a libera domine for two sols, at  every grave in the burying-ground, for the release of the soul  whose body is there interred.

The artisans of Nice are very lazy, very needy, very aukward, and  void of all ingenuity. The price of their labour is very near as  high as at London or Paris. Rather than work for moderate profit,  arising from constant employment, which would comfortably  maintain them and their families, they choose to starve at home,  to lounge about the ramparts, bask themselves in the sun, or play  at bowls in the streets from morning 'till night.

The lowest class of people consists of fishermen, day labourers,  porters, and peasants: these last are distributed chiefly in the  small cassines in the neighbourhood of the city, and are said to  amount to twelve thousand. They are employed in labouring the  ground, and have all the outward signs of extreme misery. They  are all diminutive, meagre, withered, dirty, and half naked; in  their complexions, not barely swarthy, but as black as Moors; and  I believe many of them are descendants of that people. They are  very hard favoured; and their women in general have the coarsest  features I have ever seen: it must be owned, however, they have  the finest teeth in the world. The nourishment of those poor  creatures consists of the refuse of the garden, very coarse  bread, a kind of meal called polenta, made of Indian corn, which  is very nourishing and agreeable, and a little oil; but even in  these particulars, they seem to be stinted to very scanty meals.  I have known a peasant feed his family with the skins of boiled  beans. Their hogs are much better fed than their children. 'Tis  pity they have no cows, which would yield milk, butter, and  cheese, for the sustenance of their families. With all this  wretchedness, one of these peasants will not work in your garden  for less than eighteen sols, about eleven pence sterling, per  diem; and then he does not half the work of an English labourer.  If there is fruit in it, or any thing he can convey, he will  infallibly steal it, if you do not keep a very watchful eye over  him. All the common people are thieves and beggars; and I believe  this is always the case with people who are extremely indigent  and miserable. In other respects, they are seldom guilty of  excesses. They are remarkably respectful and submissive to their  superiors. The populace of Nice are very quiet and orderly. They  are little addicted to drunkenness. I have never heard of one  riot since I lived among them; and murder and robbery are  altogether unknown. A man may walk alone over the county of Nice,  at midnight, without danger of insult. The police is very well  regulated. No man is permitted to wear a pistol or dagger' on  pain of being sent to the gallies. I am informed, that both  murder and robbery are very frequent in some parts of Piedmont.  Even here, when the peasants quarrel in their cups, (which very  seldom happens) they draw their knives, and the one infallibly  stabs the other. To such extremities, however, they never  proceed, except when there is a woman in the case; and mutual  jealousy co-operates with the liquor they have drank, to inflame  their passions. In Nice, the common people retire to their  lodgings at eight o'clock in winter, and nine in summer. Every  person found in the streets after these hours, is apprehended by  the patrole; and, if he cannot give a good account of himself,  sent to prison. At nine in winter, and ten in summer, there is a  curfew-bell rung, warning the people to put out their lights, and  go to bed. This is a very necessary precaution in towns subject  to conflagrations; but of small use in Nice, where there is very  little combustible in the houses.

The punishments inflicted upon malefactors and delinquents at  Nice are hanging for capital crimes; slavery on board the gallies  for a limited term, or for life, according to the nature of the  transgression; flagellation, and the strappado. This last is  performed, by hoisting up the criminal by his hands tied behind  his back, on a pulley about two stories high; from whence, the  rope being suddenly slackened, he falls to within a yard or two  of the ground, where he is stopped with a violent shock arising  from the weight of his body, and the velocity of his descent,  which generally dislocates his shoulders, with incredible pain.  This dreadful execution is sometimes repeated in a few minutes on  the same delinquent; so that the very ligaments are tore from his  joints, and his arms are rendered useless for life.

The poverty of the people in this country, as well as in the  South of France, may be conjectured from the appearance of their  domestic animals. The draughthorses, mules, and asses, of the  peasants, are so meagre, as to excite compassion. There is not a  dog to be seen in tolerable case; and the cats are so many  emblems of famine, frightfully thin, and dangerously rapacious. I  wonder the dogs and they do not devour young children. Another  proof of that indigence which reigns among the common people, is  this: you may pass through the whole South of France, as well as  the county of Nice, where there is no want of groves, woods, and  plantations, without hearing the song of blackbird, thrush,  linnet, gold-finch, or any other bird whatsoever. All is silent  and solitary. The poor birds are destroyed, or driven for refuge,  into other countries, by the savage persecution of the people,  who spare no pains to kill, and catch them for their own  subsistence. Scarce a sparrow, red-breast, tomtit, or wren, can  'scape the guns and snares of those indefatigable fowlers. Even  the noblesse make parties to go a la chasse, a-hunting; that is,  to kill those little birds, which they eat as gibier, or game.

The great poverty of the people here, is owing to their religion.  Half of their time is lost in observing the great number of  festivals; and half of their substance is given to mendicant  friars and parish priests. But if the church occasions their  indigence, it likewise, in some measure, alleviates the horrors  of it, by amusing them with shows, processions, and even those  very feasts, which afford a recess from labour, in a country  where the climate disposes them to idleness. If the peasants in  the neighbourhood of any chapel dedicated to a saint, whose day  is to be celebrated, have a mind to make a festin, in other  words, a fair, they apply to the commandant of Nice for a  license, which costs them about a French crown. This being  obtained, they assemble after service, men and women, in their  best apparel, and dance to the musick of fiddles, and pipe and  tabor, or rather pipe and drum. There are hucksters' stands, with  pedlary ware and knick-knacks for presents; cakes and bread,  liqueurs and wine; and thither generally resort all the company  of Nice. I have seen our whole noblesse at one of these festins,  kept on the highway in summer, mingled with an immense crowd of  peasants, mules, and asses, covered with dust, and sweating at  every pore with the excessive heat of the weather. I should be  much puzzled to tell whence their enjoyment arises on such  occasions; or to explain their motives for going thither, unless  they are prescribed it for pennance, as a fore-taste of  purgatory.

Now I am speaking of religious institutions, I cannot help  observing, that the antient Romans were still more superstitious  than the modern Italians; and that the number of their religious  feasts, sacrifices, fasts, and holidays, was even greater than  those of the Christian church of Rome. They had their festi and  profesti, their feriae stativae, and conceptivae, their fixed and  moveable feasts; their esuriales, or fasting days, and their  precidaneae, or vigils. The agonales were celebrated in January;  the carmentales, in January and February; the lupercales and  matronales, in March; the megalesia in April; the floralia, in  May; and the matralia in June. They had their saturnalia,  robigalia, venalia, vertumnalia, fornacalia, palilia, and  laralia, their latinae, their paganales, their sementinae, their  compitales, and their imperativae; such as the novemdalia,  instituted by the senate, on account of a supposed shower of  stones. Besides, every private family had a number of feriae,  kept either by way of rejoicing for some benefit, or mourning for  some calamity. Every time it thundered, the day was kept holy.  Every ninth day was a holiday, thence called nundinae quasi  novendinae. There was the dies denominalis, which was the fourth  of the kalends; nones and ides of every month, over and above the  anniversary of every great defeat which the republic had  sustained, particularly the dies alliensis, or fifteenth of the  kalends of December, on which the Romans were totally defeated by  the Gauls and Veientes; as Lucan says--et damnata diu Romanis  allia fastis, and Allia in Rome's Calendar condemn'd. The vast  variety of their deities, said to amount to thirty thousand, with  their respective rites of adoration, could not fail to introduce  such a number of ceremonies, shews, sacrifices, lustrations, and  public processions, as must have employed the people almost  constantly from one end of the year to the other. This continual  dissipation must have been a great enemy to industry; and the  people must have been idle and effeminate. I think it would be no  difficult matter to prove, that there is very little difference,  in point of character, between the antient and modern inhabitants  of Rome; and that the great figure which this empire made of old,  was not so much owing to the intrinsic virtue of its citizens, as  to the barbarism, ignorance, and imbecility of the nations they  subdued. Instances of public and private virtue I find as  frequent and as striking in the history of other nations, as in  the annals of antient Rome; and now that the kingdoms and states  of Europe are pretty equally enlightened, and ballanced in the  scale of political power, I am of opinion, that if the most  fortunate generals of the Roman commonwealth were again placed at  the head of the very armies they once commanded, instead of  extending their conquests over all Europe and Asia, they would  hardly be able to subdue, and retain under their dominion, all  the petty republics that subsist in Italy.

But I am tired with writing; and I believe you will be tired with  reading this long letter notwithstanding all your prepossession  in favour of--Your very humble servant.

LETTER XXI

NICE, November 10, 1764.

DEAR DOCTOR,--In my enquiries about the revenues of Nice, I am  obliged to trust to the information of the inhabitants, who are  much given to exaggerate. They tell me, the revenues of this town  amount to one hundred thousand livres, or five thousand pounds  sterling; of which I would strike off at least one fourth, as an  addition of their own vanity: perhaps, if we deduct a third, it  will be nearer the truth. For, I cannot find out any other funds  they have, but the butchery and the bakery, which they farm at so  much a year to the best bidder; and the droits d'entree, or  duties upon provision brought into the city; but these are very  small. The king is said to draw from Nice one hundred thousand  livres annually, arising from a free-gift, amounting to seven  hundred pounds sterling, in lieu of the taille, from which this  town and county are exempted; an inconsiderable duty upon wine  sold in public-houses; and the droits du port. These last consist  of anchorage, paid by all vessels in proportion to their tonnage,  when they enter the harbours of Nice and Villa Franca. Besides,  all foreign vessels, under a certain stipulated burthen, that  pass between the island of Sardinia and this coast, are obliged,  in going to the eastward, to enter; and pay a certain regulated  imposition, on pain of being taken and made prize. The prince of  Monaco exacts a talliage of the same kind; and both he and the  king of Sardinia maintain armed cruisers to assert this  prerogative; from which, however, the English and French are  exempted by treaty, in consequence of having paid a sum of money  at once. In all probability, it was originally given as a  consideration for maintaining lights on the shore, for the  benefit of navigators, like the toll paid for passing the Sound  in the Baltic. [Upon further inquiry I find it was given in  consideration of being protected from the Corsairs by the naval  force of the Duke of Savoy and Prince of Monaco.] The fanal, or  lanthorn, to the eastward of Villa Franca, is kept in good  repair, and still lighted in the winter. The toll, however, is a  very troublesome tax upon feluccas, and other small craft, which  are greatly retarded in their voyages, and often lose the benefit  of a fair wind, by being obliged to run inshore, and enter those  harbours. The tobacco the king manufactures at his own expence,  and sells for his own profit, at a very high price; and every  person convicted of selling this commodity in secret, is sent to  the gallies for life. The salt comes chiefly from Sardinia, and  is stored up in the king's magazine from whence it is exported to  Piedmont, and other parts of his inland dominions. And here it  may not be amiss to observe, that Sardinia produces very good  horses, well-shaped, though small; strong, hardy, full of mettle,  and easily fed. The whole county of Nice is said to yield the  king half a million of livres, about twenty-five thousand pounds  sterling, arising from a small donative made by every town and  village: for the lands pay no tax, or imposition, but the tithes  to the church. His revenue then flows from the gabelle on salt  and wine, and these free-gifts; so that we may strike off one  fifth of the sum at which the whole is estimated; and conclude,  that the king draws from the county at Nice, about four hundred  thousand livres, or twenty thousand pounds sterling. That his  revenues from Nice are not great, appears from the smallness of  the appointments allowed to his officers. The president has about  three hundred pounds per annum; and the intendant about two. The  pay of the commandant does not exceed three hundred and fifty  pounds: but he has certain privileges called the tour du baton,  some of which a man of spirit would not insist upon. He who  commands at present, having no estate of his own, enjoys a small  commandery, which being added to his appointments at Nice, make  the whole amount to about five hundred pounds sterling.

If we may believe the politicians of Nice, the king of Sardinia's  whole revenue does not fall short of twenty millions of  Piedmontese livres, being above one million of our money. It must  be owned, that there is no country in Christendom less taxed than  that of Nice; and as the soil produces the necessaries of life,  the inhabitants, with a little industry, might renew the golden  age in this happy climate, among their groves, woods, and  mountains, beautified with fountains, brooks, rivers, torrents,  and cascades. In the midst of these pastoral advantages, the  peasants are poor and miserable. They have no stock to begin the  world with. They have no leases of the lands they cultivate; but  entirely depend, from year to year, on the pleasure of the  arbitrary landholder, who may turn them out at a minute's  warning; and they are oppressed by the mendicant friars and  parish priests, who rob them of the best fruits of their labour:  after all, the ground is too scanty for the number of families  which are crouded on it.

You desire to know the state of the arts and sciences at Nice;  which, indeed, is almost a total blank. I know not what men of  talents this place may have formerly produced; but at present, it  seems to be consecrated to the reign of dulness and superstition.  It is very surprising, to see a people established between two  enlightened nations, so devoid of taste and literature. Here are  no tolerable pictures, busts, statues, nor edifices: the very  ornaments of the churches are wretchedly conceived, and worse  executed. They have no public, nor private libraries that afford  any thing worth perusing. There is not even a bookseller in Nice.  Though they value themselves upon their being natives of Italy,  they are unacquainted with music. The few that play upon  instruments, attend only to the execution. They have no genius  nor taste, nor any knowledge of harmony and composition. Among  the French, a Nissard piques himself on being Provencal; but in  Florence, Milan, or Rome, he claims the honour of being born a  native of Italy. The people of condition here speak both  languages equally well; or, rather, equally ill; for they use a  low, uncouth phraseology; and their pronunciation is extremely  vitious. Their vernacular tongue is what they call Patois; though  in so calling it, they do it injustice.--Patois, from the Latin  word patavinitas, means no more than a provincial accent, or  dialect. It takes its name from Patavium, or Padua, which was the  birthplace of Livy, who, with all his merit as a writer, has  admitted into his history, some provincial expressions of his own  country. The Patois, or native tongue of Nice, is no other than  the ancient Provencal, from which the Italian, Spanish and  French languages, have been formed. This is the language that  rose upon the ruins of the Latin tongue, after the irruptions of  the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Burgundians, by whom the Roman  empire was destroyed. It was spoke all over Italy, Spain, and the  southern parts of France, until the thirteenth century, when the  Italians began to polish it into the language which they now call  their own: The Spaniards and French, likewise, improved it into  their respective tongues. From its great affinity to the Latin,  it was called Romance, a name which the Spaniards still give to  their own language. As the first legends of knight-errantry were  written in Provencal, all subsequent performances of the same  kind, have derived from it the name of romance; and as those  annals of chivalry contained extravagant adventures of knights,  giants, and necromancers, every improbable story or fiction is to  this day called a romance. Mr. Walpole, in his Catalogue of royal  and noble Authors, has produced two sonnets in the antient  Provencal, written by our king Richard I. surnamed Coeur de Lion;  and Voltaire, in his Historical Tracts, has favoured the world  with some specimens of the same language. The Patois of Nice,  must, without doubt, have undergone changes and corruptions in  the course of so many ages, especially as no pains have been  taken to preserve its original purity, either in orthography or  pronunciation. It is neglected, as the language of the vulgar:  and scarce any-body here knows either its origin or constitution.  I have in vain endeavoured to procure some pieces in the antient  Provencal, that I might compare them with the modern Patois: but  I can find no person to give me the least information on the  subject. The shades of ignorance, sloth, and stupidity, are  impenetrable. Almost every word of the Patois may still be found  in the Italian, Spanish, and French languages, with a small  change in the pronunciation. Cavallo, signifying a horse in  Italian and Spanish is called cavao; maison, the French word for  a house, is changed into maion; aqua, which means water in  Spanish, the Nissards call daigua. To express, what a slop is  here! they say acco fa lac aqui, which is a sentence composed of  two Italian words, one French, and one Spanish. This is nearly  the proportion in which these three languages will be found  mingled in the Patois of Nice; which, with some variation,  extends over all Provence, Languedoc, and Gascony. I will now  treat you with two or three stanzas of a canzon, or hymn, in this  language, to the Virgin Mary, which was lately printed at Nice.

1 

Vierge, maire de Dieu,  Nuostro buono avocado,  Embel car uvostre sieu,  En Fenestro adourado,  Jeu vous saludi,  E demandi en socours;  E sense autre preludi, Canti lous uvostre honours.

Virgin, mother of God,  our good advocate,  With your dear son,  In Fenestro adored,  I salute you,  And ask his assistance;  And without further prelude,  I sing your honours.

[Fenestro is the name of a place in this neighbourhood, where  there is a supposed miraculous sanctuary, or chapel, of the  Virgin Mary.]

2.

Qu'ario de Paradis!  Que maesta divine!  Salamon es d'advis,  Giugiar de uvostro mino;  Vous dis plus bello:  E lou dis ben soven  De toutoi lei femello,  E non s'engano ren.

What air of Paradise!  What majesty divine!  Solomon is of opinion,  To judge of your appearance;  Says you are the fairest  And it is often said  Of all females,  And we are not all deceived.

3.

Qu'ario de Paradis!  Que maesta divine!  La bellezzo eblovis;  La bonta l'ueigl raffino.  Sias couronado; Tenes lou monde en man  Sus del trono assettado,  Riges lou avostre enfan.

What air of Paradise!  What majesty divine!  The beauty dazzles;  The goodness purifies the eye:  You are crowned:  You hold the world in your hand:  Seated on the throne,  You support your child.

You see I have not chosen this canzon for the beauty and elegance  of thought and expression; but give it you as the only printed  specimen I could find of the modern Provencal. If you have any  curiosity to be further acquainted with the Patois, I will  endeavour to procure you satisfaction. Meanwhile, I am, in plain  English,--Dear Sir, Ever yours.

LETTER XXII

NICE, November 10, 1764.

DEAR SIR,--I had once thoughts of writing a complete natural  history of this town and county: but I found myself altogether  unequal to the task. I have neither health, strength, nor  opportunity to make proper collections of the mineral, vegetable,  and animal productions. I am not much conversant with these  branches of natural philosophy. I have no books to direct my  inquiries. I can find no person capable of giving me the least  information or assistance; and I am strangely puzzled by the  barbarous names they give to many different species, the  descriptions of which I have read under other appelations; and  which, as I have never seen them before, I cannot pretend to  distinguish by the eye. You must therefore be contented with such  imperfect intelligence as my opportunities can afford.

The useful arts practised at Nice, are these, gardening and  agriculture, with their consequences, the making of wine, oil,  and cordage; the rearing of silk-worms, with the subsequent  management and manufacture of that production; and the fishing,  which I have already described.

Nothing can be more unpromising than the natural soil of this  territory, except in a very few narrow bottoms, where there is a  stiff clay, which when carefully watered, yields tolerable  pasturage. In every other part, the soil consists of a light sand  mingled with pebbles, which serves well enough for the culture of  vines and olives: but the ground laid out for kitchen herbs, as  well as for other fruit must be manured with great care and  attention. They have no black cattle to afford such compost as  our farmers use in England. The dung of mules and asses, which  are their only beasts of burthen, is of very little value for  this purpose; and the natural sterility of their ground requires  something highly impregnated with nitre and volatile salts. They  have recourse therefore to pigeons' dung and ordure, which fully  answer their expectations. Every peasant opens, at one corner of  his wall, a public house of office for the reception of  passengers; and in the town of Nice, every  tenement is provided  with one of these receptacles, the contents of which are  carefully preserved for sale. The peasant comes with his asses  and casks to carry it off before day, and pays for it according  to its quality, which he examines and investigates, by the taste  and flavour. The jakes of a protestant family, who eat gras every  day, bears a much higher price than the privy of a good catholic  who lives maigre one half of the year. The vaults belonging to the  convent of Minims are not worth emptying.

The ground here is not delved with spades as in England, but  laboured with a broad, sharp hough, having a short horizontal  handle; and the climate is so hot and dry in the summer, that the  plants must be watered every morning and evening, especially  where it is not shaded by trees. It is surprising to see how the  productions of the earth are crouded together. One would imagine  they would rob one another of nourishment; and moreover be  stifled for want of air; and doubtless this is in some measure  the case. Olive and other fruit trees are planted in rows very  close to each other. These are connected by vines, and the  interstices, between the rows, are filled with corn. The gardens  that supply the town with sallad and pot-herbs, lye all on the  side of Provence, by the highway. They are surrounded with high  stone-walls, or ditches, planted with a kind of cane or large  reed, which answers many purposes in this country. The leaves of  it afford sustenance to the asses, and the canes not only serve  as fences to the inclosures; but are used to prop the vines and  pease, and to build habitations for the silkworms: they are  formed into arbours, and wore as walking-staves. All these  gardens are watered by little rills that come from the mountains,  particularly, by the small branches of the two sources which I  have described in a former letter, as issuing from the two sides  of a mountain, under the names of Fontaine de Muraille, and  Fontaine du Temple.

In the neighbourhood of Nice, they raise a considerable quantity  of hemp, the largest and strongest I ever saw. Part of this, when  dressed, is exported to other countries; and part is manufactured  into cordage. However profitable it may be to the grower, it is  certainly a great nuisance in the summer. When taken out of the  pits, where it has been put to rot, the stench it raises is quite  insupportable; and must undoubtedly be unwholesome.

There is such a want of land in this neighbourhood, that terraces  are built over one another with loose stones, on the faces of  bare rocks, and these being covered with earth and manured, are  planted with olives, vines, and corn. The same shift was  practised all over Palestine, which was rocky and barren, and  much more populous than the county of Nice.

Notwithstanding the small extent of this territory, there are  some pleasant meadows in the skirts of Nice, that produce  excellent clover; and the corn which is sown in open fields,  where it has the full benefit of the soil, sun, and air, grows to  a surprizing height. I have seen rye seven or eight feet high.  All vegetables have a wonderful growth in this climate. Besides  wheat, rye, barley, and oats, this country produces a good deal  of Meliga, or Turkish wheat, which is what we call Indian corn. I  have, in a former letter, observed that the meal of this grain  goes by the name polenta, and makes excellent hasty-pudding,  being very nourishing, and counted an admirable pectoral. The  pods and stalks are used for fuel: and the leaves are much  preferable to common straw, for making paillasses.

The pease and beans in the garden appear in the winter like  beautiful plantations of young trees in blossom; and perfume the  air. Myrtle, sweet-briar, sweet-marjoram, sage, thyme, lavender,  rosemary, with many other aromatic herbs and flowers, which with  us require the most careful cultivation, are here found wild in  the mountains.

It is not many years since the Nissards learned the culture of  silk-worms, of their neighbours the Piedmontese; and hitherto the  progress they have made is not very considerable: the whole  county of Nice produces about one hundred and thirty-three bales  of three hundred pounds each, amounting in value to four hundred  thousand livres.

In the beginning of April, when the mulberry-leaves, begin to put  forth, the eggs or grains that produce the silk-worm, are  hatched. The grains are washed in wine, and those that swim on  the top, are thrown away as good for nothing. The rest being  deposited in small bags of linen, are worn by women in their  bosoms, until the worms begin to appear: then they are placed in  shallow wooden boxes, covered with a piece of white paper, cut  into little holes, through which the worms ascend as they are  hatched, to feed on the young mulberry-leaves, of which there is  a layer above the paper. These boxes are kept for warmth between  two mattrasses, and visited every day. Fresh leaves are laid in,  and the worms that feed are removed successively to the other  place prepared for their reception. This is an habitation,  consisting of two or three stories, about twenty inches from each  other, raised upon four wooden posts. The floors are made of  canes, and strewed with fresh mulberry-leaves: the corner posts,  and other occasional props, for sustaining the different floors,  are covered with a coat of loose heath, which is twisted round  the wood. The worms when hatched are laid upon the floors; and  here you may see them in all the different stages (if moulting or  casting the slough, a change which they undergo three times  successively before they begin to work. The silk-worm is an  animal of such acute and delicate sensations, that too much care  cannot be taken to keep its habitation clean, and to refresh it  from time to time with pure air. I have seen them languish and  die in scores, in consequence of an accidental bad smell. The  soiled leaves, and the filth which they necessarily produce,  should be carefully shifted every day; and it would not be amiss  to purify the air sometimes with fumes of vinegar, rose, or  orange-flower water. These niceties, however, are but little  observed. They commonly lie in heaps as thick as shrimps in a  plate, some feeding on the leaves, some new hatched, some  intranced in the agonies of casting their skin, sonic  languishing, and some actually dead, with a litter of half-eaten  faded leaves about them, in a close room, crouded with women and  children, not at all remarkable for their cleanliness. I am  assured by some persons of credit, that if they are touched, or  even approached, by a woman in her catamenia, they infallibly  expire. This, however, must be understood of those females whose  skins have naturally a very rank flavour, which is generally  heightened at such periods. The mulberry-leaves used in this  country are of the tree which bears a small white fruit not  larger than a damascene. They are planted on purpose, and the  leaves are sold at so much a pound. By the middle of June all the  mulberry-trees are stripped; but new leaves succeed, and in a few  weeks, they are cloathed again with fresh verdure. In about ten  days after the last moulting, the silk-worm climbs upon the props  of his house, and choosing a situation among the heath, begins to  spin in a most curious manner, until he is quite inclosed,   and  the cocon or pod of silk, about the size of a pigeon's egg, which  he has produced remains suspended by several filaments. It is no  unusual to see double cocons, spun by two worms included under a  common cover. There must be an infinite number of worms to yield  any considerable quantity of silk. One ounce of eggs or grains  produces, four rup, or one hundred Nice pounds of cocons; and one  rup, or twenty-five pounds of cocons, if they are rich, gives  three pounds of raw silk; that is, twelve pounds of silk are got  from one ounce of grains, which ounce of grains its produced by  as many worms as are inclosed in one pound, or twelve ounces of  cocons. In preserving the cocons for breed, you must choose an  equal number of males and females; and these are very easily  distinguished by the shape of the cocons; that which contains the  male is sharp, and the other obtuse, at the two ends. In ten or  twelve days after the cocon is finished, the worm makes its way  through it, in the form of a very ugly, unwieldy, aukward  butterfly, and as the different sexes are placed by one another  on paper or linen, they immediately engender. The female lays her  eggs, which are carefully preserved; but neither she nor her mate  takes any nourishment, and in eight or ten days after they quit  the cocons, they generally die. The silk of these cocons cannot  be wound, because the animals in piercing through them, have  destroyed the continuity of the filaments. It is therefore, first  boiled, and then picked and carded like wool, and being  afterwards spun, is used in the coarser stuffs of the silk  manufacture. The other cocons, which yield the best silk, are  managed in a different manner. Before the inclosed worm has time  to penetrate, the silk is reeled off with equal care and  ingenuity. A handful of the cocons are thrown away into a kettle  of boiling water, which not only kills the animal, but dissolves  the glutinous substance by which the fine filaments of the silk  cohere or stick together, so that they are easily wound off,  without breaking. Six or seven of these small filaments being  joined together are passed over a kind of twisting iron, and  fixed to the wheel, which one girl turns, while another, with her  hands in the boiling water, disentangles the threads, joins them  when they chance to break, and supplies fresh cocons with  admirable dexterity and dispatch. There is a manufacture of this  kind just without one of the gates of Nice, where forty or fifty  of these wheels are worked together, and give employment for some  weeks to double the number of young women. Those who manage the  pods that float in the boiling water must be very alert,  otherwise they will scald their fingers. The smell that comes  from the boiling cocons is extremely offensive. Hard by the  harbour, there is a very curious mill for twisting the silk,  which goes by water. There is in the town of Nice, a well  regulated hospital for poor orphans of both sexes, where above  one hundred of them are employed in dressing, dyeing, spinning,  and weaving the silk. In the villages of Provence, you see the  poor women in the streets spinning raw silk upon distaves: but  here the same instrument is only used for spinning hemp and flax;  which last, however, is not of the growth of Nice--But lest I  should spin this letter to a tedious length, I will now wind up  my bottom, and bid you heartily farewell.

LETTER XXIII

NICE, December 19, 1764.

SIR,--In my last, I gave you a succinct account of the silkworm,  and the management of that curious insect in this country. I  shall now proceed to describe the methods of making wine and oil.

The vintage begins in September. The grapes being chosen and  carefully picked, are put into a large vat, where they are  pressed by a man's naked feet, and the juices drawn off by a cock  below. When no more is procured by this operation, the bruised  grapes are put into the press, and yield still more liquor. The  juice obtained by this double pressure, being put in casks, with  their bungs open, begins to ferment and discharge its impurities  at the openings. The waste occasioned by this discharge, is  constantly supplied with fresh wine, so that the casks are  always full. The fermentation continues for twelve, fifteen, or  twenty days, according to the strength and vigour of the grape.  In about a month, the wine is fit for drinking. When the grapes  are of a bad, meagre kind, the wine dealers mix the juice with  pigeons'-dung or quick-lime, in order to give it a spirit which  nature has denied: but this is a very mischievous adulteration.

The process for oil-making is equally simple. The best olives are  those that grow wild; but the quantity of them is very  inconsiderable. Olives begin to ripen and drop in the beginning  of November: but some remain on the trees till February, and even  till April, and these are counted the most valuable. When the  olives are gathered, they must be manufactured immediately,  before they fade and grow wrinkled, otherwise they will produce  bad oil. They are first of all ground into a paste by a mill-stone  set edge-ways in a circular stone-trough, the wheel being  turned by water.

This paste is put into trails or circular cases made of grass  woven, having a round hole at top and bottom; when filled they  resemble in shape our Cheshire cheeses. A number of these placed  one upon another, are put in a press, and being squeezed, the oil  with all its impurities, runs into a receptacle below fixed in  the ground. From hence it is laded into a wooden vat, half filled  with water. The sordes or dirt falls to the bottom; the oil swims  a-top; and being skimmed off, is barrelled up in small oblong  casks. What remains in the vat, is thrown into a large stone  cistern with water, and after being often stirred, and standing  twelve or fourteen days, yields a coarser oil used for lamps and  manufactures. After these processes, they extract an oil still  more coarse and fetid from the refuse of the whole. Sometimes, in  order to make the olives grind the more easily into a paste, and  part with more oil, they are mixed with a little hot water: but  the oil thus procured is apt to grow rancid. The very finest,  called virgin oil, is made chiefly of green olives, and sold at a very high price, because a great quantity is required to  produce a very little oil. Even the stuff that is left after all  these operations, consisting of the dried pulp, is sold for fuel,  and used in brasieres for warming apartments which have no  chimney.

I have now specified all the manufactures of Nice which are worth  mentioning. True it is, there is some coarse paper made in this  neighbourhood; there are also people here who dress skins and  make leather for the use of the inhabitants: but this business is  very ill performed: the gloves and shoes are generally rotten as  they come from the hands of the maker. Carpenter's, joiner's, and  blacksmith's work is very coarsely and clumsily done. There are  no chairs to be had at Nice, but crazy things made of a few  sticks, with rush bottoms, which are sold for twelve livres a  dozen. Nothing can be more contemptible than the hard-ware made  in this place, such as knives, scissors, and candle-snuffers. All  utensils in brass and copper are very ill made and finished. The  silver-smiths make nothing but spoons, forks, paultry rings, and  crosses for the necks of the women.

The houses are built of a ragged stone dug from the mountains,  and the interstices are filled with rubble; so that the walls  would appear very ugly, if they were not covered with plaister,  which has a good effect. They generally consist of three stories,  and are covered with tiles. The apartments of the better sort are  large and lofty, the floors paved with brick, the roofs covered  with a thick coat of stucco, and the walls whitewashed. People of  distinction hang their chambers with damask, striped silk,  painted cloths, tapestry, or printed linnen. All the doors, as  well as the windows, consist of folding leaves. As there is no  wainscot in the rooms, which are divided by stone partitions and  the floors and cieling are covered with brick and stucco, fires  are of much less dreadful consequence here than in our country.  Wainscot would afford harbour for bugs: besides, white walls have  a better effect in this hot climate. The beds commonly used in  this place, and all over Italy, consist of a paillasse, with one  or two mattrasses, laid upon planks, supported by two wooden  benches. Instead of curtains there is a couziniere or mosquito  net, made of a kind of gauze, that opens and contracts  occasionally, and incloses the place where you lie: persons of  condition, however, have also bedsteads and curtains; but these  last are never used in the summer.

In these countries, people of all ranks dine exactly at noon; and  this is the time I seize in winter, for making my daily tour of  the streets and ramparts, which at all other hours of the day are  crowded with men, women, children and beasts of burthen. The  rampart is the common road for carriages of all kinds. I think  there are two private coaches in Nice, besides that of the  commandant: but there are sedan chairs, which may be had at a  reasonable rate. When I bathed in the summer, I paid thirty sols,  equal to eighteen-pence, for being carried to and from the  bathing place, which was a mile from my own house.

Now I am speaking of bathing, it may not be amiss to inform you  that though there is a fine open beach, extending several miles  to the westward of Nice, those who cannot swim ought to bathe  with great precaution, as the sea is very deep, and the descent  very abrupt from within a yard or two of the water's edge. The  people here were much surprised when I began to bathe in the  beginning of May. They thought it very strange, that a man  seemingly consumptive should plunge into the sea, especially when  the weather was so cold; and some of the doctors prognosticated  immediate death. But, when it was perceived that I grew better in  consequence of the bath, some of the Swiss officers tried the  same experiment, and in a few days, our example was followed by  several inhabitants of Nice. There is, however, no convenience  for this operation, from the benefit of which the fair sex must  be intirely excluded, unless they lay aside all regard to  decorum; for the shore is always lined with fishing-boats, and  crouded with people. If a lady should be at the expence of having  a tent pitched on the beach where she might put on and of her  bathing-dress, she could not pretend to go into the sea without  proper attendants; nor could she possibly plunge headlong into  the water, which is the most effectual, and least dangerous way  of bathing. All that she can do is to have the sea-water brought  into her house, and make use of a bathing-tub, which may be made  according to her own, or physician's direction.

What further I have to say of this climate and country, you shall  have in my next; and then you will be released from a subject,  which I am afraid has been but too circumstantially handled by-- Sir, Your very humble servant.

LETTER XXIV

NICE, January 4, 1765.

DEAR SIR.,--The constitution of this climate may be pretty well  ascertained, from the inclosed register of the weather, which I  kept with all possible care and attention. From a perusal of it,  you will see that there is less rain and wind at Nice, than in  any other part of the world that I know; and such is the serenity  of the air, that you see nothing above your head for several  months together, but a charming blue expanse, without cloud or  speck. Whatever clouds may be formed by evaporation of the sea,  they seldom or never hover over this small territory; but, in all  probability, are attracted by the mountains that surround it, and  there fall in rain or snow: as for those that gather from other  quarters, I suppose their progress hitherward is obstructed by  those very Alps, which rise one over another, to an extent of  many leagues. This air being dry, pure, heavy, and elastic, must  be agreeable to the constitution of those who labour under  disorders arising from weak nerves, obstructed perspiration,  relaxed fibres, a viscidity of lymph, and a languid circulation.  In other respects, it encourages the scurvy, the atmosphere being  undoubtedly impregnated with sea-salt. Ever since my arrival at  Nice, I have had a scorbutical eruption on my right hand, which  diminishes and increases according to the state of my health. One  day last summer, when there was a strong breeze from the sea, the  surface of our bodies was covered with a salt brine, very  perceptible to the taste; my gums, as well as those of another  person in my family, began to swell, and grow painful, though  this had never happened before; and I was seized with violent  pains in the joints of my knees. I was then at a country-house  fronting the sea, and particularly exposed to the marine air. The  swelling of our gums subsided as the wind fell: but what was very  remarkable, the scurvy-spot on my hand disappeared, and did not  return for a whole month. It is affirmed that sea-salt will  dissolve, and render the blood so fluid, that it will exude  through the coats of the vessels. Perhaps the sea-scurvy is a  partial dissolution of it, by that mineral absorbed from the air  by the lymphatics on the surface of the body, and by those of the  lungs in respiration. Certain it is, in the last stages of the  sea-scurvy, the blood often bursts from the pores; and this  phaenomenon is imputed to a high degree of putrefaction: sure  enough it is attended with putrefaction. We know that a certain  quantity of salt is required to preserve the animal juices from  going putrid: but, how a greater quantity should produce  putrefaction, I leave to wiser heads to explain. Many people here  have scorbutical complaints, though their teeth are not affected.  They are subject to eruptions on the skin, putrid gums, pains in  the bones, lassitude, indigestion, and low spirits; but the  reigning distemper is a marasmus, or consumption, which proceeds  gradually, without any pulmonary complaint, the complexion  growing more and more florid, 'till the very last scene of the  tragedy. This I would impute to the effects of a very dry, saline  atmosphere, upon a thin habit, in which there is an extraordinary  waste by perspiration. The air is remarkably salt in this  district, because the mountains that hem it in, prevent its  communication with the circumambient atmosphere, in which the  saline particles would otherwise be diffused; and there is no  rain, nor dew, to precipitate or dissolve them. Such an air as I  have described, should have no bad effect upon a moist,  phlegmatic constitution, such as mine; and yet it must be owned,  I have been visibly wasting since I came hither, though this  decay I considered as the progress of the tabes which began in  England. But the air of Nice has had a still more sensible effect  upon Mr. Sch--z, who laboured under nervous complaints to such a  degree, that life was a burthen to him. He had also a fixed pain  in his breast, for which complaint he had formerly tried the air  of Naples, where he resided some considerable time, and in a  great measure recovered: but, this returning with weakness,  faintness, low spirits, and entire loss of appetite, he was  advised to come hither; and the success of his journey has  greatly exceeded his expectation. Though the weather has been  remarkably bad for this climate, he has enjoyed perfect health.  Since he arrived at Nice, the pain in his breast has vanished; he  eats heartily, sleeps well, is in high spirits, and so strong,  that he is never off his legs in the day-time. He can walk to the  Var and back again, before dinner; and he has climbed to the tops  of all the mountains in this neighbourhood. I never saw before  such sudden and happy effects from the change of air. I must also  acknowledge, that ever since my arrival at Nice, I have breathed  more freely than I had done for some years, and my spirits have  been more alert. The father of my housekeeper, who was a dancing-master,  had been so afflicted with an asthmatic disorder, that he  could not live in France, Spain, or Italy; but found the air of  Nice so agreeable to his lungs, that he was enabled to exercise  his profession for above twenty years, and died last spring  turned of seventy. Another advantage I have reaped from this  climate is my being, in a great measure, delivered from a slow  fever which used to hang about me, and render life a burthen.  Neither am I so apt to catch cold as I used to be in England and  France; and the colds I do catch are not of the same continuance  and consequence, as those to which I was formerly subject. The  air of Nice is so dry, that in summer, and even in winter,  (except ill wet weather) you may pass the evening, and indeed the  whole night, sub Dio, without feeling the least dew or moisture;  and as for fogs, they are never seen in this district. In summer,  the air is cooled by a regular sea-breeze blowing from the cast,  like that of the West-Indies. It begins in the forenoon, and  increases with the heat of the day. It dies away about six or  seven; and immediately after sun-set is succeeded by an agreeable land-breeze from the mountains. The sea-breeze  from the eastward, however, is not so constant here, as in the  West-Indies between the tropicks, because the sun, which produces  it, is not so powerful. This country lies nearer the region of  variable winds, and is surrounded by mountains, capes, and  straights, which often influence the constitution and current of  the air. About the winter solstice, the people of Nice expect  wind and rain, which generally lasts, with intervals, 'till the  beginning of February: but even during this, their worst weather,  the sun breaks out occasionally, and you may take the air either  a-foot or on horseback every day; for the moisture is immediately  absorbed by the earth, which is naturally dry. They likewise lay  their account with being visited by showers of rain and gusts of  wind in April. A week's rain in the middle of August makes them  happy. It not only refreshes the parched ground, and plumps up  the grapes and other fruit, but it cools the air and assuages the  beets, which then begin to grow very troublesome; but the rainy  season is about the autumnal equinox, or rather something later.  It continues about twelve days or a fortnight, and is extremely  welcome to the natives of this country. This rainy season is  often delayed 'till the latter end of November, and sometimes  'till the month of December; in which case, the rest of the  winter is generally dry. The heavy rains in this country  generally come with a south-west wind, which was the creberque  procellis Africus, the stormy southwest, of the antients. It is  here called Lebeche, a corruption of Lybicus: it generally blows  high for a day or two, and rolls the Mediterranean before it in  huge waves, that often enter the town of Nice. It likewise drives  before it all the clouds which had been formed above the surface  of the Mediterranean. These being expended in rain, fair weather  naturally ensues. For this reason, the Nissards observe le  lebeche racommode le tems, the Lebeche settles the weather.  During the rains of this season, however, the winds have been  variable. From the sixteenth of November, 'till the fourth of  January, we have had two and twenty days of heavy rain: a very  extraordinary visitation in this country: but the seasons seem to  be more irregular than formerly, all over Europe. In the month of  July, the mercury in Fahrenheit's thermometer, rose to eighty-four  at Rome, the highest degree at which it was ever known in  that country; and the very next day, the Sabine mountains were  covered with snow. The same phaemomenon happened on the eleventh  of August, and the thirtieth of September. The consequence of  these sudden variations of weather, was this: putrid fevers were  less frequent than usual; but the sudden cheek of perspiration  from the cold, produced colds, inflammatory sore throats, and the  rheumatism. I know instances of some English valetudinarians, who  have passed the winter at Aix, on the supposition that there was  little or no difference between that air and the climate of Nice:  but this is a very great mistake, which may be attended with  fatal consequences. Aix is altogether exposed to the north and  north-west winds, which blow as cold in Provence, as ever I felt  them on the mountains of Scotland: whereas Nice is entirely  screened from these winds by the Maritime Alps, which form an  amphitheatre, to the land-side, around this little territory: but  another incontestible proof of the mildness of this climate, is  deduced from the oranges, lemons, citrons, roses, narcissus's,  july-flowers, and jonquils, which ripen and blow in the middle of  winter. I have described the agreeable side of this climate; and  now I will point out its inconveniences. In the winter, but  especially in the spring, the sun is so hot, that one can hardly  take exercise of any sort abroad, without being thrown into a  breathing sweat; and the wind at this season is so cold and  piercing, that it often produces a mischievous effect on the  pores thus opened. If the heat rarifies the blood and juices,  while the cold air constringes the fibres, and obstructs the  perspiration, inflammatory disorders must ensue. Accordingly, the  people are then subject to colds, pleurisies, peripneumonies, and  ardent fevers. An old count advised me to stay within doors in  March, car alors les humeurs commencent a se remuer, for then the  humours begin to be in motion. During the heats of summer, some  few persons of gross habits have, in consequence of violent  exercise and excess, been seized with putrid fevers, attended  with exanthemata, erisipelatous, and miliary eruptions, which  commonly prove fatal: but the people in general are healthy, even  those that take very little exercise: a strong presumption in  favour of the climate! As to medicine, I know nothing of the  practice of the Nice physicians. Here are eleven in all; but four  or five make shift to live by the profession. They receive, by  way of fee, ten sols (an English six-pence) a visit, and this is  but ill paid: so you may guess whether they are in a condition to  support the dignity of physic; and whether any man, of a liberal  education, would bury himself at Nice on such terms. I am  acquainted with an Italian physician settled at Villa Franca, a  very good sort of a man, who practises for a certain salary,  raised by annual contribution among the better sort of people;  and an allowance from the king, for visiting the sick belonging  to the garrison and the gallies. The whole may amount to near  thirty pounds.

Among the inconveniences of this climate, the vermin form no  inconsiderable article. Vipers and snakes are found in the  mountains. Our gardens swarm with lizzards; and there are some  few scorpions; but as yet I have seen but one of this species. In  summer, notwithstanding all the care and precautions we can take,  we are pestered with incredible swarms of flies, fleas, and bugs;  but the gnats, or couzins, are more intolerable than all the  rest. In the day-time, it is impossible to keep the flies out of  your mouth, nostrils, eyes, and ears. They croud into your milk,  tea, chocolate, soup, wine, and water: they soil your sugar,  contaminate your victuals, and devour your fruit; they cover and  defile your furniture, floors, cielings, and indeed your whole  body. As soon as candles are lighted, the couzins begin to buz  about your ears in myriads, and torment you with their stings, so  that you have no rest nor respite 'till you get into bed, where  you are secured by your mosquito-net. This inclosure is very  disagreeable in hot weather; and very inconvenient to those, who,  like me, are subject to a cough and spitting. It is moreover  ineffectual; for some of those cursed insects insinuate  themselves within it, almost every night; and half a dozen of  them are sufficient to disturb you 'till morning. This is a  plague that continues all the year; but in summer it is  intolerable. During this season, likewise, the moths are so  mischievous, that it requires the utmost care to preserve woollen  cloths from being destroyed. From the month of May, 'till the  beginning of October, the heat is so violent, that you cannot  stir abroad after six in the morning 'till eight at night, so  that you are entirely deprived of the benefit of exercise: There  is no shaded walk in, or near the town; and there is neither  coach nor chaise to hire, unless you travel post. Indeed, there  is no road fit for any wheel carriage, but the common highway to  the Var, in which you are scorched by the reflexion of the sun  from the sand and stones, and at the same time half stifled with  dust. If you ride out in the cool of the evening, you will have  the disadvantage of returning in the dark.

Among the demerits of Nice, I must also mention the water which  is used in the city. It is drawn from wells; and for the most  part so hard, that it curdles with soap. There are many fountains  and streams in the neighbourhood, that afford excellent water,  which, at no great charge, might be conveyed into the town, so as  to form conduits in all the public streets: but the inhabitants  are either destitute of public spirit, or cannot afford the  expense. [General Paterson delivered a Plan to the King of  Sardinia for supplying Nice with excellent water for so small an  expence as one livre a house per annum; but the inhabitants  remonstrated against it as an intolerable Imposition.] I have a  draw-well in my porch, and another in my garden, which supply  tolerable water for culinary uses; but what we drink, is fetched  from a well belonging to a convent of Dominicans in this  neighbourhood. Our linnen is washed in the river Paglion; and  when that is dry, in the brook called Limpia, which runs into the  harbour.

In mentioning the water of this neighbourhood, I ought not to  omit the baths of Rocabiliare, a small town among the mountains,  about five and twenty miles from Nice. There are three sources,  each warmer than the other; the warmest being nearly equal to the  heat of the king's bath at Bath in Somersetshire, as far as I can  judge from information. I have perused a Latin manuscript, which  treats of these baths at Rocabiliare, written by the duke of  Savoy's first physician about sixty years ago. He talks much of  the sulphur and the nitre which they contain; but I apprehend  their efficacy is owing to the same volatile vitriolic principle,  which characterises the waters at Bath. They are attenuating and  deobstruent, consequently of service in disorders arising from a  languid circulation, a viscidity of the juices, a lax fibre, and  obstructed viscera. The road from hence to Rocabiliare is in some  parts very dangerous, lying along the brink of precipices,  impassable to any other carriage but a mule. The town itself  affords bad lodging and accommodation, and little or no society.  The waters are at the distance of a mile and a half from the  town: there are no baths nor shelter, nor any sort of convenience  for those that drink them; and the best part of their efficacy is  lost, unless they are drank at the fountain-head. If these  objections were in some measure removed, I would advise  valetudinarians, who come hither for the benefit of this climate,  to pass the heats of summer at Rocabiliare, which being situated  among mountains, enjoys a cool temperate air all the summer. This  would be a salutary respite from the salt air of Nice, to those  who labour under scorbutical complaints; and they would return  with fresh vigour and spirits, to pass the winter in this place,  where no severity of weather is known. Last June, when I found  myself so ill at my cassine, I had determined to go to  Rocabiliare, and even to erect a hut at the spring, for my own  convenience. A gentleman of Nice undertook to procure me a  tolerable lodging in the house of the cure, who was his relation.  He assured me, there was no want of fresh butter, good poultry,  excellent veal, and delicate trout; and that the articles of  living might be had at Rocabiliare for half the price we paid at  Nice: but finding myself grow better immediately on my return  from the cassine to my own house, I would not put myself to the  trouble and expence of a further removal.

I think I have now communicated all the particulars relating to  Nice, that are worth knowing; and perhaps many more than you  desired to know: but, in such cases, I would rather be thought  prolix and unentertaining, than deficient in that regard and  attention with which I am very sincerely,--Your friend and  servant.

LETTER XXV

NICE, January 1, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--It was in deference to your opinion, reinforced by my  own inclination, and the repeated advice of other friends, that I  resolved upon my late excursion to Italy. I could plainly  perceive from the anxious solicitude, and pressing exhortations  contained in all the letters I had lately received from my  correspondents in Britain, that you had all despaired of my  recovery. You advised me to make a pilgrimage among the Alps, and  the advice was good. In scrambling among those mountains, I  should have benefited by the exercise, and at the same time have  breathed a cool, pure, salubrious air, which, in all probability,  would have expelled the slow fever arising in a great measure  from the heat of this climate. But, I wanted a companion and  fellow traveller, whose conversation and society could alleviate  the horrors of solitude. Besides, I was not strong enough to  encounter the want of conveniences, and even of necessaries to  which I must have been exposed in the course of such an  expedition. My worthy friend Dr. A-- earnestly intreated me to  try the effect of a sea-voyage, which you know has been found of  wonderful efficacy in consumptive cases. After some deliberation,  I resolved upon the scheme, which I have now happily executed. I  had a most eager curiosity to see the antiquities of Florence and  Rome: I longed impatiently to view those wonderful edifices,  statues, and pictures, which I had so often admired in prints and  descriptions. I felt an enthusiastic ardor to tread that very  classical ground which had been the scene of so many great  atchievements; and I could not bear the thought of returning to  England from the very skirts of Italy, without having penetrated  to the capital of that renowned country. With regard to my  health, I knew I could manage matters so as to enjoy all the  benefits that could be expected from the united energy of a  voyage by sea, a journey by land, and a change of climate.

Rome is betwixt four and five hundred miles distant from Nice,  and one half of the way I was resolved to travel by water. Indeed  there is no other way of going from hence to Genoa, unless you  take a mule, and clamber along the mountains at the rate of two  miles an hour, and at the risque of breaking your neck every  minute. The Apennine mountains, which are no other than a  continuation of the maritime Alps, form an almost continued  precipice from Villefranche to Lerici, which is almost forty-five  miles on the other side of Genoa; and as they are generally  washed by the sea, there is no beach or shore, consequently the  road is carried along the face of the rocks, except at certain  small intervals, which are occupied by towns and villages. But,  as there is a road for mules and foot passengers, it might  certainly be enlarged and improved so as to render it practicable  by chaises and other wheel-carriages, and a toll might be  exacted, which in a little time would defray the expence: for  certainly no person who travels to Italy, from England, Holland,  France, or Spain, would make a troublesome circuit to pass the  Alps by the way of Savoy and Piedmont, if he could have the  convenience of going post by the way of Aix, Antibes, and Nice,  along the side of the Mediterranean, and through the Riviera of  Genoa, which from the sea affords the most agreeable and amazing  prospect I ever beheld. What pity it is, they cannot restore the  celebrated Via Aurelia, mentioned in the Itinerarium of  Antoninus, which extended from Rome by the way of Genoa, and  through this country as far as Arles upon the Rhone. It was said  to have been made by the emperor Marcus Aurelius; and some of the  vestiges of it are still to be seen in Provence. The truth is,  the nobility of Genoa, who are all merchants, from a low,  selfish, and absurd policy, take all methods to keep their  subjects of the Riviera in poverty and dependence. With this  view, they carefully avoid all steps towards rendering that  country accessible by land; and at the same time discourage their  trade by sea, lest it should interfere with the commerce of their  capital, in which they themselves are personally concerned.

Those who either will not or cannot bear the sea, and are equally  averse to riding, may be carried in a common chair, provided with  a foot-board, on men's shoulders: this is the way of travelling  practised by the ladies of Nice, in crossing the mountains to  Turin; but it is very tedious and expensive, as the men must be  often relieved.

The most agreeable carriage from here to Genoa, is a feluca, or  open boat, rowed by ten or twelve stout mariners. Though none of  these boats belong to Nice, they are to be found every day in our  harbour, waiting for a fare to Genoa; and they are seen passing  and repassing continually, with merchandize or passengers,  between Marseilles, Antibes, and the Genoese territories. A  feluca is large enough to take in a post-chaise; and there is a  tilt over the stern sheets, where the passengers sit, to protect  them from the rain: between the seats one person may lie  commodiously upon a mattress, which is commonly supplied by the  patron. A man in good health may put up with any thing; but I  would advise every valetudinarian who travels this way, to  provide his own chaise, mattrass, and bedlinnen, otherwise he  will pass his time very uncomfortably. If you go as a simple  passenger in a feluca, you pay about a loui'dore for your place,  and you must be intirely under the direction of the patron, who,  while he can bear the sea, will prosecute his voyage by night as  well as by day, and expose you to many other inconveniencies: but  for eight zequines, or four loui'dores, you can have a whole  feluca to yourself, from Nice to Genoa, and the master shall be  obliged to put a-shore every evening. If you would have it still  more at your command, you may hire it at so much per day, and in  that case, go on shore as often, and stay as long as you please.  This is the method I should take, were I to make the voyage  again; for I am persuaded I should find it very near as cheap,  and much more agreeable than any other.

The distance between this place and Genoa, when measured on the  carte, does not exceed ninety miles: but the people of the  felucas insist upon its being one hundred and twenty. If they  creep along shore round the bottoms of all the bays, this  computation may be true: but, except when the sea is rough, they  stretch directly from one head-land to another, and even when the  wind is contrary, provided the gale is not fresh, they perform  the voyage in two days and a half, by dint of rowing: when the  wind is favourable, they will sail it easily in fourteen hours.

A man who has nothing but expedition in view, may go with the  courier, who has always a light boat well manned, and will be  glad to accommodate a traveller for a reasonable gratification. I  know an English gentleman who always travels with the courier in  Italy, both by sea and land. In posting by land, he is always  sure of having part of a good calash, and the best horses that  can be found; and as the expence of both is defrayed by the  public, it costs him nothing but a present to his companion,  which does not amount to one fourth part of the expence he would  incur by travelling alone. These opportunities may be had every  week in all the towns of Italy.

For my own part, I hired a gondola from hence to Genoa. This is a  boat smaller than a feluca, rowed by four men, and steered by the  patron; but the price was nine zequines, rather more than I  should have payed for a feluca of ten oars. I was assured that  being very light, it would make great way; and the master was  particularly recommended to me, as an honest man and an able  mariner. I was accompanied in this voyage by my wife and Miss C--,  together with one Mr. R--, a native of Nice, whom I treated  with the jaunt, in hopes that as he was acquainted with the  customs of the country, and the different ways of travelling in  it, he would save us much trouble, and some expence: but I was  much disappointed. Some persons at Nice offered to lay wagers  that he would return by himself from Italy; but they were also  disappointed.

We embarked in the beginning of September, attended by one  servant. The heats, which render travelling dangerous in Italy,  begin to abate at this season. The weather was extremely  agreeable; and if I had postponed my voyage a little longer, I  foresaw that I should not be able to return before winter: in  which case I might have found the sea too rough, and the weather  too cold for a voyage of one hundred and thirty-five miles in an  open boat.

Having therefore provided myself with a proper pass, signed and  sealed by our consul, as well as with letters of recommendation  from him to the English consuls at Genoa and Leghorn, a  precaution which I would advise all travellers to take, in case  of meeting with accidents on the road, we went on board about ten  in the morning, stopped about half an hour at a friend's country-house  in the bay of St. Hospice, and about noon entered the  harbour of Monaco, where the patron was obliged to pay toll,  according to the regulation which I have explained in a former  letter. This small town, containing about eight or nine hundred  souls, besides the garrison, is built on a rock which projects  into the sea, and makes a very romantic appearance. The prince's  palace stands in the most conspicuous part, with a walk of trees  before it. The apartments are elegantly furnished, and adorned  with some good pictures. The fortifications are in good repair,  and the place is garrisoned by two French battalions. The present  prince of Monaco is a Frenchman, son of the duke Matignon who  married the heiress of Monaco, whose name was Grimaldi. The  harbour is well sheltered from the wind; but has not water  sufficient to admit vessels of any great burthen. Towards the  north, the king of Sardinia's territories extend to within a mile  of the gate; but the prince of Monaco can go upon his own ground  along shore about five or six miles to the eastward, as far as  Menton, another small town, which also belongs to him, and is  situated on the seaside. His revenues are computed at a million  of French livres, amounting to something more than forty thousand  pounds sterling: but, the principality of Monaco, consisting of  three small towns, and an inconsiderable tract of barren rock, is  not worth above seven thousand a year; the rest arises from his  French estate. This consists partly of the dutchy of Matignon,  and partly of the dutchy of Valentinois, which last was given to  the ancestors of this prince of Monaco, in the year 1640, by the  French king, to make up the loss of some lands in the kingdom of  Naples, which were confiscated when he expelled the Spanish  garrison from Monaco, and threw himself into the arms of France:  so that he is duke of Valentinois as well as of Matignon, in that  kingdom. He lives almost constantly in France; and has taken the  name and arms of Grimaldi.

The Genoese territories begin at Ventimiglia, another town lying  on the coast, at the distance of twenty miles from Nice, a  circumstance from which it borrows the name. Having passed the  towns of Monaco, Menton, Ventimiglia, and several other places of  less consequence that lie along this coast, we turned the point  of St. Martin with a favourable breeze, and might have proceeded  twenty miles further before night: but the women began to be  sick, as well as afraid at the roughness of the water; Mr. R-- was  so discomposed, that he privately desired the patron to put  ashore at St. Remo, on pretence that we should not find a  tolerable auberge in any other place between this and Noli, which  was at the distance of forty miles. We accordingly landed, and  were conducted to the poste, which our gondeliere assured us was  the best auberge in the whole Riviera of Genoa. We ascended by a  dark, narrow, steep stair, into a kind of public room, with a  long table and benches, so dirty and miserable, that it would  disgrace the worst hedge ale-house in England. Not a soul  appeared to receive us. This is a ceremony one must not expect to  meet with in France; far less in Italy. Our patron going into the  kitchen, asked a servant if the company could have lodging in the  house; and was answered, "he could not tell: the patron was not  at home." When he desired to know where the patron was, the other  answered, "he was gone to take the air." E andato a passeggiare.  In the mean time, we were obliged to sit in the common room among  watermen and muleteers. At length the landlord arrived, and gave  us to understand, that he could accommodate us with chambers. In  that where I lay, there was just room for two beds, without  curtains or bedstead, an old rotten table covered with dried  figs, and a couple of crazy chairs. The walls had been once  white-washed: but were now hung with cobwebs, and speckled with  dirt of all sorts; and I believe the brick-floor had not been  swept for half a century. We supped in an outward room suitable  in all respects to the chamber, and fared villainously. The  provision was very ill-dressed, and served up in the most  slovenly manner. You must not expect cleanliness or conveniency  of any kind in this country. For this accommodation I payed as  much as if I had been elegantly entertained in the best auberge  of France or Italy. 

Next day, the wind was so high that we could not prosecute our  voyage, so that we were obliged to pass other four and twenty  hours in this comfortable situation. Luckily Mr. R-- found two  acquaintances in the place; one a Franciscan monk, a jolly  fellow; and the other a maestro di capella, who sent a spinnet to  the inn, and entertained us agreeably with his voice and  performance, in both of which accomplishments he excelled. The  padre was very good humoured, and favoured us with a letter of  recommendation to a friend of his, a professor in the university  of Pisa. You would laugh to see the hyperbolical terms in which  he mentioned your humble servant; but Italy is the native country  of hyperbole.

St. Remo is a pretty considerable town, well-built upon the  declivity of a gently rising hill, and has a harbour capable of  receiving small vessels, a good number of which are built upon  the beach: but ships of any burden are obliged to anchor in the  bay, which is far from being secure. The people of St. Remo form  a small republic, which is subject to Genoa.

They enjoyed particular privileges, till the year 1753, when in  consequence of a new gabelle upon salt, they revolted: but this  effort in behalf of liberty did not succeed. They were soon  reduced by the Genoese, who deprived them of all their  privileges, and built a fort by the sea-side, which serves the  double purpose of defending the harbour and over-awing the town.  The garrison at present does not exceed two hundred men. The  inhabitants are said to have lately sent a deputation to  Ratisbon, to crave the protection of the diet of the empire.  There is very little plain ground in this neighbourhood; but the  hills are covered with oranges, lemons, pomegranates, and olives,  which produce a considerable traffic in fine fruit and excellent  oil. The women of St. Remo are much more handsome and better  tempered than those of Provence. They have in general good eyes,  with open ingenuous countenances. Their dress, though remarkable,  I cannot describe: but upon the whole, they put me in mind of  some portraits I have seen, representing the females of Georgia  and Mingrelia.

On the third day, the wind being abated, though still  unfavourable, we reimbarked and rowed along shore, passing by  Porto-mauricio, and Oneglia; then turning the promontory called  Capo di Melle, we proceeded by Albenga, Finale, and many other  places of inferior note. Portomauricio is seated on a rock washed  by the sea, but indifferently fortified, with an inconsiderable  harbour, which none but very small vessels can enter. About two  miles to the eastward is Oneglia, a small town with  fortifications, lying along the open beach, and belonging to the  king of Sardinia. This small territory abounds with olive-trees,  which produce a considerable quantity of oil, counted the best of  the whole Riviera. Albenga is a small town, the see of a bishop,  suffragan to the archbishop of Genoa. It lies upon the sea, and  the country produces a great quantity of hemp. Finale is the  capital of a marquisate belonging to the Genoese, which has been  the source of much trouble to the republic; and indeed was the  sole cause of their rupture with the king of Sardinia and the  house of Austria in the year 1745. The town is pretty well built;  but the harbour is shallow, open, and unsafe; nevertheless, they  built a good number of tartans and other vessels on the beach and  the neighbouring country abounds with oil and fruit, particularly  with those excellent apples called pomi carli, which I have  mentioned in a former letter.

In the evening we reached the Capo di Noli, counted very  dangerous in blowing weather. It is a very high perpendicular  rock or mountain washed by the sea, which has eaten into it in  divers places, so as to form a great number of caverns. It  extends about a couple of miles, and in some parts is indented  into little creeks or bays, where there is a narrow margin of  sandy beach between it and the water. When the wind is high, no  feluca will attempt to pass it; even in a moderate breeze, the  waves dashing against the rocks and caverns, which echo with the  sound, make such an awful noise, and at the same time occasion  such a rough sea, as one cannot hear, and see, and feel, without  a secret horror.

On this side of the Cape, there is a beautiful strand cultivated  like a garden; the plantations extend to the very tops of the  hills, interspersed with villages, castles, churches, and villas.  Indeed the whole Riviera is ornamented in the same manner, except  in such places as admit of no building nor  cultivation.

Having passed the Cape, we followed the winding of the coast,  into a small bay, and arrived at the town of Noli, where we  proposed to pass the night. You will be surprised that we did not  go ashore sooner, in order to take some refreshment; but the  truth is, we had a provision of ham, tongues, roasted pullets,  cheese, bread, wine, and fruit, in the feluca, where we every day  enjoyed a slight repast about one or two o'clock in the  afternoon. This I mention as a necessary piece of information to  those who may be inclined to follow the same route. We likewise  found it convenient to lay in store of l'eau de vie, or brandy,  for the use of the rowers, who always expect to share your  comforts.  On a meagre day, however, those ragamuffins will  rather die of hunger than suffer the least morsel of flesh-meat  to enter their mouths. I have frequently tried the experiment, by  pressing them to eat something gras, on a Friday or Saturday: but  they always declined it with marks of abhorrence, crying, Dio me  ne libere! God deliver me from it! or some other words to that  effect. I moreover observed, that not one of those fellows ever  swore an oath, or spoke an indecent word. They would by no means  put to sea, of a morning, before they had heard mass; and when  the wind was unfavourable, they always set out with a hymn to the  Blessed Virgin, or St. Elmo, keeping time with their oars as they  sung. I have indeed remarked all over this country, that a man  who transgresses the institutions of the church in these small  matters, is much more infamous than one who has committed the  most flagrant crimes against nature and morality. A murderer,  adulterer, or s--m--te, will obtain easy absolution from the  church, and even find favour with society; but a man who eats a  pidgeon on a Saturday, without express licence, is avoided and  abhorred, as a monster of reprobation. I have conversed with  several intelligent persons on the subject; and have reason to  believe, that a delinquent of this sort is considered as a luke-warm  catholic, little better than a heretic; and of all crimes  they look upon heresy as the most damnable.

Noli is a small republic of fishermen subject to Genoa; but very  tenacious of their privileges. The town stands on the beach,  tolerably well built, defended by a castle situated on a rock  above it; and the harbour is of little consequence. The auberge  was such as made us regret even the inn we had left at St. Remo.  After a very odd kind of supper, which I cannot pretend to  describe, we retired to our repose: but I had not been in bed  five minutes, when I felt something crawling on different parts  of my body, and taking a light to examine, perceived above a  dozen large bugs. You must know I have the same kind of antipathy  to these vermin, that some persons have to a cat or breast of  veal. I started up immediately, and wrapping myself in a great  coat, sick as I was, laid down in the outer room upon a chest,  where I continued till morning.

One would imagine that in a mountainous country like this, there  should be plenty of goats; and indeed, we saw many flocks of them  feeding among the rocks, yet we could not procure half a pint of  milk for our tea, if we had given the weight of it in gold. The  people here have no idea of using milk, and when you ask them for  it, they stand gaping with a foolish face of surprise, which is  exceedingly provoking. It is amazing that instinct does not teach  the peasants to feed their children with goat's milk, so much  more nourishing and agreeable than the wretched sustenance on  which they live. Next day we rowed by Vado and Savona, which last  is a large town, with a strong citadel, and a harbour, which was  formerly capable of receiving large ships: but it fell a  sacrifice to the jealousy of the Genoese, who have partly choaked  it up, on pretence that it should not afford shelter to the ships  of war belonging to those states which might be at enmity with  the republic.

Then we passed Albifola, Sestri di Ponente, Novi, Voltri, and a  great number of villages, villas, and magnificent palaces  belonging to the Genoese nobility, which form almost a continued  chain of buildings along the strand for thirty miles.

About five in the afternoon, we skirted the fine suburbs of St.  Pietro d' Arena, and arrived at Genoa, which makes a dazzling  appearance when viewed from the sea, rising like an amphitheatre  in a circular form from the water's edge, a considerable way up  the mountains, and surrounded on the land side by a double wall,  the most exterior of which is said to extend fifteen miles in  circuit. The first object that strikes your eye at a distance, is  a very elegant pharos, or lighthouse, built on the projection of  a rock on the west side of the harbour, so very high, that, in a  clear day, you may see it at the distance of thirty miles.  Turning the light-house point, you find yourself close to the  mole, which forms the harbour of Genoa. It is built at a great  expence from each side of the bay, so as to form in the sea two  long magnificent jettes. At the extremity of each is another  smaller lanthorn. These moles are both provided with brass-cannon,  and between them is the entrance into the harbour. But  this is still so wide as to admit a great sea, which, when the  wind blows hard from south and south-west, is very troublesome to  the shipping. Within the mole there is a smaller harbour or wet  dock, called Darsena, for the gallies of the republic. We passed  through a considerable number of ships and vessels lying at  anchor, and landing at the water-gate, repaired to an inn called  La Croix de Malthe in the neighbourhood of the harbour. Here we  met with such good entertainment as prepossessed us in favour of  the interior parts of Italy, and contributed with other motives  to detain us some days in this city. But I have detained you so  long, that I believe you wish I may proceed no farther; and  therefore I take my leave for the present, being very sincerely-- Yours.

LETTER XXVI

NICE, January 15, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--It is not without reason that Genoa is called La  superba. The city itself is very stately; and the nobles are very  proud. Some few of them may be proud of their wealth: but, in  general, their fortunes are very small. My friend Mr. R-- assured  me that many Genoese noblemen had fortunes of half a million of  livres per annum: but the truth is, the whole revenue of the  state does not exceed this sum; and the livre of Genoa is but  about nine pence sterling. There are about half a dozen of their  nobles who have ten thousand a year: but the majority have not  above a twentieth part of that sum. They live with great  parsimony in their families; and wear nothing but black in  public; so that their expences are but small. If a Genoese  nobleman gives an entertainment once a quarter, he is said to  live upon the fragments all the rest of the year. I was told that  one of them lately treated his friends, and left the  entertainment to the care of his son, who ordered a dish of fish  that cost a zechine, which is equal to about ten shillings  sterling. The old gentleman no sooner saw it appear on the table,  than unable to suppress his concern, he burst into tears, and  exclaimed, Ah Figliuolo indegno! Siamo in Rovina! Siamo in  precipizio! Ah, Prodigal! ruined! undone!

I think the pride or ostentation of the Italians in general takes  a more laudable turn than that of other nations. A Frenchman lays  out his whole revenue upon tawdry suits of cloaths, or in  furnishing a magnificent repas of fifty or a hundred dishes, one  half of which are not eatable nor intended to be eaten. His  wardrobe goes to the fripier; his dishes to the dogs, and himself  to the devil, and after his decease no vestige of him remains. A  Genoese, on the other hand, keeps himself and his family at short  allowance, that he may save money to build palaces and churches,  which remain to after-ages so many monuments of his taste, piety,  and munificence; and in the mean time give employment and bread  to the poor and industrious. There are some Genoese nobles who  have each five or six elegant palaces magnificently furnished,  either in the city, or in different parts of the Riviera. The two  streets called Strada Balbi and Strada Nuova, are continued  double ranges of palaces adorned with gardens and fountains: but  their being painted on the outside has, in my opinion, a poor  effect.

The commerce of this city is, at present, not very considerable;  yet it has the face of business. The streets are crowded with  people; the shops are well furnished; and the markets abound with  all sorts of excellent provision. The wine made in this  neighbourhood is, however, very indifferent; and all that is  consumed must be bought at the public cantine, where it is sold  for the benefit of the state. Their bread is the whitest and the  best I have tasted any where; and the beef, which they have from  Piedmont, is juicy and delicious. The expence of eating in Italy  is nearly the same as in France, about three shillings a head for  every meal. The state of Genoa is very poor, and their bank of  St. George has received such rude shocks, first from the revolt  of the Corsicans, and afterwards from the misfortunes of the  city, when it was taken by the Austrians in the war of 1745, that  it still continues to languish without any near prospect of its  credit being restored. Nothing shews the weakness of their state,  more than their having recourse to the assistance of France to  put a stop to the progress of Paoli in Corsica; for after all  that has been said of the gallantry and courage of Paoli and his  islanders, I am very credibly informed that they might be very  easily suppressed, if the Genoese had either vigour in the council  or resolution in the field.

True it is, they made a noble effort in expelling the Austrians  who had taken possession of their city; but this effort was the  effect of oppression and despair, and if I may believe the  insinuations of some politicians in this part of the world, the  Genoese would not have succeeded in that attempt, if they had not  previously purchased with a large sum of money the connivance of  the only person who could defeat the enterprize. For my own part,  I can scarce entertain thoughts so prejudicial to the character  of human nature, as to suppose a man capable of sacrificing to  such a consideration, the duty he owed his prince, as well as all  regard to the lives of his soldiers, even those who lay sick in  hospitals, and who, being dragged forth, were miserably butchered  by the furious populace. There is one more presumption of his  innocence, he still retains the favour of his sovereign, who  could not well be supposed to share in the booty. "There are  mysteries in politics which were never dreamed of in our  philosophy, Horatio!" The possession of Genoa might have proved a  troublesome bone of contention, which it might be convenient to  lose by accident. Certain it is, when the Austrians returned  after their expulsion, in order to retake the city, the engineer,  being questioned by the general, declared he would take the place  in fifteen days, on pain of losing his head; and in four days  after this declaration the Austrians retired. This anecdote I  learned from a worthy gentleman of this country, who had it from  the engineer's own mouth. Perhaps it was the will of heaven. You  see how favourably, providence has interposed in behalf of the  reigning empress of Russia, first in removing her husband:  secondly in ordaining the assassination of prince Ivan, for which  the perpetrators have been so liberally rewarded; it even seems  determined to shorten the life of her own son, the only surviving  rival from whom she had any thing to fear.

The Genoese have now thrown themselves into the arms of France  for protection: I know not whether it would not have been a  greater mark of sagacity to cultivate the friendship of England,  with which they carry on an advantageous commerce. While the  English are masters of the Mediterranean, they will always have  it in their power to do incredible damage all along the Riviera,  to ruin the Genoese trade by sea, and even to annoy the capital;  for notwithstanding all the pains they have taken to fortify the  mole and the city, I am greatly deceived if it is not still  exposed to the danger, not only of a bombardment, but even of a  cannonade. I am even sanguine enough to think a resolute  commander might, with a strong squadron, sail directly into the  harbour, without sustaining much damage, notwithstanding all the  cannon of the place, which are said to amount to near five  hundred. I have seen a cannonade of above four hundred pieces of  artillery, besides bombs and cohorns, maintained for many hours,  without doing much mischief.

During the last siege of Genoa, the French auxiliaries were  obliged to wait at Monaco, until a gale of wind had driven the  English squadron off the coast, and then they went along shore in  small vessels at the imminent risque of being taken by the  British cruisers. By land I apprehend their march would be  altogether impracticable, if the king of Sardinia had any  interest to oppose it. He might either guard the passes, or break  up the road in twenty different places, so as to render it  altogether impassable. Here it may not be amiss to observe, that  when Don Philip advanced from Nice with his army to Genoa, he was  obliged to march so close to the shore, that in above fifty  different places, the English ships might have rendered the road  altogether impassable. The path, which runs generally along the  face of a precipice washed by the sea, is so narrow that two men  on horseback can hardly pass each other; and the road itself so  rugged, slippery, and dangerous, that the troopers were obliged  to dismount, and lead their horses one by one. On the other hand,  baron de Leutrum, who was at the head of a large body of  Piedmontese troops, had it in his power to block up the passes of  the mountains, and even to destroy this road in such a manner,  that the enemy could not possibly advance. Why these precautions  were not taken, I do not pretend to explain: neither can I tell  you wherefore the prince of Monaco, who is a subject and partizan  of France, was indulged with a neutrality for his town, which  served as a refreshing-place, a safe port, and an intermediate  post for the French succours sent from Marseilles to Genoa. This  I will only venture to affirm, that the success and advantage of  great alliances are often sacrificed to low, partial, selfish,  and sordid considerations. The town of Monaco is commanded by  every heighth in its neighbourhood; and might be laid in ashes by  a bomb-ketch in four hours by sea.

I was fortunate enough to be recommended to a lady in Genoa, who  treated us with great politeness and hospitality. She introduced  me to an abbate, a man of letters, whose conversation was  extremely agreeable. He already knew me by reputation, and  offered to make me known to some of the first persons in the  republic, with whom he lived in intimacy. The lady is one of the  most intelligent and best-bred persons I have known in any  country. We assisted at her conversazione, which was numerous.  She pressed us to pass the winter at Genoa; and indeed I was  almost persuaded: but I had attachments at Nice, from which I  could not easily disengage myself.

The few days we staved at Genoa were employed in visiting the  most remarkable churches and palaces. In some of the churches,  particularly that of the Annunciata, I found a profusion of  ornaments, which had more magnificence than taste. There is a  great number of pictures; but very few of them are capital  pieces. I had heard much of the ponte Carignano, which did not at  all answer my expectation. It is a bridge that unites two  eminences which form the higher part of the city, and the houses in the bottom below do  not rise so high as the springing of its arches. There is nothing  at all curious in its construction, nor any way remarkable,  except the heighth of the piers from which the arches are sprung.  Hard by the bridge there is an elegant church, from the top of  which you have a very rich and extensive prospect of the city,  the sea and the adjacent country, which looks like a continent of  groves and villas. The only remarkable circumstance about the  cathedral, which is Gothic and gloomy, is the chapel where the  pretended bones of John the Baptist are deposited, and in which  thirty silver lamps are continually burning. I had a curiosity to  see the palaces of Durazzo and Doria, but it required more  trouble to procure admission than I was willing to give myself:  as for the arsenal, and the rostrum of an ancient galley which  was found by accident in dragging the harbour, I postponed seeing  them till my return.

Having here provided myself with letters of credit for Florence  and Rome, I hired the same boat which had brought us hither, to  carry us forward to Lerici, which is a small town about half way  between Genoa and Leghorn, where travellers, who are tired of the  sea, take post-chaises to continue their route by land to Pisa  and Florence. I payed three loui'dores for this voyage of about  fifty miles; though I might have had a feluca for less money.  When you land on the wharf at Genoa, you are plied by the feluca  men just as you are plied by the watermen at Hungerford-stairs in  London. They are always ready to set off at a minute's warning  for Lerici, Leghorn, Nice, Antibes, Marseilles, and every part of  the Riviera.

The wind being still unfavourable, though the weather was  delightful, we rowed along shore, passing by several pretty  towns, villages, and a vast number of cassines, or little white  houses, scattered among woods of olive-trees, that cover the  hills; and these are the habitations of the velvet and damask  weavers. Turning Capo Fino we entered a bay, where stand the  towns of Porto Fino, Lavagna, and Sestri di Levante, at which  last we took up our night's lodging. The house was tolerable, and  we had no great reason to complain of the beds: but, the weather  being hot, there was a very offensive smell, which proceeded from  some skins of beasts new killed, that were spread to dry on an  outhouse in the yard. Our landlord was a butcher, and had very  much the looks of an assassin. His wife was a great masculine  virago, who had all the air of having frequented the slaughter-house.  Instead of being welcomed with looks of complaisance, we  were admitted with a sort of gloomy condescension, which seemed  to say, "We don't much like your company; but, however, you shall  have a night's lodging in favour of the patron of the gondola,  who is our acquaintance." In short, we had a very bad supper,  miserably dressed, passed a very disagreeable night, and payed a  very extravagant bill in the morning, without being thanked for  our custom. I was very glad to get out of the house with my  throat uncut.

Sestri di Levante is a little town pleasantly situated on the  seaside; but has not the conveniency of a harbour. The fish taken  here is mostly carried to Genoa. This is likewise the market for  their oil, and the paste called macaroni, of which they make a  good quantity.

Next day, we skirted a very barren coast, consisting of almost  perpendicular rocks, on the faces of which, however, we saw many  peasants' houses and hanging terraces for vines, made by dint of  incredible labour. In the afternoon, we entered by the Porti di  Venere into the bay, or gulf of Spetia or Spezza, which was the  Portus Lunae of the ancients. This bay, at the mouth of which  lies the island Palmaria, forms a most noble and secure harbour,  capacious enough to contain all the navies in Christendom. The  entrance on one side is defended by a small fort built above the  town of Porto Venere, which is a very poor place. Farther in  there is a battery of about twenty guns; and on the right hand,  opposite to Porto Venere, is a block-house, founded on a rock in  the sea. At the bottom of the bay is the town of Spetia on the  left, and on the right that of Lerici, defended by a castle of  very little strength or consequence. The whole bay is surrounded  with plantations of olives and oranges, and makes a very  delightful appearance. In case of a war, this would be an  admirable station for a British squadron, as it lies so near  Genoa and Leghorn; and has a double entrance, by means of which  the cruisers could sail in and out continually, which way soever  the wind might chance to sit. I am sure the fortifications would  give very little disturbance.

At the post-house in Lerici, the accommodation is intolerable. We  were almost poisoned at supper. I found the place where I was to  lie so close and confined, that I could not breathe in it, and  therefore lay all night in an outward room upon four chairs, with  a leather portmanteau for my pillow. For this entertainment I  payed very near a loui'dore. Such bad accommodation is the less  excusable, as the fellow has a great deal of business, this being  a great thoroughfare for travellers going into Italy, or  returning from thence.

I might have saved some money by prosecuting my voyage directly  by sea to Leghorn: but, by this time, we were all heartily tired  of the water, the business then was to travel by land to  Florence, by the way of Pisa, which is seven posts distant from  Lerici. Those who have not their own carriage must either hire  chaises to perform the whole journey, or travel by way of  cambiatura, which is that of changing the chaises every post, as  the custom is in England. In this case the great inconvenience  arises from your being obliged to shift your baggage every post.  The chaise or calesse of this country, is a wretched machine with  two wheels, as uneasy as a common cart, being indeed no other  than what we should call in England a very ill-contrived one-horse  chair, narrow, naked, shattered and shabby. For this  vehicle and two horses you pay at the rate of eight paoli a  stage, or four shillings sterling; and the postilion expects two  paoli for his gratification: so that every eight miles cost about  five shillings, and four only, if you travel in your own  carriage, as in that case you pay no more than at the rate of  three paoli a horse.

About three miles from Lerici, we crossed the Magra, which  appeared as a rivulet almost dry, and in half a mile farther  arrived at Sarzana, a small town at the extremity of the Genoese  territories, where we changed horses. Then entering the  principalities of Massa and Carrara, belonging to the duke of  Modena, we passed Lavenza, which seems to be a decayed fort with  a small garrison, and dined at Massa, which is an agreeable  little town, where the old dutchess of Modena resides.  Notwithstanding all the expedition we could make, it was dark  before we passed the Cerchio, which is an inconsiderable stream  in the neighbourhood of Pisa, where we arrived about eight in the  evening.

The country from Sarzana to the frontiers of Tuscany is a narrow  plain, bounded on the right by the sea, and on the left by the  Apennine mountains. It is well cultivated and inclosed,  consisting of meadow-ground, corn fields, plantations of olives;  and the trees that form the hedge-rows serve as so many props to  the vines, which are twisted round them, and continued from one  to another. After entering the dominions of Tuscany, we travelled  through a noble forest of oak-trees of a considerable extent,  which would have appeared much more agreeable, had we not been  benighted and apprehensive of robbers. The last post but one in  this days journey, is at the little town of Viareggio, a kind of  sea-port on the Mediterranean, belonging to Lucia. The roads are  indifferent, and the accommodation is execrable. I was glad to  find myself housed in a very good inn at Pisa, where I promised  myself a good night's rest, and was not disappointed. I heartily  wish you the same pleasure, and am very sincerely--Yours.

LETTER XXVII

NICE, January 28, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--Pisa is a fine old city that strikes you with the same  veneration you would feel at sight of an antient temple which  bears the marks of decay, without being absolutely dilapidated.  The houses are well built, the streets open, straight, and well  paved; the shops well furnished; and the markets well supplied:  there are some elegant palaces, designed by great masters. The  churches are built with taste, and tolerably ornamented. There is  a beautiful wharf of freestone on each side of the river Arno,  which runs through the city, and three bridges thrown over it, of  which that in the middle is of marble, a pretty piece of  architecture: but the number of inhabitants is very  inconsiderable; and this very circumstance gives it an air of  majestic solitude, which is far from being unpleasant to a man of  a contemplative turn of mind. For my part, I cannot bear the  tumult of a populous commercial city; and the solitude that  reigns in Pisa would with me be a strong motive to choose it as a  place of residence. Not that this would be the only inducement  for living at Pisa. Here is some good company, and even a few men  of taste and learning. The people in general are counted sociable  and polite; and there is great plenty of provisions, at a very  reasonable rate. At some distance from the more frequented parts  of the city, a man may hire a large house for thirty crowns a  year: but near the center, you cannot have good lodgings, ready  furnished, for less than a scudo (about five shillings) a day.  The air in summer is reckoned unwholesome by the exhalations  arising from stagnant water in the neighbourhood of the city,  which stands in the midst of a fertile plain, low and marshy: yet  these marshes have been considerably drained, and the air is much  meliorated. As for the Arno, it is no longer navigated by vessels  of any burthen. The university of Pisa is very much decayed; and  except the little business occasioned by the emperor's gallies,  which are built in this town, [This is a mistake. No gallies have  been built here for a great many years, and the dock is now  converted into stables for the Grand Duke's Horse Guards.] I know  of no commerce it carried on: perhaps the inhabitants live on the  produce of the country, which consists of corn, wine, and cattle.  They are supplied with excellent water for drinking, by an  aqueduct consisting of above five thousand arches, begun by  Cosmo, and finished by Ferdinand I. Grand-dukes of Tuscany; it  conveys the water from the mountains at the distance of five  miles. This noble city, formerly the capital of a flourishing and  powerful republic, which contained above one hundred and fifty  thousand inhabitants, within its walls, is now so desolate that  grass grows in the open streets; and the number of its people do  not exceed sixteen thousand.

You need not doubt but I visited the Campanile, or hanging-tower,  which is a beautiful cylinder of eight stories, each adorned with  a round of columns, rising one above another. It stands by the  cathedral, and inclines so far on one side from the  perpendicular, that in dropping a plummet from the top, which is  one hundred and eighty-eight feet high, it falls sixteen feet  from the base. For my part, I should never have dreamed that this  inclination proceeded from any other cause, than an accidental  subsidence of the foundation on this side, if some connoisseurs  had not taken great pains to prove it was done on purpose by the  architect. Any person who has eyes may see that the pillars on  that side are considerably sunk; and this is the case with the  very threshold of the door by which you enter. I think it would  have been a very preposterous ambition in the architects, to show  how far they could deviate from the perpendicular in this  construction; because in that particular any common mason could  have rivalled them; [All the world knows that a Building with  such Inclination may be carried up till a line drawn from the  Centre of Gravity falls without the Circumference of the Base.]  and if they really intended it as a specimen of their art, they  should have shortened the pilasters on that side, so as to  exhibit them intire, without the appearance of sinking. These  leaning towers are not unfrequent in Italy; there is one at  Bologna, another at Venice, a third betwixt Venice and Ferrara,  and a fourth at Ravenna; and the inclination in all of them has  been supposed owing to the foundations giving way on one side  only.

In the cathedral, which is a large Gothic pile, [This Edifice is  not absolutely Gothic. It was built in the Twelfth Century after  the Design of a Greek Architect from Constantinople, where by  that time the art was much degenerated. The Pillars of Granite  are mostly from the Islands of Ebba and Giglia on the coast of  Tuscany, where those quarries were worked by the antient Romans.  The Giullo, and the verde antico are very beautiful species of  marble, yellow and green; the first, antiently called marmor  numidicum, came from Africa; the other was found (according to  Strabo) on the mons Taygetus in Lacedemonia: but, at present,  neither the one nor the other is to be had except among the ruins  of antiquity.] there is a great number of massy pillars of  porphyry, granite, jasper, giullo, and verde antico, together  with some good pictures and statues: but the greatest curiosity  is that of the brass-gates, designed and executed by John of  Bologna, representing, embossed in different compartments, the  history of the Old and New Testament. I was so charmed with this  work, that I could have stood a whole day to examine and admire  it. In the Baptisterium, which stands opposite to this front,  there are some beautiful marbles, particularly the font, and a  pulpit, supported by the statues of different animals.

Between the cathedral and this building, about one hundred paces  on one side, is the famous burying-ground, called Campo Santo,  from its being covered with earth brought from Jerusalem. It is  an oblong square, surrounded by a very high wall, and always kept  shut. Within-side there is a spacious corridore round the whole  space, which is a noble walk for a contemplative philosopher. It  is paved chiefly with flat grave-stones: the walls are painted in  fresco by Ghiotto, Giottino, Stefano, Bennoti, Bufalmaco, and  some others of his cotemporaries and disciples, who flourished  immediately after the restoration of painting. The subjects are  taken from the Bible. Though the manner is dry, the drawing  incorrect, the design generally lame, and the colouring  unnatural; yet there is merit in the expression: and the whole  remains as a curious monument of the efforts made by this noble  art immediately after her revival. [The History of Job by Giotto  is much admired.] Here are some deceptions in perspective equally  ingenious and pleasing; particularly the figures of certain  animals, which exhibit exactly the same appearance, from whatever  different points of view they are seen. One division of the  burying-ground consists of a particular compost, which in nine  days consumes the dead bodies to the bones: in all probability,  it is no other than common earth mixed with quick-lime. At one  corner of the corridore, there are the pictures of three bodies  represented in the three different stages of putrefaction which  they undergo when laid in this composition. At the end of the  three first days, the body is bloated and swelled, and the  features are enlarged and distorted to such a degree, as fills  the spectator with horror. At the sixth day, the swelling is  subsided, and all the muscular flesh hangs loosened from the  bones: at the ninth, nothing but the skeleton remains. There is a  small neat chapel at one end of the Campo Santo, with some tombs,  on one of which is a beautiful bust by Buona Roti. [Here is a  sumptuous cenotaph erected by Pope Gregory XIII. to the memory of  his brother Giovanni Buoncampagni. It is called the Monumentum  Gregorianum, of a violet-coloured marble from Scravezza in this  neighbourhood, adorned with a couple of columns of Touchstone,  and two beautiful spherical plates of Alabaster.] At the other  end of the corridore, there is a range of antient sepulchral  stones ornamented with basso-relievo brought hither from  different parts by the Pisan Fleets in the course of their  expeditions. I was struck with the figure of a woman lying dead  on a tomb-stone, covered with a piece of thin drapery, so  delicately cut as to shew all the flexures of the attitude, and  even all the swellings and sinuosities of the muscles. Instead of  stone, it looks like a sheet of wet linen. [One of these  antiquities representing the Hunting of Meleager was converted  into a coffin for the Countess Beatrice, mother of the famous  Countess Mathilda; it is now fixed to the outside of the church  wall just by one of the doors, and is a very elegant piece of  sculpture. Near the same place is a fine pillar of Porphyry  supporting the figure of a Lion, and a kind of urn which seems to  be a Sarcophagus, though an inscription round the Base declares  it is a Talentum in which the antient Pisans measured the Census  or Tax which they payed to Augustus: but in what metal or specie  this Census was payed we are left to divine. There are likewise  in the Campo Santo two antique Latin edicts of the Pisan Senate  injoining the citizens to go into mourning for the Death of Caius  and Lucius Caesar the Sons of Agrippa, and heirs declared of the  Emperor. Fronting this Cemetery, on the other side of the Piazza  of the Dome, is a large, elegant Hospital in which the sick are  conveniently and comfortably lodged, entertained, and attended.]

For four zechines I hired a return-coach and four from Pisa to  Florence. This road, which lies along the Arno, is very good; and  the country is delightful, variegated with hill and vale, wood  and water, meadows and corn-fields, planted and inclosed like the  counties of Middlesex and Hampshire; with this difference,  however, that all the trees in this tract were covered with  vines, and the ripe clusters black and white, hung down from  every bough in a most luxuriant and romantic abundance. The vines  in this country are not planted in rows, and propped with sticks,  as in France and the county of Nice, but twine around the hedge- row trees, which they almost quite cover with their foliage and  fruit. The branches of the vine are extended from tree to tree,  exhibiting beautiful festoons of real leaves, tendrils, and  swelling clusters a foot long. By this oeconomy the ground of the  inclosure is spared for corn, grass, or any other production. The  trees commonly planted for the purpose of sustaining the vines,  are maple, elm, and aller, with which last the banks of the Arno  abound. [It would have been still more for the advantage of the  Country and the Prospect, if instead of these they had planted  fruit trees for the purpose.] This river, which is very  inconsiderable with respect to the quantity of water, would be a  charming pastoral stream, if it was transparent; but it is always  muddy and discoloured. About ten or a dozen miles below Florence,  there are some marble quarries on the side of it, from whence the  blocks are conveyed in boats, when there is water enough in the  river to float them, that is after heavy rains, or the melting of  the snow upon the mountains of Umbria, being part of the  Apennines, from whence it takes its rise.

Florence is a noble city, that still retains all the marks of a  majestic capital, such as piazzas, palaces, fountains, bridges,  statues, and arcades. I need not te11 you that the churches here  are magnificent, and adorned not only with pillars of oriental  granite, porphyry, Jasper, verde antico, and other precious  stones; but also with capital pieces of painting by the most  eminent masters. Several of these churches, however, stand  without fronts, for want of money to complete the plans. It may  also appear superfluous to mention my having viewed the famous  gallery of antiquities, the chapel of St. Lorenzo, the palace of  Pitti, the cathedral, the baptisterium, Ponte de Trinita, with  its statues, the triumphal arch, and every thing which is  commonly visited in this metropolis. But all these objects having  been circumstantially described by twenty different authors of  travels, I shall not trouble you with a repetition of trite  observations.

That part of the city which stands on each side of the river,  makes a very elegant appearance, to which the four bridges and  the stone-quay between them, contribute in a great measure. I  lodged at the widow Vanini's, an English house delightfully  situated in this quarter. The landlady, who is herself a native  of England, we found very obliging. The lodging-rooms are  comfortable; and the entertainment is good and reasonable. There  is a considerable number of fashionable people at Florence, and  many of them in good circumstances. They affect a gaiety in their  dress, equipage, and conversation; but stand very much on their  punctilio with strangers; and will not, without great reluctance,  admit into their assemblies any lady of another country, whose  noblesse is not ascertained by a title. This reserve is in some  measure excusable among a people who are extremely ignorant of  foreign customs, and who know that in their own country, every  person, even the most insignificant, who has any pretensions to  family, either inherits, or assumes the title of principe, conte,  or marchese.

With all their pride, however, the nobles of Florence are humble  enough to enter into partnership with shop-keepers, and even to  sell wine by retail. It is an undoubted fact, that in every  palace or great house in this city, there is a little window  fronting the street, provided with an iron-knocker, and over it  hangs an empty flask, by way of sign-post. Thither you send your  servant to buy a bottle of wine. He knocks at the little wicket,  which is opened immediately by a domestic, who supplies him with  what he wants, and receives the money like the waiter of any  other cabaret. It is pretty extraordinary, that it should not be  deemed a disparagement in a nobleman to sell half a pound of  figs, or a palm of ribbon or tape, or to take money for a flask  of sour wine; and yet be counted infamous to match his daughter  in the family of a person who has distinguished himself in any  one of the learned professions.

Though Florence be tolerably populous, there seems to be very  little trade of any kind in it: but the inhabitants flatter  themselves with the prospect of reaping great advantage from the  residence of one of the arch-dukes, for whose reception they are  now repairing the palace of Pitti. I know not what the revenues  of Tuscany may amount to, since the succession of the princes of Lorraine; but, under the last dukes of the Medici family, they  were said to produce two millions of crowns, equal to five  hundred thousand pounds sterling. These arose from a very heavy  tax upon land and houses, the portions of maidens, and suits at  law, besides the duties upon traffick, a severe gabelle upon the  necessaries of life, and a toll upon every eatable entered into  this capital. If we may believe Leti, the grand duke was then  able to raise and maintain an army of forty thousand infantry,  and three thousand horse; with twelve gallies, two galeasses, and  twenty ships of war. I question if Tuscany can maintain at  present above one half of such an armament. He that now commands  the emperor's navy, consisting of a few frigates, is an  Englishman, called Acton, who was heretofore captain of a ship in  our East India company's service. He has lately embraced the  catholic religion, and been created admiral of Tuscany.

There is a tolerable opera in Florence for the entertainment of  the best company, though they do not seem very attentive to the  musick. Italy is certainly the native country of this art; and  yet, I do not find the people in general either more musically  inclined, or better provided with ears than their neighbours.  Here is also a wretched troop of comedians for the burgeois, and  lower class of people: but what seems most to suit the taste of  all ranks, is the exhibition of church pageantry. I had occasion  to see a procession, where all the noblesse of the city attended  in their coaches, which filled the whole length of the great  street called the Corso. It was the anniversary of a charitable  institution in favour of poor maidens, a certain number of whom  are portioned every year. About two hundred of these virgins  walked in procession, two and two together, cloathed in violet-coloured  wide gowns, with white veils on their heads, and made a  very classical appearance. They were preceded and followed by an  irregular mob of penitents in sack-cloth, with lighted tapers,  and monks carrying crucifixes, bawling and bellowing the  litanies: but the great object was a figure of the Virgin Mary,  as big as the life, standing within a gilt frame, dressed in a  gold stuff, with a large hoop, a great quantity of false jewels,  her face painted and patched, and her hair frizzled and curled in  the very extremity of the fashion. Very little regard had been paid to the image of our Saviour on the cross; but when his  lady-mother appeared on the shoulders of three or four lusty  friars, the whole populace fell upon their knees in the dirt.  This extraordinary veneration paid to the Virgin, must have been  derived originally from the French, who pique themselves on their  gallantry to the fair sex.

Amidst all the scenery of the Roman catholic religion, I have  never yet seen any of the spectators affected at heart, or  discover the least signs of fanaticism. The very disciplinants,  who scourge themselves in the Holy-week, are generally peasants  or parties hired for the purpose. Those of the confrairies, who  have an ambition to distinguish themselves on such occasions,  take care to secure their backs from the smart, by means of  secret armour, either women's boddice, or quilted jackets. The  confrairies are fraternities of devotees, who inlist themselves  under the banners of particular saints. On days of procession  they appear in a body dressed as penitents and masked, and  distinguished by crosses on their habits. There is scarce an  individual, whether noble or plebeian, who does not belong to one  of these associations, which may be compared to the FreeMasons,  Gregoreans, and Antigallicans of England.

Just without one of the gates of Florence, there is a triumphal  arch erected on occasion of the late emperor's making his public  entry, when he succeeded to the dukedom of Tuscany: and herein  the summer evenings, the quality resort to take the air in their  coaches. Every carriage stops, and forms a little separate  conversazione. The ladies sit within, and the cicisbei stand on  the foot-boards, on each side of the coach, entertaining them  with their discourse. It would be no unpleasant inquiry to trace  this sort of gallantry to its original, and investigate all its  progress. The Italians, having been accused of jealousy, were  resolved to wipe off the reproach, and, seeking to avoid it for  the future, have run into the other extreme. I know it is  generally supposed that the custom of choosing cicisbei, was  calculated to prevent the extinction of families, which would  otherwise often happen in consequence of marriages founded upon  interest, without any mutual affection in the contracting  parties. How far this political consideration may have weighed  against the jealous and vindictive temper of the Italians, I will  not pretend to judge: but, certain it is, every married lady in  this country has her cicisbeo, or servente, who attends her every  where, and on all occasions; and upon whose privileges the  husband dares not encroach, without incurring the censure and  ridicule of the whole community. For my part, I would rather be  condemned for life to the gallies, than exercise the office of a  cicisbeo, exposed to the intolerable caprices and dangerous  resentment of an Italian virago. I pretend not to judge of the  national character, from my own observation: but, if the  portraits drawn by Goldoni in his Comedies are taken from nature,  I would not hesitate to pronounce the Italian women the most  haughty, insolent, capricious, and revengeful females on the face  of the earth. Indeed their resentments are so cruelly implacable,  and contain such a mixture of perfidy, that, in my opinion, they  are very unfit subjects for comedy, whose province it is, rather  to ridicule folly than to stigmatize such atrocious vice.

You have often heard it said, that the purity of the Italian is  to be found in the lingua Toscana, and bocca Romana. Certain it  is, the pronunciation of the Tuscans is disagreeably guttural:  the letters C and G they pronounce with an aspiration, which  hurts the ear of an Englishman; and is I think rather rougher  than that of the X, in Spanish. It sounds as if the speaker had  lost his palate. I really imagined the first man I heard speak in  Pisa, had met with that misfortune in the course of his amours.

One of the greatest curiosities you meet with in Italy, is the  Improvisatore; such is the name given to certain individuals, who  have the surprising talent of reciting verses extempore, on any  subject you propose. Mr. Corvesi, my landlord, has a son, a  Franciscan friar, who is a great genius in this way.

When the subject is given, his brother tunes his violin to  accompany him, and he begins to rehearse in recitative, with  wonderful fluency and precision. Thus he will, at a minute's  warning, recite two or three hundred verses, well turned, and  well adapted, and generally mingled with an elegant compliment to  the company. The Italians are so fond of poetry, that many of  them, have the best part of Ariosto, Tasso, and Petrarch, by  heart; and these are the great sources from which the  Improvisatori draw their rhimes, cadence, and turns of  expression. But, lest you should think there is neither rhime nor  reason in protracting this tedious epistle, I shall conclude it  with the old burden of my song, that I am always--Your  affectionate humble servant.

LETTER XXVIII

NICE, February 5, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--Your entertaining letter of the fifth of last month,  was a very charitable and a very agreeable donation: but your  suspicion is groundless. I assure you, upon my honour, I have no  share whatever in any of the disputes which agitate the public:  nor do I know any thing of your political transactions, except  what I casually see in one of your newspapers, with the perusal  of which I am sometimes favoured by our consul at Villefranche.  You insist upon my being more particular in my remarks on what I  saw at Florence, and I shall obey the injunction. The famous  gallery which contains the antiquities, is the third story of a  noble stone-edifice, built in the form of the Greek Pi, the upper  part fronting the river Arno, and one of the legs adjoining to  the ducal-palace, where the courts of justice are held. As the  house of Medici had for some centuries resided in the palace of  Pitti, situated on the other side of the river, a full mile from  these tribunals, the architect Vasari, who planned the new  edifice, at the same time contrived a corridore, or covered  passage, extending from the palace of Pitti along one of the  bridges, to the gallery of curiosities, through which the grand- duke passed unseen, when he was disposed either to amuse himself  with his antiquities, or to assist at his courts of judicature:  but there is nothing very extraordinary either in the contrivance  or execution of this corridore.

If I resided in Florence I would give something extraordinary for  permission to walk every day in the gallery, which I should much  prefer to the Lycaeum, the groves of Academus, or any porch or  philosophical alley in Athens or in Rome. Here by viewing the  statues and busts ranged on each side, I should become acquainted  with the faces of all the remarkable personages, male and female,  of antiquity, and even be able to trace their different  characters from the expression of their features. This collection  is a most excellent commentary upon the Roman historians,  particularly Suetonius and Dion Cassius. There was one  circumstance that struck me in viewing the busts of Caracalla,  both here and in the Capitol at Rome; there was a certain  ferocity in the eyes, which seemed to contradict the sweetness of  the other features, and remarkably justified the epithet  Caracuyl, by which he was distinguished by the antient  inhabitants of North-Britain. In the language of the Highlanders  caracuyl signifies cruel eye, as we are given to understand by  the ingenious editor of Fingal, who seems to think that Caracalla  is no other than the Celtic word, adapted to the pronunciation of  the Romans: but the truth is, Caracalla was the name of a Gaulish  vestment, which this prince affected to wear; and hence he  derived that surname. The Caracuyl of the Britons, is the same as  the upodra idon of the Greeks, which Homer has so often applied  to his Scolding Heroes. I like the Bacchanalian, chiefly for the  fine drapery. The wind, occasioned by her motion, seems to have  swelled and raised it from the parts of the body which it covers.  There is another gay Bacchanalian, in the attitude of dancing,  crowned with ivy, holding in her right hand a bunch of grapes,  and in her left the thyrsus. The head of the celebrated Flora is  very beautiful: the groupe of Cupid and Psyche, however, did not  give me all the pleasure I expected from it.

Of all the marbles that appear in the open gallery, the following  are those I most admire. Leda with the Swan; as for Jupiter, in  this transformation, he has much the appearance of a goose. I  have not seen any thing tamer; but the sculptor has admirably  shewn his art in representing Leda's hand partly hid among the  feathers, which are so lightly touched off, that the very shape  of the fingers are seen underneath. The statue of a youth,  supposed to be Ganymede, is compared by the connoisseurs to the  celebrated Venus, and as far as I can judge, not without reason:  it is however, rather agreeable than striking, and will please a  connoisseur much more than a common spectator. I know not whether  it is my regard to the faculty that inhances the value of the  noted Esculapius, who appears with a venerable beard of delicate  workmanship. He is larger than the life, cloathed in a  magnificent pallium, his left arm resting on a knotted staff,  round which the snake is twined according to Ovid.

Hunc modo serpentem baculum qui nexibus ambit  Perspice--

Behold the snake his mystic Rod intwine.

He has in his hand the fascia herbarum, and the crepidae on his  feet. There is a wild-boar represented lying on one side, which I  admire as a master-piece. The savageness of his appearance is  finely contrasted with the case and indolence of the attitude.  Were I to meet with a living boar lying with the same expression,  I should be tempted to stroke his bristles. Here is an elegant  bust of Antinous, the favourite of Adrian; and a beautiful head  of Alexander the Great, turned on one side, with an expression of  languishment and anxiety in his countenance. The virtuosi are not  agreed about the circumstance in which he is represented; whether  fainting with the loss of blood which he suffered in his  adventure at Oxydrace; or languishing with the fever contracted  by bathing in the Cydnus; or finally complaining to his father  Jove, that there were no other worlds for him to conquer. The  kneeling Narcissus is a striking figure, and the expression  admirable. The two Bacchi are perfectly well executed; but (to my  shame be it spoken) I prefer to the antique that which is the  work of Michael Angelo Buonaroti, concerning which the story is  told which you well know. The artist having been blamed by some  pretended connoisseurs, for not imitating the manner of the  ancients, is said to have privately finished this Bacchus, and  buried it, after having broke off an arm, which he kept as a  voucher. The statue, being dug up by accident, was allowed by the  best judges, to be a perfect antique; upon which Buonaroti  produced the arm, and claimed his own work. Bianchi looks upon  this as a fable; but owns that Vasari tells such another of a  child cut in marble by the same artist, which being carried to  Rome, and kept for some time under ground, was dug up as an  antique, and sold for a great deal of money. I was likewise  attracted by the Morpheus in touchstone, which is described by  Addison, who, by the bye, notwithstanding all his taste, has been  convicted by Bianchi of several gross blunders in his account of  this gallery.

With respect to the famous Venus Pontia, commonly called de  Medicis, which was found at Tivoli, and is kept in a separate  apartment called the Tribuna, I believe I ought to be intirely  silent, or at least conceal my real sentiments, which will  otherwise appear equally absurd and presumptuous. It must be want  of taste that prevents my feeling that enthusiastic admiration  with which others are inspired at sight of this statue: a statue  which in reputation equals that of Cupid by Praxiteles, which  brought such a concourse of strangers of old to the little town  of Thespiae. I cannot help thinking that there is no beauty in  the features of Venus; and that the attitude is aukward and out  of character. It is a bad plea to urge that the antients and we  differ in the ideas of beauty. We know the contrary, from their  medals, busts, and historians. Without all doubt, the limbs and  proportions of this statue are elegantly formed, and accurately  designed, according to the nicest rules of symmetry and  proportion; and the back parts especially are executed so  happily, as to excite the admiration of the most indifferent  spectator. One cannot help thinking it is the very Venus of  Cnidos by Praxiteles, which Lucian describes. "Hercle quanta  dorsi concinnitas! ut exuberantes lumbi amplexantes manus  implent! quam scite circumductae clunium pulpae in se  rotundantur, neque tenues nimis ipsis ossibus adstrictae, neque  in immensam effusae Pinguedinem!" That the statue thus described  was not the Venus de Medicis, would appear from the Greek  inscription on the base, KLEOMENIS APPOLLODOROI ATHINAIOS  EPOESEI. Cleomenes filius Apollodori fecit; did we not know that  this inscription is counted spurious, and that instead of  EPOESEI, it should be EPOIESE. This, however, is but a frivolous  objection, as we have seen many inscriptions undoubtedly antique,  in which the orthography is false, either from the ignorance or  carelessness of the sculptor. Others suppose, not without reason,  that this statue is a representation of the famous Phryne, the  courtesan of Athens, who at the celebration of the Eleusinian  games, exhibited herself coming out of the bath, naked, to the  eyes of the whole Athenian people. I was much pleased with the  dancing faun; and still better with the Lotti, or wrestlers, the  attitudes of which are beautifully contrived to shew the  different turns of the limbs, and the swelling of the muscles:  but, what pleased me best of all the statues in the Tribuna was  the Arrotino, commonly called the Whetter, and generally supposed  to represent a slave, who in the act of whetting a knife,  overhears the conspiracy of Catiline. You know he is represented  on one knee; and certain it is, I never saw such an expression of  anxious attention, as appears in his countenance.  But it is not  mingled with any marks of surprise, such as could not fail to lay  hold on a man who overhears by accident a conspiracy against the  state. The marquis de Maffei has justly observed that Sallust, in  his very circumstantial detail of that conspiracy, makes no  mention of any such discovery. Neither does it appear that the  figure is in the act of whetting, the stone which he holds in one  hand being rough and unequal no ways resembling a whetstone.  Others alledge it represents Milico, the freedman of Scaevinus,  who conspired against the life of Nero, and gave his poignard to  be whetted to Milico, who presented it to the emperor, with an  account of the conspiracy: but the attitude and expression will  by no means admit of this interpretation. Bianchi, [This  antiquarian is now imprisoned for Life, for having robbed the  Gallery and then set it on fire.] who shows the gallery, thinks  the statue represents the augur Attius Navius, who cut a stone  with a knife, at the command of Tarquinius Priscus. This  conjecture seems to be confirmed by a medallion of Antoninus  Pius, inserted by Vaillant among his Numismata Prestantiora, on  which is delineated nearly such a figure as this in question,  with the following legend. "Attius Navius genuflexus ante  Tarquinium Priscum cotem cultro discidit." He owns indeed that in  the statue, the augur is not distinguished either by his habit or  emblems; and he might have added, neither is the stone a cotes.  For my own part, I think neither of these three opinions is  satisfactory, though the last is very ingenious. Perhaps the  figure allude to a private incident, which never was recorded in  any history. Among the great number of pictures in this Tribuna,  I was most charmed with the Venus by Titian, which has a  sweetness of expression and tenderness of colouring, not to be  described. In this apartment, they reckon three hundred pieces,  the greatest part by the best masters, particularly by Raphael,  in the three manners by which he distinguished himself at  different periods of his life. As for the celebrated statue of  the hermaphrodite, which we find in another room, I give the  sculptor credit for his ingenuity in mingling the sexes in the  composition; but it is, at best, no other than a monster in  nature, which I never had any pleasure in viewing: nor, indeed,  do I think there was much talent required in representing a  figure with the head and breasts of a woman, and all the other  parts of the body masculine. There is such a profusion of  curiosities in this celebrated musaeum; statues, busts, pictures,  medals, tables inlaid in the way of marquetry, cabinets adorned  with precious stones, jewels of all sorts, mathematical  instruments, antient arms and military machines, that the  imagination is bewildered, and a stranger of a visionary turn,  would be apt to fancy himself in a palace of the fairies, raised  and adorned by the power of inchantment.

In one of the detached apartments, I saw the antependium of the  altar, designed for the famous chapel of St. Lorenzo. It is a  curious piece of architecture, inlaid with coloured marble and  precious stones, so as to represent an infinite variety of  natural objects. It is adorned with some crystal pillars, with  capitals of beaten gold. The second story of the building is  occupied by a great number of artists employed in this very  curious work of marquetry, representing figures with gems and  different kinds of coloured marble, for the use of the emperor.  The Italians call it pietre commesse, a sort of inlaying with  stones, analogous to the fineering of cabinets in wood. It is  peculiar to Florence, and seems to be still more curious than the  Mosaic work, which the Romans have brought to great perfection.

The cathedral of Florence is a great Gothic building, encrusted  on the outside with marble; it is remarkable for nothing but its  cupola, which is said to have been copied by the architect of St.  Peter's at Rome, and for its size, which is much greater than  that of any other church in Christendom.  [In this cathedral is  the Tomb of Johannes Acutus Anglus, which a man would naturally  interpret as John Sharp; but his name was really Hawkwood, which  the Italians have corrupted into Acut. He was a celebrated  General or Condottiere who arrived in Italy at the head of four  thousand soldiers of fortune, mostly Englishmen who had served  with him in the army of King Edward III., and were dismissed at  the Peace of Bontigny. Hawkwood greatly distinguished himself in  Italy by his valour and conduct, and died a very old man in the  Florentine service. He was the son of a Tanner in Essex, and had  been put apprentice to a Taylor.] The baptistery, which stands by  it, was an antient temple, said to be dedicated to Mars. There  are some good statues of marble within; and one or two of bronze  on the outside of the doors; but it is chiefly celebrated for the  embossed work of its brass gates, by Lorenzo Ghiberti, which  Buonaroti used to say, deserved to be made the gates of Paradise.  I viewed them with pleasure: but still I retained a greater  veneration for those of Pisa, which I had first admired: a  preference which either arises from want of taste, or from the  charm of novelty, by which the former were recommended to my  attention. Those who would have a particular detail of every  thing worth seeing at Florence, comprehending churches,  libraries, palaces, tombs, statues, pictures, fountains, bridge, etc. may consult Keysler, who is so laboriously circumstantial in  his descriptions, that I never could peruse them, without  suffering the headache, and recollecting the old observation,  that the German genius lies more in the back than in the brain.

I was much disappointed in the chapel of St. Lorenzo.  Notwithstanding the great profusion of granite, porphyry, jasper,  verde antico, lapis-lazuli, and other precious stones,  representing figures in the way of marquetry, I think the whole  has a gloomy effect. These pietre commesse are better calculated  for cabinets, than for ornaments to great buildings, which ought  to be large masses proportioned to the greatness of the edifice.  The compartments are so small, that they produce no effect in  giving the first impression when one enters the place; except to  give an air of littleness to the whole, just as if a grand saloon  was covered with pictures painted in miniature. If they have as  little regard to proportion and perspective, when they paint the  dome, which is not yet finished, this chapel will, in my opinion,  remain a monument of ill taste and extravagance.

The court of the palace of Pitti is formed by three sides of an  elegant square, with arcades all round, like the palace of  Holyrood house at Edinburgh; and the rustic work, which  constitutes the lower part of the building, gives it an air of  strength and magnificence. In this court, there is a fine  fountain, in which the water trickles down from above; and here  is also an admirable antique statue of Hercules, inscribed  LUSIPPOI ERGON, the work of Lysippus.

The apartments of this palace are generally small, and many of  them dark. Among the paintings the most remarkable is the Madonna  de la Seggiola, by Raphael, counted one of the best coloured  pieces of that great master. If I was allowed to find fault with  the performance, I should pronounce it defective in dignity and  sentiment. It is the expression of a peasant rather than of the  mother of God. She exhibits the fondness and joy of a young woman  towards her firstborn son, without that rapture of admiration  which we expect to find in the Virgin Mary, while she  contemplates, in the fruit of her own womb, the Saviour of  mankind. In other respects, it is a fine figure, gay, agreeable,  and very expressive of maternal tenderness; and the bambino is  extremely beautiful. There was an English painter employed in  copying this picture, and what he had done was executed with  great success. I am one of those who think it very possible to  imitate the best pieces in such a manner, that even the  connoisseurs shall not be able to distinguish the original from  the copy. After all, I do not set up for a judge in these  matters, and very likely I may incur the ridicule of the  virtuosi for the remarks I have made: but I am used to speak my  mind freely on all subjects that fall under the cognizance of my  senses; though I must as freely own, there is something more than  common sense required to discover and distinguish the more  delicate beauties of painting. I can safely say, however, that  without any daubing at all, I am, very sincerely--Your  affectionate humble servant.

LETTER XXIX

NICE, February 20, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--Having seen all the curiosities of Florence, and hired  a good travelling coach for seven weeks, at the price of seven  zequines, something less than three guineas and a half, we set  out post for Rome, by the way of Sienna, where we lay the first  night. The country through which we passed is mountainous but  agreeable. Of Sienna I can say nothing from my own observation,  but that we were indifferently lodged in a house that stunk like  a privy, and fared wretchedly at supper. The city is large and  well built: the inhabitants pique themselves upon their  politeness, and the purity of their dialect. Certain it is, some  strangers reside in this place on purpose to learn the best  pronunciation of the Italian tongue. The Mosaic pavement of their  duomo, or cathedral, has been much admired; as well as the  history of Aeneas Sylvius, afterwards pope Pius II., painted on  the walls of the library, partly by Pietro Perugino, and partly  by his pupil Raphael D'Urbino.

Next day, at Buon Convento, where the emperor Henry VII. was  poisoned by a friar with the sacramental wafer, I refused to give  money to the hostler, who in revenge put two young unbroke stone-horses  in the traces next to the coach, which became so unruly,  that before we had gone a quarter of a mile, they and the  postilion were rolling in the dust. In this situation they made  such efforts to disengage themselves, and kicked with such  violence, that I imagined the carriage and all our trunks would  have been beaten in pieces. We leaped out of the coach, however,  without sustaining any personal damage, except the fright; nor  was any hurt done to the vehicle. But the horses were terribly  bruised, and almost strangled, before they could be disengaged.  Exasperated at the villany of the hostler, I resolved to make a  complaint to the uffiziale or magistrate of the place. I found  him wrapped in an old, greasy, ragged, great-coat, sitting in a  wretched apartment, without either glass, paper, or boards in the  windows; and there was no sort of furniture but a couple of  broken chairs and a miserable truckle-bed. He looked pale, and  meagre, and had more the air of a half-starved prisoner than of a  magistrate. Having heard my complaint, he came forth into a kind  of outward room or bellfrey, and rung a great bell with his own  hand. In consequence of this signal, the postmaster came up  stairs, and I suppose he was the first man in the place, for the  uffiziale stood before him cap-in-hand, and with great marks of  humble respect repeated the complaint I had made. This man  assured me, with an air of conscious importance, that he himself  had ordered the hostler to supply me with those very horses,  which were the best in his stable; and that the misfortune which  happened was owing to the misconduct of the fore-postilion, who  did not keep the fore-horses to a proper speed proportioned to  the mettle of the other two. As he took the affair upon himself,  and I perceived had an ascendancy over the magistrate, I  contented myself with saying, I was certain the two horses had  been put to the coach on purpose, either to hurt or frighten us;  and that since I could not have justice here I would make a  formal complaint to the British minister at Florence. In passing  through the street to the coach, which was by this time furnished  with fresh horses, I met the hostler, and would have caned him  heartily; but perceiving my intention, he took to his heels and  vanished. Of all the people I have ever seen, the hostlers,  postilions, and other fellows hanging about the post-houses in  Italy, are the most greedy, impertinent, and provoking. Happy are  those travellers who have phlegm enough to disregard their  insolence and importunity: for this is not so disagreeable as  their revenge is dangerous. An English gentleman at Florence told  me, that one of those fellows, whom he had struck for his  impertinence, flew at him with a long knife, and he could hardly  keep him at sword's point. All of them wear such knives, and are  very apt to use them on the slightest provocation. But their open  attacks are not so formidable as their premeditated schemes of  revenge; in the prosecution of which the Italians are equally  treacherous and cruel.

This night we passed at a place called Radicofani, a village and  fort, situated on the top of a very high mountain. The inn stands  still lower than the town. It was built at the expence of the  last grand-duke of Tuscany; is very large, very cold, and  uncomfortable. One would imagine it was contrived for coolness,  though situated so high, that even in the midst of summer, a  traveller would be glad to have a fire in his chamber. But few,  or none of them have fireplaces, and there is not a bed with  curtains or tester in the house. All the adjacent country is  naked and barren. On the third day we entered the pope's  territories, some parts of which are delightful. Having passed  Aqua-Pendente, a beggarly town, situated on the top of a rock,  from whence there is a romantic cascade of water, which gives it  the name, we travelled along the side of the lake Bolsena, a  beautiful piece of water about thirty miles in circuit, with two  islands in the middle, the banks covered with noble plantations  of oak and cypress. The town of Bolsena standing near the ruins  of the antient Volsinium, which was the birth-place of Sejanus,  is a paultry village; and Montefiascone, famous for its wine, is  a poor, decayed town in this neighbourhood, situated on the side  of a hill, which, according to the author of the Grand Tour, the  only directory I had along with me, is supposed to be the Soracte  of the ancients. If we may believe Horace, Soracte was visible  from Rome: for, in his ninth ode, addressed to Thaliarchus, he  says,

Vides, ut alta stet nive candidum Soracte--

You see how deeply wreathed with snow Soracte lifts his hoary head,

but, in order to see Montefiascone, his eyesight must have  penetrated through the Mons Cyminus, at the foot of which now  stands the city of Viterbo. Pliny tells us, that Soracte was not  far from Rome, haud procul ab urbe Roma; but Montefiascone is  fifty miles from this city. And Desprez, in his notes upon  Horace, says it is now called Monte S. Oreste. Addison tells us  he passed by it in the Campania. I could not without indignation  reflect upon the bigotry of Mathilda, who gave this fine country  to the see of Rome, under the dominion of which no country was  ever known to prosper.

About half way between Montefiascone and Viterbo, one of our  fore-wheels flew off, together with a large splinter of the axle-tree;  and if one of the postilions had not by great accident been  a remarkably ingenious fellow, we should have been put to the  greatest inconvenience, as there was no town, or even house,  within several miles. I mention this circumstance, by way of  warning to other travellers, that they may provide themselves  with a hammer and nails, a spare iron-pin or two, a large knife,  and bladder of grease, to be used occasionally in case of such  misfortune.

The mountain of Viterbo is covered with beautiful plantations and  villas belonging to the Roman nobility, who come hither to make  the villegiatura in summer. Of the city of Viterbo I shall say  nothing, but that it is the capital of that country which  Mathilda gave to the Roman see. The place is well built, adorned  with public fountains, and a great number of churches and  convents; yet far from being populous, the whole number of  inhabitants, not exceeding fifteen thousand. The post-house is  one of the worst inns I ever entered.

After having passed this mountain, the Cyminus of the antients,  we skirted part of the lake, which is now called de Vico, and  whose banks afford the most agreeable rural prospects of hill and  vale, wood, glade and water, shade and sun-shine. A few other  very inconsiderable places we passed, and descended into the  Campania of Rome, which is almost a desert. The view of this  country in its present situation, cannot but produce emotions of  pity and indignation in the mind of every person who retains any  idea of its antient cultivation and fertility. It is nothing but  a naked withered down, desolate and dreary, almost without  inclosure, corn-field, hedge, tree, shrub, house, hut, or  habitation; exhibiting here and there the ruins of an antient  castellum, tomb, or temple, and in some places the remains of a  Roman via. I had heard much of these antient pavements, and was  greatly disappointed when I saw them. The Via Cassia or Cymina is  paved with broad, solid, flint-stones, which must have greatly  incommoded the feet of horses that travelled upon it as well as  endangered the lives of the riders from the slipperiness of the  pavement: besides, it is so narrow that two modern carriages  could not pass one another upon it, without the most imminent  hazard of being overturned. I am still of opinion that we excel  the ancient Romans in understanding the conveniences of life.

The Grand Tour says, that within four miles of Rome you see a  tomb on the roadside, said to be that of Nero, with sculpture in  basso-relievo at both ends. I did see such a thing more like a  common grave-stone, than the tomb of an emperor. But we are  informed by Suetonius, that the dead body of Nero, who slew  himself at the villa of his freedman, was by the care of his two  nurses and his concubine Atta, removed to the sepulchre of the  Gens Domitia, immediately within the Porta del Popolo, on your  left hand as you enter Rome, precisely on the spot where now  stands the church of S. Maria del Popolo. His tomb was even  distinguished by an epitaph, which has been preserved by  Gruterus. Giacomo Alberici tells us very gravely in his History  of the Church, that a great number of devils, who guarded the  bones of this wicked emperor, took possession, in the shape of  black ravens, of a walnut-tree, which grew upon the spot;  from whence they insulted every passenger, until pope Paschal II.,  in consequence of a solemn fast and a revelation, went thither in procession with his court and cardinals, cut down the tree,  and burned it to ashes, which, with the bones of Nero, were  thrown into the Tyber: then he consecrated an altar on the  place, where afterwards the church was built. You may guess  what I felt at first sight of the city of Rome, which,  notwithstanding all the calamities it has undergone, still  maintains an august and imperial appearance. It stands on  the farther side of the Tyber, which we crossed at the Ponte  Molle, formerly called Pons Milvius, about two miles from the  gate by which we entered. This bridge was built by Aemilius  Censor, whose name it originally bore. It was the road by which  so many heroes returned with conquest to their country; by which  so many kings were led captive to Rome; and by which the  ambassadors of so many kingdoms and states approached the seat of  empire, to deprecate the wrath, to sollicit the friendship, or  sue for the protection of the Roman people. It is likewise famous  for the defeat and death of Maxentius, who was here overcome by  Constantine the Great. The space between the bridge and Porta del  Popolo, on the right-hand, which is now taken up with gardens and  villas, was part of the antient Campus Martius, where the  comitiae were held; and where the Roman people inured themselves  to all manner of exercises: it was adorned with porticos,  temples, theatres, baths, circi, basilicae, obelisks, columns,  statues, and groves. Authors differ in their opinions about the  extent of it; but as they all agree that it contained the  Pantheon, the Circus Agonis, now the Piazza Navona, the Bustum  and Mausoleum Augusti, great part of the modern city must be  built upon the ancient Campus Martius. The highway that leads  from the bridge to the city, is part of the Via Flaminia, which  extended as far as Rimini; and is well paved, like a modern  street. Nothing of the antient bridge remains but the piles; nor  is there any thing in the structure of this, or of the other five  Roman bridges over the Tyber, that deserves attention. I have not  seen any bridge in France or Italy, comparable to that of  Westminster either in beauty, magnificence, or solidity; and when  the bridge at Black-Friars is finished, it will be such a  monument of architecture as all the world cannot parallel. As for  the Tyber, it is, in comparison with the Thames, no more than an  inconsiderable stream, foul, deep, and rapid. It is navigable by  small boats, barks, and lighters; and, for the conveniency of  loading and unloading them, there is a handsome quay by the new  custom-house, at the Porto di Ripetta, provided with stairs of  each side, and adorned with an elegant fountain, that yields  abundance of excellent water. 

We are told that the bed of this river has been considerably  raised by the rubbish of old Rome, and this is the reason usually  given for its being so apt to overflow its banks. A citizen of  Rome told me, that a friend of his lately digging to lay the  foundation of a new house in the lower part of the city, near the  bank of the river, discovered the pavement of an antient street,  at the depth of thirty-nine feet from the present surface of the  earth. He therefore concluded that modern Rome is near forty feet  higher in this place, than the site of the antient city, and that  the bed of the river is raised in proportion; but this is  altogether incredible. Had the bed of the Tyber been antiently  forty feet lower at Rome, than it is at present, there must have  been a fall or cataract in it immediately above this tract, as it  is not pretended that the bed of it is raised in any part above  the city; otherwise such an elevation would have obstructed its  course, and then it would have overflowed the whole Campania.  There is nothing extraordinary in its present overflowings: they  frequently happened of old, and did great mischief to the antient  city. Appian, Dio, and other historians, describe an inundation  of the Tiber immediately after the death of Julius Caesar, which  inundation was occasioned by the sudden melting of a great  quantity of snow upon the Apennines. This calamity is recorded by  Horace in his ode to Augustus.

Vidimus flavum Tiberim retortis  Littore Etrusco violenter undis,  Ire dejectum monumenta regis,  Templaque Vestae: Iliae dum se nimium querenti, Jactat ultorem; vagus et sinistra  Labitur ripa, Jove non probante Uxorius Amnis.

Livy expressly says, "Ita abundavit Tiberis, ut Ludi Apollinares,  circo inundato, extra portam Collinam ad aedem Erycinae Veneris  parati sint," "There was such an inundation of the Tiber that,  the Circus being overflowed, the Ludi Appollinares were exhibited  without the gate Collina, hard by the temple of Venus Erycina."  To this custom of transferring the Ludi Appollinares to another  place where the Tyber had overflowed the Circus Maximus, Ovid  alludes in his Fasti.

Altera gramineo spectabis equiriacampo  Quem Tiberis curvis in latus urget aquis,  Qui tamen ejecta si forte tenebitur unda,  Coelius accipiet pulverulentus equos.

Another race thy view shall entertain  Where bending Tiber skirts the grassy plain;  Or should his vagrant stream that plain o'erflow,  The Caelian hill the dusty course will show.

The Porta del Popolo (formerly, Flaminia,) by which we entered  Rome, is an elegant piece of architecture, adorned with marble  columns and statues, executed after the design of Buonaroti.  Within-side you find yourself in a noble piazza, from whence  three of the principal streets of Rome are detached. It is  adorned with the famous Aegyptian obelisk, brought hither from  the Circus Maximus, and set up by the architect Dominico Fontana  in the pontificate of Sixtus V. Here is likewise a beautiful  fountain designed by the same artist; and at the beginning of the  two principal streets, are two very elegant churches fronting  each other. Such an august entrance cannot fail to impress a  stranger with a sublime idea of this venerable city.

Having given our names at the gate, we repaired to the dogana, or  custom-house, where our trunks and carriage were searched; and  here we were surrounded by a number of servitori de piazza,  offering their services with the most disagreeable importunity.  Though I told them several times I had no occasion for any, three  of them took possession of the coach, one mounting before and two  of them behind; and thus we proceeded to the Piazza d'Espagna,  where the person lived to whose house I was directed. Strangers  that come to Rome seldom put up at public inns, but go directly  to lodging houses, of which there is great plenty in this  quarter. The Piazza d'Espagna is open, airy, and pleasantly  situated in a high part of the city immediately under the Colla  Pinciana, and adorned with two fine fountains. Here most of the  English reside: the apartments are generally commodious and well  furnished; and the lodgers are well supplied with provisions and  all necessaries of life. But, if I studied oeconomy, I would  choose another part of the town than the Piazza d'Espagna, which  is, besides, at a great distance from the antiquities. For a  decent first floor and two bed-chambers on the second, I payed no  more than a scudo (five shillings) per day. Our table was  plentifully furnished by the landlord for two and thirty pauls,  being equal to sixteen shillings. I hired a town-coach at the  rate of fourteen pauls, or seven shillings a day; and a servitore  di piazza for three pauls, or eighteen-pence. The coachman has  also an allowance of two pauls a day. The provisions at Rome are  reasonable and good, the vitella mongana, however, which is the  most delicate veal I ever tasted, is very dear, being sold for  two pauls, or a shilling, the pound. Here are the rich wines of  Montepulciano,  Montefiascone, and Monte di Dragone; but what we  commonly drink at meals is that of Orvieto, a small white wine,  of an agreeable flavour. Strangers are generally advised to  employ an antiquarian to instruct them in all the curiosities of  Rome; and this is a necessary expence, when a person wants to  become a connoisseur in painting, statuary, and architecture. For  my own part I had no such ambition. I longed to view the remains  of antiquity by which this metropolis is distinguished; and to  contemplate the originals of many pictures and statues, which I  had admired in prints and descriptions. I therefore chose a  servant, who was recommended to me as a sober, intelligent  fellow, acquainted with these matters: at the same time I  furnished myself with maps and plans of antient and modern Rome,  together with the little manual, called, Itinerario istruttivo  per ritrovare con facilita tutte le magnificenze di Roma e di  alcune citta', e castelli suburbani. But I found still more  satisfaction in perusing the book in three volumes, intitled,  Roma antica, e moderna, which contains a description of  everything remarkable in and about the city, illustrated with a  great number of copper-plates, and many curious historical  annotations. This directory cost me a zequine; but a hundred  zequines will not purchase all the books and prints which have  been published at Rome on these subjects. Of these the most  celebrated are the plates of Piranesi, who is not only an ingenious architect and engraver, but also a learned antiquarian;  though he is apt to run riot in his conjectures; and with regard  to the arts of antient Rome, has broached some doctrines, which  he will find it very difficult to maintain. Our young gentlemen  who go to Rome will do well to be upon their guard against a set  of sharpers, (some of them of our own country,) who deal in  pictures and antiques, and very often impose upon the uninformed  stranger, by selling him trash, as the productions of the most  celebrated artists. The English are more than any other  foreigners exposed to this imposition. They are supposed to have  more money to throw away; and therefore a greater number of  snares are laid for them. This opinion of their superior wealth  they take a pride in confirming, by launching out into all manner  of unnecessary expence: but, what is still more dangerous, the  moment they set foot in Italy, they are seized with the ambition  of becoming connoisseurs in painting, musick, statuary, and  architecture; and the adventurers of this country do not fail to  flatter this weakness for their own advantage. I have seen in  different parts of Italy, a number of raw boys, whom Britain  seemed to have poured forth on purpose to bring her national  character into contempt, ignorant, petulant, rash, and  profligate, without any knowledge or experience of their own,  without any director to improve their understanding, or  superintend their conduct. One engages in play with an infamous  gamester, and is stripped perhaps in the very first partie:  another is pillaged by an antiquated cantatrice; a third is  bubbled by a knavish antiquarian; and a fourth is laid under  contribution by a dealer in pictures. Some turn fiddlers, and  pretend to compose: but all of them talk familiarly of the arts,  and return finished connoisseurs and coxcombs, to their own  country. The most remarkable phaenomenon of this kind, which I  have seen, is a boy of seventy-two, now actually travelling  through Italy, for improvement, under the auspices of another boy  of twenty-two. When you arrive at Rome, you receive cards from  all your country-folks in that city: they expect to have the  visit returned next day, when they give orders not to be at home;  and you never speak to one another in the sequel. This is a  refinement in hospitality and politeness, which the English have  invented by the strength of their own genius, without any  assistance either from France, Italy, or Lapland. No Englishman  above the degree of a painter or cicerone frequents any coffee-house  at Rome; and as there are no public diversions, except in  carnival-time, the only chance you have of seeing your  compatriots is either in visiting the curiosities, or at a  conversazione. The Italians are very scrupulous in admitting  foreigners, except those who are introduced as people of quality:  but if there happens to be any English lady of fashion at Rome,  she generally keeps an assembly, to which the British subjects  resort. In my next, I shall communicate, without ceremony or  affectation, what further remarks I have made at Rome, without  any pretence, however, to the character of a connoisseur, which,  without all doubt, would fit very aukwardly upon,--Dear Sir, Your  Friend and Servant.

LETTER XXX

NICE, February 28, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--Nothing can be more agreeable to the eyes of a  stranger, especially in the heats of summer, than the great  number of public fountains that appear in every part of Rome,  embellished with all the ornaments of sculpture, and pouring  forth prodigious quantities of cool, delicious water, brought in  aqueducts from different lakes, rivers, and sources, at a  considerable distance from the city. These works are the remains  of the munificence and industry of the antient Romans, who were  extremely delicate in the article of water: but, however, great  applause is also due to those beneficent popes who have been at  the expence of restoring and repairing those noble channels of  health, pleasure, and convenience. This great plenty of water,  nevertheless, has not induced the Romans to be cleanly. Their  streets, and even their palaces, are disgraced with filth. The  noble Piazza Navona, is adorned with three or four fountains, one  of which is perhaps the most magnificent in Europe, and all of  them discharge vast streams of water: but, notwithstanding this  provision, the piazza is almost as dirty, as West Smithfield,  where the cattle are sold in London. The corridores, arcades, and  even staircases of their most elegant palaces, are depositories  of nastiness, and indeed in summer smell as strong as spirit of  hartshorn. I have a great notion that their ancestors were not  much more cleanly. If we consider that the city and suburbs of  Rome, in the reign of Claudius, contained about seven millions of  inhabitants, a number equal at least to the sum total of all the  souls in England; that great part of antient Rome was allotted to  temples, porticos, basilicae, theatres, thermae, circi, public  and private walks and gardens, where very few, if any, of this  great number lodged; that by far the greater part of those  inhabitants were slaves and poor people, who did not enjoy the  conveniencies of life; and that the use of linen was scarce  known; we must naturally conclude they were strangely crouded  together, and that in general they were a very frowzy generation.  That they were crouded together appears from the height of their  houses, which the poet Rutilius compared to towers made for  scaling heaven. In order to remedy this inconvenience, Augustus  Caesar published a decree, that for the future no houses should  be built above seventy feet high, which, at a moderate  computation, might make six stories. But what seems to prove,  beyond all dispute, that the antient Romans were dirty creatures,  are these two particulars. Vespasian laid a tax upon urine and  ordure, on pretence of being at a great expence in clearing the  streets from such nuisances; an imposition which amounted to about  fourteen pence a year for every individual; and when Heliogabalus  ordered all the cobwebs of the city and suburbs to be collected,  they were found to weigh ten thousand pounds. This was intended  as a demonstration of the great number of inhabitants; but it was  a proof of their dirt, rather than of their populosity. I might  likewise add, the delicate custom of taking vomits at each  other's houses, when they were invited to dinner, or supper, that  they might prepare their stomachs for gormandizing; a beastly  proof of their nastiness as well as gluttony. Horace, in his  description of the banquet of Nasiedenus, says, when the canopy,  under which they sat, fell down, it brought along with it as much  dirt as is raised by a hard gale of wind in dry weather.

              --trahentia pulveris atri,  Quantum non aquilo Campanis excitat agris.

Such clouds of dust revolving in its train  As Boreas whirls along the level plain.

I might observe, that the streets were often encumbered with the  putrefying carcasses of criminals, who had been dragged through  them by the heels, and precipitated from the Scalae Gemoniae, or  Tarpeian rock, before they were thrown into the Tyber, which was  the general receptacle of the cloaca maxima and all the filth of  Rome: besides, the bodies of all those who made away with  themselves, without sufficient cause; of such as were condemned  for sacrilege, or killed by thunder, were left unburned and  unburied, to rot above ground.

I believe the moderns retain more of the customs of antient  Romans, than is generally imagined. When I first saw the infants  at the enfans trouves in Paris, so swathed with bandages, that  the very sight of them made my eyes water, I little dreamed, that  the prescription of the antients could be pleaded for this  custom, equally shocking and absurd: but in the Capitol at Rome,  I met with the antique statue of a child swaddled exactly in the  same manner; rolled up like an Aegyptian mummy from the feet. The  circulation of the blood, in such a case, must be obstructed on  the whole surface of the body; and nothing be at liberty but the  head, which is the only part of the child that ought to be  confined. Is it not surprising that common sense should not point  out, even to the most ignorant, that those accursed bandages must  heat the tender infant into a fever; must hinder the action of  the muscles, and the play of the joints, so necessary to health  and nutrition; and that while the refluent blood is obstructed in  the veins, which run on the surface of the body, the arteries,  which lie deep, without the reach of compression, are continually  pouring their contents into the head, where the blood meets with  no resistance? The vessels of the brain are naturally lax, and  the very sutures of the skull are yet unclosed. What are the  consequences of this cruel swaddling? the limbs are wasted; the  joints grow rickety; the brain is compressed, and a  hydrocephalus, with a great head and sore eyes, ensues. I take  this abominable practice to be one great cause of the bandy legs,  diminutive bodies, and large heads, so frequent in the south of  France, and in Italy.

I was no less surprised to find the modern fashion of curling the  hair, borrowed in a great measure from the coxcombs and coquettes  of antiquity. I saw a bust of Nero in the gallery at Florence,  the hair represented in rows of buckles, like that of a French  petit-maitre, conformable to the picture drawn of him by  Suetonius. Circa cultum adeo pudendum, ut coman semper in gradus  formatam peregrinatione achaica, etiam pene verticem sumpserit,  So very finical in his dress, that he wore his hair in the Greek  fashion, curled in rows almost to the crown of his head. I was  very sorry however to find that this foppery came from Greece. As  for Otho, he wore a galericulum, or tour, on account of thin  hair, propter raritatem capillorum. He had no right to imitate  the example of Julius Caesar, who concealed his bald head with a  wreath of laurel. But there is a bust in the Capitol of Julia  Pia, the second wife of Septimius Severus, with a moveable  peruke, dressed exactly in the fashionable mode, with this  difference, that there is no part of it frizzled; nor is there  any appearance of pomatum and powder. These improvements the  beau-monde have borrowed from the natives of the Cape of Good  Hope.

Modern Rome does not cover more than one-third of the space  within the walls; and those parts that were most frequented of  old are now intirely abandoned. From the Capitol to the Coliseo,  including the Forum Romanum and Boarium, there is nothing intire  but one or two churches, built with the fragments of ancient  edifices. You descend from the Capitol between the remaining  pillars of two temples, the pedestals and part of the shafts sunk  in the rubbish: then passing through the triumphal arch of  Septimius Severus, you proceed along the foot of Mons Palatinus,  which stands on your right hand, quite covered with the ruins of  the antient palace belonging to the Roman emperors, and at the  foot of it, there are some beautiful detached pillars still  standing. On the left you see the remains of the Templum Pacis,  which seems to have been the largest and most magnificent of all  the temples in Rome. It was built and dedicated by the emperor  Vespasian, who brought into it all the treasure and precious  vessels which he found in the temple of Jerusalem. The columns of  the portico he removed from Nero's golden house, which he  levelled with the ground. This temple was likewise famous for its  library, mentioned by Aulus Gellius, Further on, is the arch of  Constantine on the right, a most noble piece of architecture,  almost entire; with the remains of the Meta Sudans before it; and  fronting you, the noble ruins of that vast amphitheatre, called  the Colossaeum, now Coliseo, which has been dismantled and  dilapidated by the Gothic popes and princes of modern Rome, to  build and adorn their paultry palaces. Behind the amphitheatre  were the thermae of the same emperor Titus Vespasian. In the same  quarter was the Circus Maximus; and the whole space from hence on  both sides, to the walls of Rome, comprehending above twice as  much ground as the modern city, is almost covered with the  monuments of antiquity. I suppose there is more concealed below  ground than appears above. The miserable houses, and even garden-walls  of the peasants in this district, are built with these  precious materials. I mean shafts and capitals of marble columns,  heads, arms, legs, and mutilated trunks of statues. What pity it  is that among all the remains of antiquity, at Rome, there is not  one lodging-house remaining. I should be glad to know how the  senators of Rome were lodged. I want to be better informed  touching the cava aedium, the focus, the ara deorum penatum, the  conclavia, triclinia, and caenationes; the atria where the women  resided, and employed themselves in the woolen manufacture; the  praetoria, which were so spacious as to become a nuisance in the  reign of Augustus; and the Xysta, which were shady walks between  two porticos, where the men exercised themselves in the winter. I  am disgusted by the modern taste of architecture, though I am no  judge of the art. The churches and palaces of these days are  crowded with pretty ornaments, which distract the eye, and by  breaking the design into a variety of little parts, destroy the  effect of the whole. Every door and window has its separate  ornaments, its moulding, frize, cornice. and tympanum; then there  is such an assemblage of useless festoons, pillars, pilasters,  with their architraves, entablatures, and I know not what, that  nothing great or uniform remains to fill the view; and we in vain  look for that simplicity of grandeur, those large masses of light  and shadow, and the inexpressible EUSUINOPTON, which characterise  the edifices of the antients. A great edifice, to have its full  effect, ought to be isole, or detached from all others, with a  large space around it: but the palaces of Rome, and indeed of all  the other cities of Italy, which I have seen, are so engaged  among other mean houses, that their beauty and magnificence are  in a great measure concealed. Even those which face open streets  and piazzas are only clear in front. The other apartments are  darkened by the vicinity of ordinary houses; and their views are  confined by dirty and disagreeable objects. Within the court  there is generally a noble colonnade all round, and an open  corridore above, but the stairs are usually narrow, steep, and  high, the want of sash-windows, the dullness of their small glass  lozenges, the dusty brick floors, and the crimson hangings laced  with gold, contribute to give a gloomy air to their apartments; I  might add to these causes, a number of Pictures executed on  melancholy subjects, antique mutilated statues, busts, basso  relieves, urns, and sepulchral stones, with which their rooms are  adorned. It must be owned, however, there are some exceptions to  this general rule. The villa of cardinal Alexander Albani  is light, gay, and airy; yet the rooms are too small, and  too much decorated with carving and gilding, which is a kind of  gingerbread work. The apartments of one of the princes Borghese  are furnished in the English taste; and in the palazzo di colonna  connestabile, there is a saloon, or gallery, which, for the  proportions, lights, furniture, and ornaments, is the most noble,  elegant, and agreeable apartment I ever saw.

It is diverting to hear all Italian expatiate upon the greatness  of modern Rome. He will tell you there are above three hundred  palaces in the city; that there is scarce a Roman prince, whose  revenue does not exceed two hundred thousand crowns; and that  Rome produces not only the most learned men, but also the most  refined politicians in the universe. To one of them talking in  this strain, I replied, that instead of three hundred palaces,  the number did not exceed fourscore; that I had been informed, on  good authority, there were not six individuals in Rome who had so  much as forty thousand crowns a year, about ten thousand pounds  sterling; and that to say their princes were so rich, and their  politicians so refined, was, in effect, a severe satire upon  them, for not employing their wealth and their talents for the  advantage of their country. I asked why their cardinals and  princes did not invite and encourage industrious people to settle  and cultivate the Campania of Rome, which is a desert? why they  did not raise a subscription to drain the marshes in the  neighbourhood of the city, and thus meliorate the air, which is  rendered extremely unwholsome in the summer, by putrid  exhalations from those morasses? I demanded of him, why they did  not contribute their wealth, and exert their political  refinements, in augmenting their forces by sea and land, for the  defence of their country, introducing commerce and manufactures,  and in giving some consequence to their state, which was no more  than a mite in the political scale of Europe? I expressed a  desire to know what became of all those sums of money, inasmuch  as there was hardly any circulation of gold and silver in Rome,  and the very bankers, on whom strangers have their credit, make  interest to pay their tradesmen's bills with paper notes of the  bank of Spirito Santo? And now I am upon this subject, it may not  be amiss to observe that I was strangely misled by all the books  consulted about the current coin of Italy. In Tuscany, and the  Ecclesiastical State, one sees nothing but zequines in gold, and  pieces of two paoli, one paolo, and half a paolo, in silver.  Besides these, there is a copper coin at Rome, called bajocco and  mezzo bajocco. Ten bajocchi make a paolo: ten paoli make a scudo,  which is an imaginary piece: two scudi make a zequine; and a  French loui'dore is worth two zequines and two paoli.

Rome has nothing to fear from the catholic powers, who respect it  with a superstitious veneration as the metropolitan seat of their  religion: but the popes will do well to avoid misunderstandings  with the maritime protestant states, especially the English, who  being masters of the Mediterranean, and in possession of Minorca,  have it in their power at all times, to land a body of troops  within four leagues of Rome, and to take the city, without  opposition. Rome is surrounded with an old wall, but altogether  incapable of defence. Or if it was, the circuit of the walls is  so extensive, that it would require a garrison of twenty thousand  men. The only appearance of a fortification in this city, is the  castle of St. Angelo, situated on the further bank of the Tyber,  to which there is access by a handsome bridge: but this castle,  which was formerly the moles Adriani, could not hold out half a  day against a battery of ten pieces of cannon properly directed.  It was an expedient left to the invention of the modern Romans,  to convert an ancient tomb into a citadel. It could only serve as  a temporary retreat for the pope in times of popular commotion,  and on other sudden emergencies; as it happened in the case of  pope Clement VII. when the troops of the emperor took the city by  assault; and this only, while he resided at the Vatican, from  whence there is a covered gallery continued to the castle: it can  never serve this purpose again, while the pontiff lives on Monte  Cavallo, which is at the other end of the city. The castle of St.  Angelo, howsoever ridiculous as a fortress, appears respectable  as a noble monument of antiquity, and though standing in a low  situation, is one of the first objects that strike the eye of a  stranger approaching Rome. On the opposite side of the river, are  the wretched remains of the Mausoleum Augusti, which was still  more magnificent. Part of the walls is standing, and the terraces  are converted into garden-ground. In viewing these ruins, I  remembered Virgil's pathetic description of Marcellus, who was  here intombed.

Quantos ille virum, magnum mavortis ad urbem.  Campus aget gemitus, vel que Tyberine, videbis  Funera, cum tumulum, preter labere recentem.

Along his Banks what Groans shall Tyber hear, When the fresh tomb and funeral pomp appear!

The beautiful poem of Ovid de Consolatione ad Liviam, written  after the ashes of Augustus and his nephew Marcellus, of  Germanicus, Agrippa, and Drusus, were deposited in this  mausoleum, concludes with these lines, which are extremely  tender:

Claudite jam Parcae nimium reserata sepulchra;  Claudite, plus justo, jam domus ista patet!

Ah! shut these yawning Tombs, ye sister Fates! Too long unclos'd have stood those dreary Gates!

What the author said of the monument, you will be tempted to say  of this letter, which I shall therefore close in the old stile,  assuring you that I ever am,--Yours most affectionately.

LETTER XXXI

NICE, March 5, 1765

DEAR SIR,--In my last I gave you my opinion freely of the modern  palaces of Italy. I shall now hazard my thoughts upon the gardens  of this country, which the inhabitants extol with all the  hyperboles of admiration and applause. I must acknowledge  however, I have not seen the famous villas at Frascati and  Tivoli, which are celebrated for their gardens and waterworks. I  intended to visit these places; but was prevented by an  unexpected change of weather, which deterred me from going to the  country. On the last day of September the mountains of Palestrina  were covered with snow; and the air became so cold at Rome, that  I was forced to put on my winter cloaths. This objection  continued, till I found it necessary to set out on my return to  Florence. But I have seen the gardens of the Poggio Imperiale,  and the Palazzo de Pitti at Florence, and those of the Vatican,  of the pope's palace on Monte Cavallo, of the Villa Ludovisia,  Medicea, and Pinciana, at Rome; so that I think I have some right  to judge of the Italian taste in gardening. Among those I have  mentioned, that of the Villa Pinciana, is the most remarkable,  and the most extensive, including a space of three miles in  circuit, hard by the walls of Rome, containing a variety of  situations high and low, which favour all the natural  embellishments one would expect to meet with in a garden, and  exhibit a diversity of noble views of the city and adjacent  country.

In a fine extensive garden or park, an Englishman expects to see  a number of groves and glades, intermixed with an agreeable  negligence, which seems to be the effect of nature and accident.  He looks for shady walks encrusted with gravel; for open lawns  covered with verdure as smooth as velvet, but much more lively  and agreeable; for ponds, canals, basins, cascades, and running  streams of water; for clumps of trees, woods, and wildernesses,  cut into delightful alleys, perfumed with honeysuckle and sweet- briar, and resounding with the mingled melody of all the singing  birds of heaven: he looks for plats of flowers in different parts  to refresh the sense, and please the fancy; for arbours, grottos,  hermitages, temples, and alcoves, to shelter him from the sun,  and afford him means of contemplation and repose; and he expects  to find the hedges, groves, and walks, and lawns kept with the  utmost order and propriety. He who loves the beauties of simple  nature, and the charms of neatness will seek for them in vain  amidst the groves of Italy. In the garden of the Villa Pinciana,  there is a plantation of four hundred pines, which the Italians  view with rapture and admiration: there is likewise a long walk,  of trees extending from the garden-gate to the palace; and plenty  of shade, with alleys and hedges in different parts of the  ground: but the groves are neglected; the walks are laid with  nothing but common mould or sand, black and dusty; the hedges are  tall, thin and shabby; the trees stunted; the open ground, brown  and parched, has scarce any appearance of verdure. The flat,  regular alleys of evergreens are cut into fantastic figures; the  flower gardens embellished with thin cyphers and flourished  figures in box, while the flowers grow in rows of earthen-pots,  and the ground appears as dusky as if it was covered with the  cinders of a blacksmith's forge. The water, of which there is  great plenty, instead of being collected in large pieces, or  conveyed in little rivulets and streams to refresh the thirsty  soil, or managed so as to form agreeable cascades, is squirted  from fountains in different parts of the garden, through tubes  little bigger than common glyster-pipes. It must be owned indeed  that the fountains have their merit in the way of sculpture and  architecture; and that here is a great number of statues which  merit attention: but they serve only to encumber the ground, and  destroy that effect of rural simplicity, which our gardens are  designed to produce. In a word, here we see a variety of walks  and groves and fountains, a wood of four hundred pines, a paddock  with a few meagre deer, a flower-garden, an aviary, a grotto, and  a fish-pond; and in spite of all these particulars, it is, in my  opinion, a very contemptible garden, when compared to that of  Stowe in Buckinghamshire, or even to those of Kensington and  Richmond. The Italians understand, because they study, the  excellencies of art; but they have no idea of the beauties of  nature. This Villa Pinciana, which belongs to the Borghese  family, would make a complete academy for painting and sculpture,  especially for the study of antient marbles; for, exclusive of  the statues and busts in the garden, and the vast collection in  the different apartments, almost the whole outside of the house  is covered with curious pieces in basso and alto relievo. The  most masterly is that of Curtius on horseback, leaping into the  gulph or opening of the earth, which is said to have closed on  receiving this sacrifice. Among the exhibitions of art within the  house, I was much struck with a Bacchus, and the death of  Meleager, represented on an antient sepulchre. There is also an  admirable statue of Silenus, with the infant Bacchus in his arms;  a most beautiful gladiator; a curious Moor of black marble, with  a shirt of white alabaster; a finely proportioned bull of black  marble also, standing upon a table of alabaster; a black gipsey  with a head, hands, and feet of brass; and the famous  hermaphrodite, which vies with that of Florence: though the most  curious circumstance of this article, is the mattrass executed  and placed by Bernini, with such art and dexterity, that to the  view, it rivals the softness of wool, and seems to retain the  marks of pressure, according to the figure of the superincumbent  statue. Let us likewise own, for the honour of the moderns, that  the same artist has produced two fine statues, which we find  among the ornaments of this villa, namely, a David with his sling  in the attitude of throwing the stone at the giant Goliah; and a  Daphne changing into laurel at the approach of Apollo. On the  base of this figure, are the two following elegant lines, written  by pope Urban VIII. in his younger years.

Quisquis amans sequitur fugitivae gaudia formae,  Fronde manus implet, baccas vel carpit amaras.

Who pants for fleeting Beauty, vain pursuit! Shall barren Leaves obtain, or bitter fruit.

I ought not to forget two exquisite antique statues of Venus, the  weeping slave, and the youth pulling a thorn out of his foot.

I do not pretend to give a methodical detail of the curiosities  of Rome: they have been already described by different authors,  who were much better qualified than I am for the talk: but you  shall have what observations I made on the most remarkable  objects, without method, just as they occur to my remembrance;  and I protest the remarks are all my own: so that if they deserve  any commendation, I claim all the merit; and if they are  impertinent, I must be contented to bear all the blame.

The piazza of St. Peter's church is altogether sublime. The  double colonnade on each side extending in a semi-circular sweep,  the stupendous Aegyptian obelisk, the two fountains, the portico,  and the admirable facade of the church, form such an assemblage  of magnificent objects, as cannot fail to impress the mind with  awe and admiration: but the church would have produced a still  greater effect, had it been detached entirely from the buildings  of the Vatican, It would then have been a master-piece of  architecture, complete in all its parts, intire and perfect:  whereas, at present, it is no more than a beautiful member  attached to a vast undigested and irregular pile of building. As  to the architecture of this famous temple, I shall say nothing;  neither do I pretend to describe the internal ornaments. The  great picture of Mosaic work, and that of St. Peter's bark tossed  by the tempest, which appear over the gate of the church, though  rude in comparison with modern pieces, are nevertheless great  curiosities, when considered as the work of Giotto, who  flourished in the beginning of the fourteenth century. His master  was Cimabue, who learned painting and architecture of the Grecian  artists, who came from Constantinople, and first revived these  arts in Italy. But, to return to St. Peter's, I was not at all  pleased with the famous statue of the dead Christ in his mother's  lap, by Michael Angelo. The figure of Christ is as much  emaciated, as if he had died of a consumption: besides, there is  something indelicate, not to say indecent, in the attitude and  design of a man's body, stark naked, lying upon the knees of a  woman. Here are some good pictures, I should rather say copies of  good pictures, done in Mosaic to great perfection; particularly a  St. Sebastian by Domenichino, and Michael the Archangel, from a,  painting of Guido Rheni. I am extremely fond of all this artist's  pieces. There is a tenderness and delicacy in his manner; and his  figures are all exquisitely beautiful, though his expression is  often erroneous, and his attitudes are always affected and  unnatural. In this very piece the archangel has all the air of a  French dancing-master; and I have seen a Madonna by the same  hand, I think it is in the Palazzo di Barberini, in which, though  the figures are enchanting, the Virgin is represented holding up  the drapery of the infant, with the ridiculous affectation of a  singer on the stage of our Italian opera. The Mosaic work, though  brought to a wonderful degree of improvement, and admirably  calculated for churches, the dampness of which is pernicious to  the colours of the pallet, I will not yet compare to the  productions of the pencil. The glassyness (if I may be allowed  the expression) of the surface, throws, in my opinion, a false  light on some parts of the picture; and when you approach it, the  joinings of the pieces look like so many cracks on painted  canvas. Besides, this method is extremely tedious and expensive.  I went to see the artists at work, in a house that stands near  the church, where I was much pleased with the ingenuity of the  process; and not a little surprized at the great number of  different colours and tints, which are kept in separate drawers,  marked with numbers as far as seventeen thousand. For a single  head done in Mosaic, they asked me fifty zequines. But to return  to the church. The altar of St. Peter's choir, notwithstanding  all the ornaments which have been lavished upon it, is no more  than a heap of puerile finery, better adapted to an Indian pagod,  than to a temple built upon the principles of the Greek  architecture. The four colossal figures that support the chair,  are both clumsy and disproportioned. The drapery of statues,  whether in brass or stone, when thrown into large masses, appears  hard and unpleasant to the eye and for that reason the antients  always imitated wet linen, which exhibiting the shape of the  limbs underneath, and hanging in a multiplicity of wet folds,  gives an air of lightness, softness, and ductility to the whole.

These two statues weigh 116,257 pounds, and as they sustain  nothing but a chair, are out of all proportion, inasmuch as the  supporters ought to be suitable to the things supported. Here are  four giants holding up the old wooden chair of the apostle Peter,  if we may believe the book De Identitate Cathedrae Romanae, Of  the Identity of the Roman Chair. The implements of popish  superstition; such as relicks of pretended saints, ill-proportioned  spires and bellfreys, and the nauseous repetition of  the figure of the cross, which is in itself a very mean and  disagreeable object, only fit for the prisons of condemned  criminals, have contributed to introduce a vitious taste into the  external architecture, as well as in the internal ornaments of  our temples. All churches are built in the figure of a cross,  which effectually prevents the eye from taking in the scope of  the building, either without side or within; consequently robs  the edifice of its proper effect. The palace of the Escurial in  Spain is laid out in the shape of a gridiron, because the convent  was built in consequence of a vow to St. Laurence, who was  broiled like a barbecued pig. What pity it is, that the labours  of painting should have been so much employed on the shocking  subjects of the martyrology. Besides numberless pictures of the  flagellation, crucifixion, and descent from the cross, we have  Judith with the head of Holofernes, Herodias with the head of  John the Baptist, Jael assassinating Sisera in his sleep, Peter  writhing on the cross, Stephen battered with stones, Sebastian  stuck full of arrows, Laurence frying upon the coals, Bartholomew  flaed alive, and a hundred other pictures equally frightful,  which can only serve to fill the mind with gloomy ideas, and  encourage a spirit of religious fanaticism, which has always been  attended with mischievous consequences to the community where it  reigned.

The tribune of the great altar, consisting of four wreathed brass  pillars, gilt, supporting a canopy, is doubtless very  magnificent, if not over-charged with sculpture, fluting,  foliage, festoons, and figures of boys and angels, which, with  the hundred and twenty-two lamps of silver, continually burning  below, serve rather to dazzle the eyes, and kindle the devotion  of the ignorant vulgar, than to excite the admiration of a  judicious observer.

There is nothing, I believe, in this famous structure, so worthy  of applause, as the admirable symmetry and proportion of its  parts. Notwithstanding all the carving, gilding, basso relievos,  medallions, urns, statues, columns, and pictures with which it  abounds, it does not, on the whole, appear over-crouded with  ornaments. When you first enter, your eye is filled so equally  and regularly, that nothing appears stupendous; and the church  seems considerably smaller than it really is. The statues of  children, that support the founts of holy water when observed  from the door, seem to be of the natural size; but as you draw  near, you perceive they are gigantic. In the same manner, the  figures of the doves, with olive branches in their beaks, which  are represented on the wall, appear to be within your reach; but  as you approach them, they recede to a considerable height, as if  they had flown upwards to avoid being taken.

I was much disappointed at sight of the Pantheon, which, after  all that has been said of it, looks like a huge cockpit, open at  top. The portico which Agrippa added to the building, is  undoubtedly very noble, though, in my opinion, it corresponds but  ill with the simplicity of the edifice. With all my veneration  for the antients, I cannot see in what the beauty of tile rotunda  consists. It is no more than a plain unpierced cylinder, or  circular wall, with two fillets and a cornice, having a vaulted  roof or cupola, open in the centre. I mean the original building,  without considering the vestibule of Agrippa. Within side it has  much the air of a mausoleum. It was this appearance which, in all  probability, suggested the thought to Boniface IV. to transport  hither eight and twenty cart-loads of old rotten bones, dug from  different burying-places, and then dedicate it as a church to the  blessed Virgin and all the holy martyrs. I am not one of those  who think it is well lighted by the hole at the top, which is  about nine and twenty feet in diameter, although the author of  the Grand Tour calls it but nine. The same author says, there is  a descent of eleven steps to go into it; that it is a hundred and  forty-four feet in heighth, and as many in breadth; that it was  covered with copper, which, with the brass nails of the portico,  pope Urban VIII. took away, and converted into the four wreathed  pillars that support the canopy of the high altar in the church  of St. Peter, &c. The truth is, before the time of pope Alexander  VII. the earth was so raised as to cover part of the temple, and  there was a descent of some steps into the porch: but that  pontiff ordered the ground to be pared away to the very pedestal  or base of the portico, which is now even with the street, so  that there is no descent whatsoever. The height is two hundred  palmi, and the breadth two hundred and eighteen; which, reckoning  fife palmi at nine inches, will bring the height to one hundred  and fifty, and the breadth to one hundred and sixty-three feet  six inches. It was not any covering of copper which pope Urban  VIII. removed, but large brass beams, which supported the roof of  the portico. They weighed 186,392 pounds; and afforded metal  enough not only for the pillars in St. Peter's church, but also  for several pieces of artillery that are now in the castle of St.  Angelo. What is more extraordinary, the gilding of those columns  is said to have cost forty thousand golden crowns: sure money was  never worse laid out. Urban VIII. likewise added two bellfrey  towers to the rotunda; and I wonder he did not cover the central  hole with glass, as it must be very inconvenient and disagreeable  to those who go to church below, to be exposed to the rain in wet  weather, which must also render it very damp and unwholesome. I  visited it several times, and each time it looked more and more  gloomy and sepulchral.

The magnificence of the Romans was not so conspicuous in their  temples, as in their theatres, amphitheatres, circusses,  naumachia, aqueducts, triumphal arches, porticoes, basilicae, but  especially their thermae, or bathing-places. A great number of  their temples were small and inconsiderable; not one of them was  comparable either for size or magnificence, to the modern church  of St. Peter of the Vatican. The famous temple of Jupiter  Capitolinus was neither half so long, nor half so broad: it was  but two hundred feet in length, and one hundred and eighty-five  in breadth; whereas the length of St. Peter's extends to six  hundred and thirty-eight feet, and the breadth to above five  hundred. It is very near twice as large as the temple of Jupiter  Olympius in Greece, which was counted one of the seven wonders of  the world. But I shall take another opportunity to explain myself  further on the antiquities of this city; a subject, upon which I  am disposed to be (perhaps impertinently) circumstantial. When I  begin to run riot, you should cheek me with the freedom of a  friend. The most distant hint will be sufficient to,--Dear Sir, Yours assuredly.

LETTER XXXII

NICE, March 10, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--The Colossaeum or amphitheatre built by Flavius  Vespasian, is the most stupendous work of the kind which  antiquity can produce. Near one half of the external circuit  still remains, consisting of four tire of arcades, adorned with  columns of four orders, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, and Composite.  The height and extent of it may be guessed from the number of  spectators it contained, amounting to one hundred thousand; and  yet, according to Fontana's mensuration, it could not contain  above thirty-four thousand persons sitting, allowing a foot and  an half for each person: for the circuit of the whole building  did not exceed one thousand five hundred and sixty feet. The  amphitheatre at Verona is one thousand two hundred and ninety  feet in circumference; and that of Nismes, one thousand and  eighty. The Colossaeum was built by Vespasian, who employed  thirty thousand Jewish slaves in the work; but finished and  dedicated by his son Titus, who, on the first day of its being  opened, produced fifty thousand wild beasts, which were all  killed in the arena. The Romans were undoubtedly a barbarous  people, who delighted in horrible spectacles. They viewed with  pleasure the dead bodies of criminals dragged through the  streets, or thrown down the Scalae Gemoniae and Tarpeian rock,  for their contemplation. Their rostra were generally adorned with  the heads of some remarkable citizens, like Temple-Bar, at  London. They even bore the sight of Tully's head fixed upon that  very rostrum where he had so often ravished their ears with all  the charms of eloquence, in pleading the cause of innocence and  public virtue. They took delight in seeing their fellow-creatures  torn in pieces by wild beasts, in the amphitheatre.  They shouted with applause when they saw a poor dwarf or slave  killed by his adversary; but their transports were altogether  extravagant, when the devoted captives were obliged to fight in  troops, till one side was entirely butchered by the other. Nero  produced four hundred senators, and six hundred of the equestrian  order, as gladiators in the public arena: even the women fought  with wild beasts, as well as with each other, and drenched the  amphitheatres with their blood. Tacitus says, "Sed faeminarum  illustrium, senatorumque filiorum plures per arenam faedati  sunt," "But many sons of Senators, and even Matrons of the first  Rank, exposed themselves in this vile exercise." The execrable  custom of sacrificing captives or slaves at the tombs of their  masters and great men, which is still preserved among the negroes  of Africa, obtained also among the antients, Greeks as well as  Romans. I could never, without horror and indignation, read that  passage in the twenty-third book of the Iliad, which describes  twelve valiant Trojan captives sacrificed by the inhuman Achilles  at the tomb of his friend Patroclus.

Dodeka men Troon megathumon uias eathlous Tous ama pantas pur eathiei.

Twelve generous Trojans slaughtered in their Bloom,  With thy lov'd Corse the Fire shall now consume.

Even Virgil makes his pious Hero sacrifice eight Italian youths  to the manes of Pallas. It is not at all clear to me, that a  people is the more brave, the more they are accustomed to  bloodshed in their public entertainments. True bravery is not  savage but humane. Some of this sanguinary spirit is inherited by  the inhabitants of a certain island that shall be nameless--but,  mum for that. You will naturally suppose that the Coliseo was  ruined by the barbarians who sacked the city of Rome: in effect,  they robbed it of its ornaments and valuable materials; but it  was reserved for the Goths and Vandals of modern Rome, to  dismantle the edifice, and reduce it to its present ruinous  condition. One part of it was demolished by pope Paul II. that he  might employ the stones of it in building the palace of St. Mark.  It was afterwards dilapidated for the same purposes, by the  cardinals Riarius and Farnese, which last assumed the tiara under  the name of Paul III. Notwithstanding these injuries, there is  enough standing to convey a very sublime idea of ancient  magnificence.

The Circi and Naumachia, if considered as buildings and  artificial basins, are admirable; but if examined as areae  intended for horse and chariot races, and artificial seas for  exhibiting naval engagements, they seem to prove that the antient  Romans were but indifferently skilled and exercised either in  horsemanship or naval armaments. The inclosure of the emperor  Caracalla's circus is still standing, and scarce affords  breathing room for an English hunter. The Circus Maximus, by far  the largest in Rome, was not so long as the Mall; and I will  venture to affirm, that St. James's Park would make a much more  ample and convenient scene for those diversions. I imagine an old  Roman would be very much surprised to see an English race on the  course at New-Market. The Circus Maximus was but three hundred  yards in breadth. A good part of this was taken up by the spina,  or middle space, adorned with temples, statues, and two great  obelisks; as well as by the euripus, or canal, made by order of  Julius Caesar, to contain crocodiles, and other aquatic animals,  which were killed occasionally. This was so large, that  Heliogabalus, having filled it with excellent wine, exhibited  naval engagements in it, for the amusement of the people. It  surrounded three sides of the square, so that the whole extent of  the race did not much exceed an English mile; and when Probus was  at the expence of filling the plain of it with fir-trees to form  a wood for the chace of wild beasts, I question much if this  forest was more extensive than the plantation in St. James's  Park, on the south side of the canal: now I leave you to judge  what ridicule a king of England would incur by converting this  part of the park into a chace for any species of animals which  are counted game in our country.

The Roman emperors seemed more disposed to elevate and surprize,  than to conduct the public diversions according to the rules of  reason and propriety. One would imagine, it was with this view  they instituted their naumachia, or naval engagements, performed  by half a dozen small gallies of a side in an artificial basin of  fresh water. These gallies I suppose were not so large as common  fishing-smacks, for they were moved by two, three, and four oars  of a side according to their different rates, biremes, triremes,  and quadriremes. I know this is a knotty point not yet  determined; and that some antiquarians believe the Roman gallies  had different tires or decks of oars; but this is a notion very  ill supported, and quite contrary to all the figures of them that  are preserved on antient coins and medals. Suetonius in the reign  of Domitian, speaking of these naumachia, says, "Edidit navales  pugnas, pene justarum classium, effosso, et circumducto juxta  Tyberim lacu, atque inter maximas imbres prospectavit," "He  exhibited naval engagements of almost intire fleets, in an  artificial Lake formed for the purpose hard by the Tyber, and  viewed them in the midst of excessive Rains." This artificial  lake was not larger than the piece of water in Hyde-Park; and yet  the historian says, it was almost large enough for real or intire  fleets. How would a British sailor relish an advertisement that a  mock engagement between two squadrons of men of war would be  exhibited on such a day in the Serpentine river? or that the  ships of the line taken from the enemy would be carried in  procession from Hyde-Park-Corner to Tower-wharf? Certain it is,  Lucullus, in one of his triumphs, had one hundred and ten ships  of war (naves longas) carried through the streets of Rome.  Nothing can give a more contemptible idea of their naval power,  than this testimony of their historians, who declare that their  seamen or mariners were formed by exercising small row-boats in  an inclosed pool of fresh water. Had they not the sea within a  few miles of them, and the river Tyber running through their  capital! even this would have been much more proper for  exercising their watermen, than a pond of still-water, not much  larger than a cold-bath. I do believe in my conscience that half  a dozen English frigates would have been able to defeat both the  contending fleets at the famous battle of Actium, which has been  so much celebrated in the annals of antiquity, as an event that  decided the fate of empire.

It would employ me a whole month to describe the thermae or  baths, the vast ruins of which are still to be seen within the  walls of Rome, like the remains of so many separate citadels. The  thermae Dioclesianae might be termed an august academy for the  use and instruction of the Roman people. The pinacotheca of this  building was a complete musaeum of all the curiosities of art and  nature; and there were public schools for all the sciences. If I  may judge by my eye, however, the thermae Antonianae built by  Caracalla, were still more extensive and magnificent; they  contained cells sufficient for two thousand three hundred persons  to bathe at one time, without being seen by one another. They  were adorned with all the charms of painting, architecture, and  sculpture. The pipes for convoying the water were of silver. Many  of the lavacra were of precious marble, illuminated by lamps of  chrystal. Among the statues, were found the famous Toro, and  Hercole Farnese.

Bathing was certainly necessary to health and cleanliness in a  hot country like Italy, especially before the use of linen was  known: but these purposes would have been much better answered by  plunging into the Tyber, than by using the warm bath in the  thermae, which became altogether a point of luxury borrowed from  the effeminate Asiatics, and tended to debilitate the fibres  already too much relaxed by the heat of the climate. True it is,  they had baths of cool water for the summer: but in general they  used it milk-warm, and often perfumed: they likewise indulged in  vapour-baths, in order to enjoy a pleasing relaxation, which they  likewise improved with odoriferous ointments.

The thermae consisted of a great variety of parts and  conveniences; the natationes, or swimming places; the portici,  where people amused themselves in walking, conversing, and  disputing together, as Cicero says, In porticibus deambulantes  disputabant; the basilicae, where the bathers assembled, before  they entered, and after they came out of the bath; the atria, or  ample courts, adorned with noble colonnades of Numidian marble  and oriental granite; the ephibia, where the young men inured  themselves to wrestling and other exercises; the frigidaria, or  places kept cool by a constant draught of air, promoted by the  disposition and number of the windows; the calidaria, where the  water was warmed for the baths; the platanones, or delightful  groves of sycamore; the stadia, for the performances of the  athletae; the exedrae, or resting-places, provided with seats for  those that were weary; the palestrae, where every one chose that  exercise which pleased him best; the gymnasia, where poets,  orators, and philosophers recited their works, and harangued for  diversion; the eleotesia, where the fragrant oils and ointments  were kept for the use of the bathers; and the conisteria, where  the wrestlers were smeared with sand before they engaged. Of the  thermae in Rome, some were mercenary, and some opened gratis.  Marcus Agrippa, when he was edile, opened one hundred and seventy  private baths, for the use of the people. In the public baths,  where money was taken, each person paid a quadrans, about the  value of our halfpenny, as Juvenal observes,

Caedere Sylvano porcum, quadrante lavari.

The victim Pig to God Sylvanus slay, And for the public Bath a farthing pay.

But after the hour of bathing was past, it sometimes cost a great  deal more, according to Martial,

Balnea post decimam, lasso centumque petuntur  Quadrantes--

The bathing hour is past, the waiter tir'd;  An hundred Farthings now will be requir'd.

Though there was no distinction in the places between the first  patrician and the lowest plebeian, yet the nobility used their  own silver and gold plate, for washing, eating, and drinking in  the bath, together with towels of the finest linen. They likewise  made use of the instrument called strigil, which was a kind of  flesh-brush; a custom to which Persius alludes in this line,

I puer, et strigiles Crispini ad balnea defer.

Here, Boy, this Brush to Crispin's Bagnio bear.

The common people contented themselves with sponges. The bathing  time was from noon till the evening, when the Romans ate their  principal meal. Notice was given by a bell, or some such  instrument, when the baths were opened, as we learn from Juvenal,

Redde Pilam, sonat Aes thermarum, ludere pergis?  Virgine vis sola lotus abdire domum.

Leave off; the Bath Bell rings--what, still play on?  Perhaps the maid in private rubs you down.

There were separate places for the two sexes; and indeed there  were baths opened for the use of women only, at the expence of  Agrippina, the mother of Nero, and some other matrons of the  first quality. The use of bathing was become so habitual to the  constitutions of the Romans, that Galen, in his book De Sanitate  tuenda, mentions a certain philosopher, who, if he intermitted  but one day in his bathing, was certainly attacked with a fever.  In order to preserve decorum in the baths, a set of laws and  regulations were published, and the thermae were put under the  inspection of a censor, who was generally one of the first  senators in Rome. Agrippa left his gardens and baths, which stood  near the pantheon, to the Roman people: among the statues that  adorned them was that of a youth naked, as going into the bath,  so elegantly formed by the hand of Lysippus, that Tiberius, being  struck with the beauty of it, ordered it to be transferred into  his own palace: but the populace raised such a clamour against  him, that he was fain to have it reconveyed to its former place.  These noble baths were restored by Adrian, as we read in  Spartian; but at present no part of them remains.

With respect to the present state of the old aqueducts, I can  give you very little satisfaction. I only saw the ruins of that  which conveyed the aqua Claudia, near the Porta Maggiore, and the  Piazza of the Lateran. You know there were fourteen of those  antient aqueducts, some of which brought water to Rome from the  distance of forty miles. The channels of them were large enough  to admit a man armed on horseback; and therefore when Rome was  besieged by the Goths, who had cut off the water, Belisarius  fortified them with works to prevent the enemy from entering the  city by those conveyances. After that period, I suppose the  antient aqueducts continued dry, and were suffered to run to  ruins. Without all doubt, the Romans were greatly obliged to  those benefactors, who raised such stupendous works for the  benefit, as well as the embellishment of their city: but it might  have been supplied with the same water through pipes at one  hundredth part of the expence; and in that case the enemy would  not have found it such an easy matter to cut it off. Those popes  who have provided the modern city so plentifully with excellent  water, are much to be commended for the care and expence, they  have bestowed in restoring the streams called acqua Virgine,  acqua Felice, and acqua Paolina, which afford such abundance of  water as would plentifully supply a much larger city than modern  Rome.

It is no wonder that M. Agrippa, the son-in-law, friend, and  favourite of Augustus, should at the same time have been the idol  of the people, considering how surprisingly he exerted himself  for the emolument, convenience, and pleasure of his fellow-citizens.  It was he who first conducted this acqua Virgine to  Rome: he formed seven hundred reservoirs in the city; erected one  hundred and five fountains; one hundred and thirty castella, or  conduits, which works he adorned with three hundred statues, and four hundred pillars of  marble, in the space of one year. He also brought into Rome, the  aqua Julia, and restored the aqueduct of the aqua Marzia, which  had fallen to decay. I have already observed the great number of  baths which he opened for the people, and the magnificent  thermae, with spacious gardens, which he bequeathed to them as a  legacy. But these benefactions, great and munificent as they seem  to be, were not the most important services he performed for the  city of Rome. The common-sewers were first made by order of  Tarquinius Priscus, not so much with a view to cleanliness, as by  way of subterranean drains to the Velabrum, and in order to carry  off the stagnant water, which remained in the lower parts, after  heavy rains. The different branches of these channels united at  the Forum, from whence by the cloaca Maxima, their contents were  conveyed into the Tyber. This great cloaca was the work of  Tarquinius Superbus. Other sewers were added by Marcus Cato, and  Valerius Flaccus, the censors. All these drains having been  choaked up and ruinous, were cleared and restored by Marcus  Agrippa, who likewise undermined the whole city with canals of  the same kind, for carrying of the filth; he strengthened and  enlarged the cloaca maxima, so as to make it capable of receiving  a large cart loaded with hay; and directed seven streams of water  into these subterranean passages, in order to keep them always  clean and open. If, notwithstanding all these conveniences,  Vespasian was put to great expence in removing the ordure from  the public streets, we have certainly a right to conclude that  the antient Romans were not more cleanly than the modern  Italians.

After the mausolea of Augustus, and Adrian, which I have already  mentioned, the most remarkable antient sepulchres at Rome, are  those of Caius Cestius, and Cecilia Metella. The first, which  stands by the Porta di S. Paolo, is a beautiful pyramid, one  hundred and twenty feet high, still preserved intire, having a  vaulted chamber within-side, adorned with some ancient painting,  which is now almost effaced. The building is of brick, but eased  with marble. This Caius Cestius had been consul, was very rich,  and acted as one of the seven Epulones, who superintended the  feasts of the gods, called Lectisternia, and Pervigilia. He  bequeathed his whole fortune to his friend M. Agrippa, who was so  generous as to give it up to the relations of the testator. The  monument of Cecilia Metella, commonly called Capo di Bove, is  without the walls on the Via Appia. This lady was daughter of  Metellus Creticus, and wife to Crassus, who erected this noble  monument to her memory. It consisted of two orders, or stories,  the first of which was a square of hewn stone: the second was a  circular tower, having a cornice, adorned with ox heads in basso  relievo, a circumstance from which it takes the name of Capo di  Bove. The ox was supposed to be a most grateful sacrifice to the  gods. Pliny, speaking of bulls and oxen, says,

Hinc victimae optimae et laudatissima deorum placatio.

They were accounted the best Victims and most agreeable to  appease the anger of the Gods.

This tower was surmounted by a noble cupola or dome, enriched  with all the ornaments of architecture. The door of the building  was of brass; and within-side the ashes of Cecilia were deposited  in a fluted marble urn, of curious workmanship, which is still  kept in the Palazzo Farnese. At present the surface of the ground  is raised so much as to cover the first order of the edifice:  what we see is no more than the round tower, without the dome and  its ornaments; and the following inscription still remains near  the top, facing the Via Appia. 

CAECILLAE Q. CRETICI F. METELLAE CRASSI.

To Caecilia Metella, Daughter of Q. Criticus: wife of Crassus.

Now we are talking of sepulchral inscriptions, I shall conclude  this letter with the copy of a very singular will, made by  Favonius Jocundus, who died in Portugal, by which will the  precise situation of the famous temple of Sylvanus is  ascertained.

"Jocundi. Ego gallus Favonius Jocundus P. Favoni F. qui bello contra  Viriatum Succubui, Jocundum et Prudentem filios, e me et Quintia  Fabia conjuge mea ortos, et Bonorum Jocundi Patris mei, et eorum,  quae mihi ipsi acquisivi haeredes relinquo; hac tamen conditione,  ut ab urbe Romana huc veniant, et ossa hic mea, intra  quinquennium exportent, et via latina condant in sepulchro, jussu  meo condito, et mea voluntate; in quo velim neminem mecum, neque  servum, neque libertum inseri; et velim ossa quorumcunque  sepulchro statim meo eruantur, et jura Romanorum serventur, in  sepulchris ritu majorum retinendis, juxta volantatem testatoris;  et si secus fecerint, nisi legittimae oriantur causae, velim ea  omnia, quae filijs meis relinquo, pro reparando templo dei  Sylvani, quod sub viminali monte est, attribui; manesque mei a  Pont. max; a flaminibus dialibus, qui in capitolio sunt, opem  implorent, ad liberorum meorum impietatem ulciscendam;  teneanturque sacerdotes dei Silvani, me in urbem referre, et  sepulchro me meo condere. Volo quoque vernas qui domi meae sunt,  omnes a praetore urbano liberos, cum matribus dimitti,  singulisque libram argenti puri, et vestem unam dori. In  Lusitania. In agro VIII. Cal Quintilis, bello viriatino."

I, Gallus Favonius Jocundus, son of P. Favonius, dying in the war  against Viriatus, declare my sons Jocundus and Prudens, by my  wife Quintia Fabia, joint Heirs of my Estate, real and personal;  on condition, however, that they come hither within a time of  five years from this my last will, and transport my remains to  Rome to be deposited in my Sepulchre built in the via latina by  my own order and Direction: and it is my will that neither slave  nor freedman shall be interred with me in the said tomb; that if  any such there be, they shall be removed, and the Roman law  obeyed, in preserving in the antient Form the sepulchre according  to the will of the Testator. If they act otherwise without just  cause, it is my will that the whole estate, which I now bequeathe  to my children, shall be applied to the Reparation of the Temple  of the God Sylvanus, at the foot of Mount Viminalis; and that my  Manes [The Manes were an order of Gods supposed to take  cognisance of such injuries.] I shall implore the assistance of  the Pontifex maximus, and the Flaminisdiales in the Capitol, to  avenge the Impiety of my children; and the priests of Sylvanus  shall engage to bring my remains to Rome and see them decently  deposited in my own Sepulchre. It is also my will that all my  domestic slaves shall be declared free by the city Praetor, and  dismissed with their mothers, after having received each, a suit  of cloaths, and a pound weight of pure silver from my heirs and  Executors.--At my farm in Lusitania, July 25. During the Viriatin  war.

My paper scarce affords room to assure you that I am ever,--Dear  Sir, Your faithful, etc.

LETTER XXXIII

NICE, March 30, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--YOU must not imagine I saw one half of the valuable  pictures and statues of Rome; there is such a vast number of both  in this capital, that I might have spent a whole year in taking  even a transient view of them; and, after all, some of them would  have been overlooked. The most celebrated pieces, however, I have  seen; and therefore my curiosity is satisfied. Perhaps, if I had  the nice discernment and delicate sensibility of a true  connoisseur, this superficial glimpse would have served only to  whet my appetite, and to detain me the whole winter at Rome. In  my progress through the Vatican, I was much pleased with the  School of Athens, by Raphael, a piece which hath suffered from  the dampness of the air. The four boys attending to the  demonstration of the mathematician are admirably varied in the  expression. Mr. Webb's criticism on this artist is certainly  just. He was perhaps the best ethic painter that ever the world  produced. No man ever expressed the sentiments so happily, in  visage, attitude, and gesture: but he seems to have had too much  phlegm to strike off the grand passions, or reach the sublime  parts of painting. He has the serenity of Virgil, but wants the  fire of Homer. There is nothing in his Parnassus which struck me,  but the ludicrous impropriety of Apollo's playing upon a fiddle,  for the entertainment of the nine muses. [Upon better information  I must retract this censure; in as much, as I find there was  really a Musical Instrument among the antients of this Figure, as  appears by a small statue in Bronze, to be still seen in the  Florentine Collection.]

The Last Judgment, by Buonaroti, in the chapel of Sixtus IV.  produced to my eye the same sort of confusion, that perplexes my  ear at a grand concert, consisting of a great variety of  instruments: or rather, when a number of people are talking all  at once. I was pleased with the strength of expression, exhibited  in single figures, and separate groupes: but, the whole together  is a mere mob, without subordination, keeping, or repose. A  painter ought to avoid all subjects that require a multiplicity  of groupes and figures; because it is not in the power of that  art to unite a great number in one point of view, so as to  maintain that dependence which they ought to have upon one  another. Michael Angelo, with all his skill in anatomy, his  correctness of design, his grand composition, his fire, and force  of expression, seems to have had very little idea of grace. One  would imagine he had chosen his kings, heroes, cardinals, and  prelates, from among the facchini of Rome: that he really drew  his Jesus on the Cross, from the agonies of some vulgar assassin  expiring on the wheel; and that the originals of his Bambini,  with their mothers, were literally found in a stable. In the Sala  Regia, from whence the Sistian chapel is detached, we see, among  other exploits of catholic heroes, a representation of the  massacre of the protestants in Paris, Tholouse, and other parts  of France, on the eve of St. Bartholomew, thus described in the  Descrizione di Roma, "Nella prima pittura, esprime Georgio Vasari  l'istoria del Coligni, grand' amiraglio, di Francia, che come  capo de ribelli, e degl'ugonotti, fu ucciso; e nell'altra vicina,  la strage fatta in Parigi, e nel regno, de rebelli, e  degl'Ugonotti." "In the first picture, George Vasari represents  the history of Coligni, high admiral of France, who was slain as  head of the rebels and huegonots; and in another near it, the  slaughter that was made of the rebels and huegonots in Paris and  other parts of the kingdom." Thus the court of Rome hath employed  their artists to celebrate and perpetuate, as a meritorious  action, the most perfidious, cruel, and infamous massacre, that  ever disgraced the annals of any nation.

I need not mention the two equestrian statues of Constantine the  Great, and Charlemagne, which stand at opposite ends of the great  portico of St. Peter's church; because there is nothing in them  which particularly engaged my attention. The sleeping Cleopatra,  as you enter the court of the Belvedere, in the Vatican, is much  admired; but I was better pleased with the Apollo, which I take  to be the most beautiful statue that ever was formed. The Nile,  which lies in the open court, surmounted with the little  children, has infinite merit; but is much damaged, and altogether  neglected. Whether it is the same described in Pliny, as having  been placed by Vespasian in the Temple of Peace, I do not know.  The sixteen children playing about it, denoted the swelling of  the Nile, which never rose above sixteen cubits. As for the  famous groupe of Laocoon, it surpassed my expectation. It was not  without reason that Buonaroti called it a portentous work; and  Pliny has done it no more than justice in saying it is the most  excellent piece that ever was cut in marble; and yet the famous  Fulvius Ursini is of opinion that this is not the same statue  which Pliny described. His reasons, mentioned by Montfaucon, are  these. The statues described by Pliny were of one stone; but  these are not. Antonioli, the antiquary, has in his Possession,  pieces of Laocoon's snakes, which were found in the ground, where  the baths of Titus actually stood, agreeable to Pliny, who says  these statues were placed in the buildings of Titus. Be that as  it may, the work which we now see does honour to antiquity. As  you have seen innumerable copies and casts of it, in marble,  plaister, copper, lead, drawings, and prints, and read the  description of it in Keysler, and twenty other books of travels,  I shall say nothing more on the subject; but that neither they  nor I, nor any other person, could say too much in its praise. It  is not of one piece indeed. In that particular Pliny himself  might be mistaken. "Opus omnibus et picturae, et statuariae artis  praeponendum. Ex uno lapide eum et Liberos draconumque mirabiles  nexus de consilii sententia fecere succubi artifices." "A work  preferable to all the other Efforts of Painting and Statuary. The  most excellent artists joined their Talents in making the Father  and his Sons, together with the admirable Twinings of the  Serpents, of one Block." Buonaroti discovered the joinings,  though they were so artfully concealed as to be before invisible.  This amazing groupe is the work of three Rhodian sculptors,  called Agesander, Polydore, and Athenodorus, and was found in the  thermae of Titus Vespasian, still supposing it to be the true  antique. As for the torso, or mutilated trunk of a statue, which  is called the school of Michael Angelo, I had not time to  consider it attentively; nor taste enough to perceive its  beauties at first sight. The famous horses on Monte Cavallo,  before the pope's palace, which are said to have been made in  emulation, by Phidias and Praxiteles, I have seen, and likewise  those in the front of the Capitol, with the statues of Castor and  Pollux; but what pleased me infinitely more than all of them  together, is the equestrian statue of Corinthian brass, standing  in the middle of this Piazza (I mean at the Capitol) said to  represent the emperor Marcus Aurelius. Others suppose it was  intended for Lucius Verus; a third set of antiquaries contend for  Lucius Septimius Severus; and a fourth, for Constantine, because  it stood in the Piazza of the Lateran palace, built by that  emperor, from whence pope Paul III. caused it to be removed to  the Capitol. I considered the trophy of Marius as a very curious  piece of sculpture, and admired the two sphinxes at the bottom of  the stairs leading to this Piazza, as the only good specimens of  design I have ever seen from Aegypt: for the two idols of that  country, which stand in the ground floor of the Musaeum of the  Capitol, and indeed all the Aegyptian statues in the Camera  Aegyptiaca of this very building, are such monstrous  misrepresentations of nature, that they never could have obtained  a place among the statues of Rome, except as curiosities of  foreign superstition, or on account of the materials, as they are  generally of basaltes, porphyry, or oriental granite.

At the farther end of the court of this Musaeum, fronting the  entrance, is a handsome fountain, with the statue of a river-god  reclining on his urn; this is no other than the famous Marforio,  so called from its having been found in Martis Fore. It is  remarkable only as being the conveyance of the answers to the  satires which are found pasted upon Pasquin, another mutilated  statue, standing at the corner of a street.

The marble coffin, supposed to have contained the ashes of  Alexander Severus, which we find in one of these apartments, is a  curious antique, valuable for its sculpture in basso relievo,  especially for the figures on the cover, representilig that  emperor and his mother Julia Mammea.

I was sorry I had not time to consider the antient plan of Rome,  disposed in six classes, on the stair-case of this Musaeum, which  was brought hither from a temple that stood in the Forum Boarium,  now called Campo vaccine.

It would be ridiculous in me to enter into a detail of the vast  collection of marbles, basso relievos, inscriptions, urns, busts,  and statues, which are placed in the upper apartments of this  edifice. I saw them but once, and then I was struck with the  following particulars. A bacchanalian drunk; a Jupiter and Leda,  at least equal to that in the gallery at Florence; an old  praesica, or hired mourner, very much resembling those wrinkled  hags still employed in Ireland, and in the Highlands of Scotland,  to sing the coronach at funerals, in praise of the deceased; the  famous Antinous, an elegant figure, which Pousin studied as canon  or rule of symmetry; the two fauns; and above all the mirmillone,  or dying gladiator; the attitude of the body, the expression of  the countenance, the elegance of the limbs, and the swelling of  the muscles, in this statue, are universally admired; but the  execution of the back is incredibly delicate. The course of the  muscles called longissimi dorsi, are so naturally marked and  tenderly executed, that the marble actually emulates the softness  of the flesh; and you may count all the spines of the vertebrae,  raising up the skin as in the living body; yet this statue, with  all its merit, seems inferior to the celebrated dying gladiator  of Ctesilas, as described by Pliny, who says the expression of it  was such, as appears altogether incredible. In the court, on the  opposite side of the Capitol, there is an admirable statue of a  lion devouring an horse, which was found by the gate of Ostia,  near the pyramid of Caius Cestius; and here on the left hand,  under a colonade, is what they call the Columna Rostrata, erected  in honour of Caius Duilius, who first triumphed over the  Carthaginians by sea. But this is a modern pillar, with the old  inscription, which is so defaced as not to be legible. Among the  pictures in the gallery and saloon above, what pleased me most  was the Bacchus and Ariadne of Guido Rheni; and the wolf suckling  Romulus and Remus, by Rubens. The court of the Palazzo Farnese is  surrounded with antique statues, among which the most celebrated  are, the Flora, with a most delicate drapery; the gladiator, with  a dead boy over his shoulder; the Hercules, with the spoils of  the Nemean lion, but that which the connoisseurs justly esteem  above all the rest is Hercules, by Glycon, which you know as well  as I do, by the great reputation it has acquired. This admirable  statue having been found without the legs, these were supplied by  Gulielmo de la Porta so happily, that when afterwards the  original limbs were discovered, Michael Angelo preferred those of  the modern artist, both in grace and proportion; and they have  been retained accordingly. In a little house, or shed, behind the  court, is preserved the wonderful group of Dirce, commonly called  the Toro Farnese, which was brought hither from the thermae  Caracallae. There is such spirit, ferocity, and indignant  resistance expressed in the bull, to whose horns Dirce is tied by  the hair, that I have never seen anything like it, either upon  canvass, or in stone. The statues of the two brothers  endeavouring to throw him into the sea are beautiful figures,  finely contrasted; and the rope, which one of them holds in a  sort of loose coil, is so surprisingly chizzelled, that one can  hardly believe it is of stone. As for Dirce herself, she seems to  be but a subaltern character; there is a dog upon his hind legs  barking at the bull, which is much admired. This amazing groupe  was cut out of one stone, by Appollonius and Tauriscus, two  sculptors of Rhodes; and is mentioned by Pliny in the thirty- sixth book of his Natural History. All the precious monuments of  art, which have come down to us from antiquity, are the  productions of Greek artists. The Romans had taste enough to  admire the arts of Greece, as plainly appears by the great  collections they made of their statues and pictures, as well as  by adopting their architecture and musick: but I do not remember  to have read of any Roman who made a great figure either as a  painter or a statuary. It is not enough to say those professions  were not honourable in Rome, because painting, sculpture, and  musick, even rhetoric, physic, and philosophy were practised and  taught by slaves. The arts were always honoured and revered at  Rome, even when the professors of them happened to be slaves by  the accidents and iniquity of fortune. The business of painting  and statuary was so profitable, that in a free republic, like  that of Rome, they must have been greedily embraced by a great  number of individuals: but, in all probability, the Roman soil  produced no extraordinary genius for those arts. Like the English  of this day, they made a figure in poetry, history, and ethics;  but the excellence of painting, sculpture, architecture, and  music, they never could attain. In the Palazzo Picchini I saw  three beautiful figures, the celebrated statues of Meleager, the  boar, and dog; together with a wolf, of excellent workmanship.  The celebrated statue of Moses, by Michael Angelo, in the church  of St. Peter in Vincula, I beheld with pleasure; as well as that  of Christ, by the same hand, in the Church of S. Maria sopra  Minerva. The right foot, covered with bronze, gilt, is much  kissed by the devotees. I suppose it is looked upon as a specific  for the toothache; for, I saw a cavalier, in years, and an old  woman successively rub their gums upon it, with the appearance of  the most painful perseverance.

You need not doubt but that I went to the church of St. Peter in  Montorio, to view the celebrated Transfiguration, by Raphael,  which, if it was mine, I would cut in two parts. The three  figures in the air attract the eye so strongly, that little or no  attention is payed to those below on the mountain. I apprehend  that the nature of the subject does not admit of that keeping and  dependence, which ought to be maintained in the disposition of  the lights and shadows in a picture. The groupes seem to be  intirely independent of each other. The extraordinary merit of  this piece, I imagine, consists, not only in the expression of  divinity on the face of Christ; but also in the surprising  lightness of the figure, that hovers like a beautiful exhalation  in the air. In the church of St. Luke, I was not at all struck by  the picture of that saint, drawing the portrait of the Virgin  Mary, although it is admired as one of the best pieces of  Raphael. Indeed it made so little impression upon me, that I do  not even remember the disposition of the figures. The altar-piece,  by Andrea Sacchi, in the church of St. Romauldus, would  have more merit, if the figure of the saint himself had more  consequence, and was represented in a stronger light. In the  Palazzo Borghese, I chiefly admired the following pieces: a Venus  with two nymphs; and another with Cupid, both by Titian: an  excellent Roman Piety, by Leonardo da Vinci; and the celebrated  Muse, by Dominechino, which is a fine, jolly, buxom figure. At  the palace of Colorina Connestabile, I was charmed with the  Herodias, by Guido Rheni; a young Christ; and a Madonna, by  Raphael; and four landscapes, two by Claude Lorraine, and the  other two, by Salvator Rosa. In the palazetto, or summerhouse  belonging to the Palazzo Rospigliosi, I had the satisfaction of  contemplating the Aurora of Guido, the colours of which still  remain in high perfection, notwithstanding the common report that  the piece is spoiled by the dampness of the apartment. The print  of this picture, by Freij, with all its merit, conveys but an  imperfect idea of the beauty of the original. In the Palazzo  Barberini, there is a great collection of marbles and pictures:  among the first, I was attracted by a beautiful statue of Venus;  a sleeping faun, of curious workmanship; a charming Bacchus,  lying on an antient sculpture, and the famous Narcissus. Of the  pictures, what gave me most pleasure was the Magdalen of Guido,  infinitely superior to that by Le Brun in the church of the  Carmelites at Paris; the Virgin, by Titian; a Madonna, by  Raphael, but not comparable to that which is in the Palazzo de  Pitti, at Florence; and the death of Germanicus, by Poussin,  which I take to be one of the best pieces in this great  collection. In the Palazzo Falconeri there is a beautiful St.  Cecilia, by Guercino; a holy family, by Raphael; and a fine  expressive figure of St. Peter weeping, by Dominechino. In the  Palazzo Altieri, I admired a picture, by Carlo Maratti,  representing a saint calling down lightning from heaven to  destroy blasphemers. It was the figure of the saint I admired,  merely as a portrait. The execution of the other parts was tame  enough: perhaps they were purposely kept down, in order to  preserve the importance of the principal figure. I imagine  Salvator Rosa would have made a different disposition on the same  subject: that amidst the darkness of a tempest, he would have  illuminated the blasphemer with the flash of lightning by which  he was destroyed: this would have thrown a dismal gleam upon his  countenance, distorted by the horror of his situation as well as  by the effects of the fire; and rendered the whole scene  dreadfully picturesque. In the same palace, I saw the famous holy  family, by Corregio, which he left unfinished, and no other  artist would undertake to supply; for what reason I know not.  Here too is a judgment of Paris, by Titian, which is reckoned a  very valuable piece. In the Palazzo Odescalchi, there is a holy  family, by Buonaroti, and another by Raphael, both counted  excellent, though in very different stiles, extremely  characteristic of those two great rival artists.

If I was silly enough to make a parade, I might mention some  hundreds more of marbles and pictures, which I really saw at  Rome; and even eke out that number with a huge list of those I  did not see: but whatever vanity I may have, it has not taken  this turn; and I assure you, upon my word and honour, I have  described nothing but what actually fell under my own  observation. As for my critical remarks, I am afraid you will  think them too superficial and capricious to belong to any other  person but--Your humble servant.

LETTER XXXIV

NICE, April 2, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--I have nothing to communicate touching the library of  the Vatican, which, with respect to the apartments and their  ornaments, is undoubtedly magnificent. The number of books it  contains does not exceed forty thousand volumes, which are all  concealed from the view, and locked up in presses: as for the  manuscripts, I saw none but such as are commonly presented to  strangers of our nation; some very old copies of Virgil and  Terence; two or three Missals, curiously illuminated; the book De  Septem Sacramentis, written in Latin by Henry VIII. against  Luther; and some of that prince's love letters to Anne Boleyn. I  likewise visited the Libreria Casanatense, belonging to the  convent of the church called S. Maria Sopra Minerva. I had a  recommendation to the principal librarian, a Dominican friar, who  received me very politely, and regaled me with a sight of several  curious MSS. of the classics.

Having satisfied my curiosity at Rome, I prepared for my  departure, and as the road between Radicofani and Montefiascone  is very stony and disagreeable, I asked the banker Barazzi, if  there was not a better way of returning to Florence, expressing a  desire at the same time to see the cascade of Terni. He assured  me that the road by Terni was forty miles shorter than the other,  much more safe and easy, and accommodated with exceeding good  auberges. Had I taken the trouble to cast my eyes upon the map, I  must have seen, that the road by Terni, instead of being forty  miles shorter, was much longer than the other: but this was not  the only mistake of Signiore Barazzi. Great part of this way lies  over steep mountains, or along the side of precipices, which  render travelling in a carriage exceeding tedious, dreadful, and  dangerous; and as for the public houses, they are in all respects  the most execrable that ever I entered. I will venture to say  that a common prisoner in the Marshalsea or King's-Bench is more  cleanly and commodiously lodged than we were in many places on  this road. The houses are abominably nasty, and generally  destitute of provision: when eatables were found, we were almost  poisoned by their cookery: their beds were without curtains or  bedstead, and their windows without glass; and for this sort of  entertainment we payed as much as if we had been genteelly  lodged, and sumptuously treated. I repeat it again; of all the  people I ever knew, the Italians are the most villainously  rapacious. The first day, having passed Civita Castellana, a  small town standing on the top of a hill, we put up at what was  called an excellent inn, where cardinals, prelates, and princes,  often lodged. Being meagre day, there was nothing but bread,  eggs, and anchovies, in the house. I went to bed without supper,  and lay in a pallet, where I was half devoured by vermin. Next  day, our road, in some places, lay along precipices, which over-hang  the Nera or Nar, celebrated in antiquity for its white foam,  and the sulphureous quality of its waters.

Sulfurea nar albus aqua, fontesque velini.

Sulphureous nar, and the Velinian streams.

It is a small, but rapid stream, which runs not far from hence,  into the Tyber. Passing Utricoli, near the ruins of the ancient  Ocriculum, and the romantic town of Narni, situated on the top of  a mountain, in the neighbourhood of which is still seen standing  one arch of the stupendous bridge built by Augustus Caesar, we  arrived at Terni, and hiring a couple of chaises before dinner,  went to see the famous Cascata delle Marmore, which is at the  distance of three miles. We ascended a steep mountain by a narrow  road formed for a considerable way along the brink of a  precipice, at the bottom of which brawls the furious river Nera,  after having received the Velino. This last is the stream which,  running from the Lago delle Marmore, forms the cascade by falling  over a precipice about one hundred and sixty feet high. Such a  body of water rushing down the mountain; the smoak, vapour, and  thick white mist which it raises; the double rainbow which these  particles continually exhibit while the sun shines; the deafening  sound of the cataract; the vicinity of a great number of other  stupendous rocks and precipices, with the dashing, boiling, and  foaming of the two rivers below, produce altogether an object of  tremendous sublimity: yet great part of its effect is lost, for  want of a proper point of view, from which it might be  contemplated. The cascade would appear much more astonishing,  were it not in some measure eclipsed by the superior height of  the neighbouring mountains. You have not a front perspective; but  are obliged to view it obliquely on one side, standing upon the  brink of a precipice, which cannot be approached without horror.  This station might be rendered much more accessible, and  altogether secure, for the expence of four or five zequines; and  a small tax might be levied for the purpose from travellers by  the aubergiste at Terni, who lets his calasses for half a zequine  a piece to those that are curious to see this phaenomenon.  Besides the two postilions whom I payed for this excursion, at  the rate of one stage in posting, there was a fellow who posted  himself behind one of the chaises, by way of going to point out  the different views of the cascade; and his demand amounted to  four or five pauls. To give you an idea of the extortion of those  villainous publicans, I must tell you that for a dinner and  supper, which even hunger could not tempt us to eat, and a  night's lodging in three truckle beds, I paid eighty pauls,  amounting to forty shillings sterling. You ask me why I submitted  to such imposition? I will tell you--I have more than once in my  travels made a formal complaint of the exorbitancy of a publican,  to the magistrate of the place; but I never received any  satisfaction, and have lost abundance of time. Had I proceeded to  manual correction, I should have alarmed and terrified the women:  had I peremptorily refused to pay the sum total, the landlord,  who was the post-master, would not have supplied me with horses  to proceed on my journey. I tried the experiment at Muy in  France, where I put myself into a violent passion, had abundance  of trouble, was detained till it was almost night, and after all  found myself obliged to submit, furnishing at the same time  matter of infinite triumph to the mob, which had surrounded the  coach, and interested themselves warmly in favour of their  townsman. If some young patriot, in good health and spirits,  would take the trouble as often as he is imposed upon by the road  in travelling, to have recourse to the fountain-head, and prefer  a regular complaint to the comptroller of the posts, either in  France or Italy, he would have ample satisfaction, and do great  service to the community. Terni is an agreeable town, pretty well  built, and situated in a pleasant valley, between two branches of  the river Nera, whence it was called by the antients, Interamna.  Here is an agreeable piazza, where stands a church that was of  old a heathen temple. There are some valuable paintings in the  church. The people are said to be very civil, and provisions to  be extremely cheap. It was the birthplace of the emperor Tacitus,  as well as of the historian of the same name. In our journey from  hence to Spoleto, we passed over a high mountain, (called, from  its height, Somma) where it was necessary to have two additional  horses to the carriage, and the road winds along a precipice.  which is equally dangerous and dreadful. We passed through part  of Spoleto, the capital of Umbria, which is a pretty large city.  Of this, however, I give no other account from my own  observation, but that I saw at a distance the famous Gothic  aqueduct of brick: this is mentioned by Addison as a structure, which, for the height of its arches, is not equalled by any thing  in Europe. The road from hence to Foligno, where we lay, is kept  in good order, and lies through a delightful plain, laid out into  beautiful inclosures, abounding with wine, oil, corn, and cattle,  and watered by the pastoral streams of the famous river  Clitumnus, which takes its rise in three or four separate  rivulets issuing from a rock near the highway. On the right-hand,  we saw several towns situated on rising grounds, and among the  rest, that of Assissio, famous for the birth of St. Francis,  whose body, being here deposited, occasions a concourse of  pilgrims. We met a Roman princess going thither with a grand  retinue, in consequence of a vow she had made for the re-establishment  of her health. Foligno, the Fulginium of the  antients, is a small town, not unpleasant, lying in the midst of  mulberry plantations, vineyards, and corn-fields, and built on  both sides of the little river Topino. In choosing our beds at  the inn, I perceived one chamber locked, and desired it might be  opened; upon which the cameriere declared with some reluctance,  "Besogna dire a su' eccellenza; poco fa, che una bestia e morta  in questa camera, e non e ancora lustrata," "Your Excellency must  know that a filthy Beast died lately in that Chamber, and it is  not yet purified and put in order." When I enquired what beast it  was, he replied, "Un'eretico Inglese," "An English heretic." I  suppose he would not have made so free with our country and  religion, if he had not taken us for German catholics, as we  afterwards learned from Mr. R--i. Next day, we crossed the Tyber,  over a handsome bridge, and in mounting the steep hill upon which  the city of Perugia stands, our horses being exhausted, were  dragged backwards by the weight of the carriage to the very edge  of a precipice, where, happily for us, a man passing that way,  placed a large stone behind one of the wheels, which stopped  their motion, otherwise we should have been all dashed in pieces.  We had another ugly hill to ascend within the city, which was  more difficult and dangerous than the other: but the postilions,  and the other beasts made such efforts, that we mounted without  the least stop, to the summit, where we found ourselves in a  large piazza, where the horses are always changed. There being no  relays at the post, we were obliged to stay the whole day and  night at Perugia, which is a considerable city, built upon the  acclivity of a hill, adorned with some elegant fountains, and  several handsome churches, containing some valuable pictures by  Guido, Raphael, and his master Pietro Perugino, who was a native  of this place. The next stage is on the banks of the lake, which  was the Thrasimene of the antients, a beautiful piece of water,  above thirty miles in circumference, having three islands,  abounding with excellent fish: upon a peninsula of it, there is a  town and castle. It was in this neighbourhood where the consul  Flaminius was totally defeated with great slaughter by Hannibal.  From Perugia to Florence, the posts are all double, and the road  is so bad that we never could travel above eight and twenty miles  a day. We were often obliged to quit the carriage, and walk up  steep mountains; and the way in general was so unequal and stony,  that we were jolted even to the danger of our lives. I never felt  any sort of exercise or fatigue so intolerable; and I did not  fail to bestow an hundred benedictions per diem upon the banker  Barazzi, by whose advice we had taken this road; yet there was no  remedy but patience. If the coach had not been incredibly strong,  it must have been shattered to pieces. The fifth night we passed  at a place called Camoccia, a miserable cabaret, where we were  fain to cook our own supper, and lay in a musty chamber, which  had never known a fire, and indeed had no fire-place, and where  we ran the risque of being devoured by rats. Next day one of the  irons of the coach gave way at Arezzo, where we were detained two  hours before it could be accommodated. I might have taken this  opportunity to view the remains of the antient Etruscan  amphitheatre. and the temple of Hercules, described by the  cavalier Lorenzo Guazzesi, as standing in the neighbourhood of  this place: but the blacksmith assured me his work would be  finished in a few minutes; and as I had nothing so much at heart  as the speedy accomplishment of this disagreeable journey, I  chose to suppress my curiosity, rather than be the occasion of a  moment's delay. But all the nights we had hitherto passed were  comfortable in comparison to this, which we suffered at a small  village, the name of which I do not remember. The house was  dismal and dirty beyond all description; the bed-cloaths filthy  enough to turn the stomach of a muleteer; and the victuals cooked  in such a manner, that even a Hottentot could not have beheld  them without loathing. We had sheets of our own, which were  spread upon a mattrass, and here I took my repose wrapped in a  greatcoat, if that could be called repose which was interrupted  by the innumerable stings of vermin. In the morning, I was seized  with a dangerous fit of hooping-cough, which terrified my wife,  alarmed my people, and brought the whole community into the  house. I had undergone just such another at Paris, about a year  before. This forenoon, one of our coach wheels flew off in the  neighbourhood of Ancisa, a small town, where we were detained  above two hours by this accident; a delay which was productive of  much disappointment, danger, vexation, and fatigue. There being  no horses at the last post, we were obliged to wait until those  which brought us thither were sufficiently refreshed to proceed.  Understanding that all the gates of Florence are shut at six,  except two that are kept open for the accommodation of  travellers; and that to reach the nearest of these gates, it was  necessary to pass the river Arno in a ferry-boat, which could not  transport the carriage; I determined to send my servant before  with a light chaise to enter the nearest gate before it was  shut, and provide a coach to come and take us up at the side of  the river, where we should be obliged to pass in the boat: for I  could not bear the thoughts of lying another night in a common  cabaret. Here, however, another difficulty occurred. There was  but one chaise, and a dragoon officer, in the imperial troops,  insisted upon his having bespoke it for himself and his servant.  A long dispute ensued, which had like to have produced a quarrel:  but at length I accommodated matters, by telling the officer that  he should have a place in it gratis, and his servant might ride  a-horse-back. He accepted the offer without hesitation; but, in the mean  time, we set out in the coach before them, and having proceeded  about a couple of miles, the road was so deep from a heavy rain,  and the beasts were so fatigued, that they could not proceed. The  postilions scourging the poor animals with great barbarity, they  made an effort, and pulled the coach to the brink of a precipice,  or rather a kind of hollow-way, which might be about seven or  eight feet lower than the road. Here my wife and I leaped out,  and stood under the rain up to the ancles in mud; while the  postilions still exercising their whips, one of the fore-horses  fairly tumbled down the descent, arid hung by the neck, so that  he was almost strangled before he could be disengaged from the  traces, by the assistance of some foot travellers that happened  to pass. While we remained in this dilemma, the chaise, with the  officer and my servant, coming up, we exchanged places; my wife  and I proceeded in the chaise, and left them with Miss C-- and Mr.  R--, to follow in the coach. The road from hence to Florence is  nothing but a succession of steep mountains, paved and conducted  in such a manner, that one would imagine the design had been to  render it impracticable by any sort of wheel-carriage.  Notwithstanding all our endeavours, I found it would be  impossible to enter Florence before the gates were shut. I  flattered and threatened the driver by turns: but the fellow, who  had been remarkably civil at first, grew sullen and impertinent.  He told me I must not think of reaching Florence: that the boat  would not take the carriage on board; and that from the other  side, I must walk five miles before I should reach the gate that  was open: but he would carry me to an excellent osteria, where I  should be entertained and lodged like a prince. I was now  convinced that he had lingered on purpose to serve this inn-keeper;  and I took it for granted that what he told me of the  distance between the ferry and the gate was a lie. It was eight  o'clock when we arrived at his inn. I alighted with my wife to  view the chambers, desiring he would not put up his horses.  Finding it was a villainous house, we came forth, and, by this  time, the horses were put up. I asked the fellow how he durst  presume to contradict my orders, and commanded him to put them to  the chaise. He asked in his turn if I was mad? If I thought I and  the lady had strength and courage enough to walk five miles in  the dark, through a road which we did not know, and which was  broke up by a continued rain of two days? I told him he was an  impertinent rascal, and as he still hesitated, I collared him  with one hand, and shook my cane over his head with the other. It  was the only weapon I had, either offensive or defensive; for I  had left my sword, and musquetoon in the coach. At length the  fellow obeyed, though with great reluctance, cracking many severe  jokes upon us in the mean time, and being joined in his raillery  by the inn-keeper, who had all the external marks of a ruffian.  The house stood in a solitary situation, and not a soul appeared  but these two miscreants, so that they might have murdered us  without fear of detection. "You do not like the apartments? (said  one) to be sure they were not fitted up for persons of your rank  and quality!" "You will be glad of a worse chamber, (continued  the other) before you get to bed." "If you walk to Florence  tonight, you will sleep so sound, that the fleas will not disturb  you." "Take care you do not take up your night's lodging in the  middle of the road, or in the ditch of the city-wall." I fired  inwardly at these sarcasms, to which, however, I made no reply;  and my wife was almost dead with fear. In the road from hence to  the boat, we met with an ill-looking fellow, who offered his  service to conduct us into the city, and such was our situation,  that I was fain to accept his proposal, especially as we had two  small boxes in the chaise by accident, containing some caps and laces belonging to my wife, I still hoped the postilion had  exaggerated in the distance between the boat and the city gate,  and was confirmed in this opinion by the ferryman, who said we  had not above half a league to walk. Behold us then in this  expedition; myself wrapped up in a very heavy greatcoat, and my  cane in my hand. I did not imagine I could have walked a couple  of miles in this equipage, had my life been depending; my wife a  delicate creature, who had scarce ever walked a mile in her life;  and the ragamuffin before us with our boxes under his arm. The  night was dark and wet; the road slippery and dirty; not a soul  was seen, nor a sound was heard: all was silent, dreary, and  horrible. I laid my account with a violent fit of illness from  the cold I should infallibly catch, if I escaped assassination,  the fears of which were the more troublesome as I had no weapon  to defend our lives. While I laboured under the weight of my  greatcoat which made the streams of sweat flow down my face and  shoulders, I was plunging in the mud, up to the mid-leg at every  step; and at the same time obliged to support my wife, who wept  in silence, half dead with terror and fatigue. To crown our  vexation, our conductor walked so fast, that he was often out of  sight, and I imagined he had run away with the boxes. All I could  do on these occasions, was to hollow as loud as I could, and  swear horribly that I would blow his brains out. I did not know  but these oaths and menaces might keep other rogues in awe. In  this manner did we travel three long miles, making almost an  intire circuit of the city-wall, without seeing the face of a  human creature, and at length reached the gate, where we were  examined by the guard, and allowed to pass, after they had told  us it was a long mile from thence to the house of Vanini, where  we proposed to lodge. No matter, being now fairly within the  city, I plucked up my spirits, and performed the rest of the  journey with such ease, that I am persuaded, I could have walked  at the same pace all night long, without being very much  fatigued. It was near ten at night, when we entered the auberge  in such a draggled and miserable condition, that Mrs. Vanini  almost fainted at sight of us, on the supposition that we had met  with some terrible disaster, and that the rest of the company  were killed. My wife and I were immediately accommodated with dry  stockings and shoes, a warm apartment, and a good supper, which I  ate with great satisfaction, arising not only from our having  happily survived the adventure, but also from a conviction that  my strength and constitution were wonderfully repaired: not but  that I still expected a severe cold, attended with a terrible fit  of the asthma: but in this I was luckily disappointed. I now for  the first time drank to the health of my physician Barazzi, fully  persuaded that the hardships and violent exercise I underwent by  following his advice, had greatly contributed to the re-establishment  of my health. In this particular, I imitate the  gratitude of Tavernier, who was radically cured of the gout by a  Turkish aga in Aegypt, who gave him the bastinado, because he  would not look at the head of the bashaw of Cairo, which the aga  had in a bag, to be presented to the grand signior at  Constantinople.

I did not expect to see the rest of our company that night, as I  never doubted but they would stay with the coach at the inn on  the other side of the Arno: but at mid-night we were joined by  Miss C-- and Mr. R--, who had left the carriage at the inn, under  the auspices of the captain and my servant, and followed our  foot-steps by walking from the ferry-boat to Florence, conducted  by one of the boatmen. Mr. R-- seemed to be much ruffled and  chagrined; but, as he did not think proper to explain the cause,  he had no right to expect that I should give him satisfaction  for some insult he had received from my servant. They had been  exposed to a variety of disagreeable adventures from the  impracticability of the road. The coach had been several times in  the most imminent hazard of being lost with all our baggage; and  at one place, it was necessary to hire a dozen of oxen, and as  many men, to disengage it from the holes into which it had run.  It was in the confusion of these adventures, that the captain and  his valet, Mr. R-- and my servant, had like to have gone all by  the ears together. The peace was with difficulty preserved by the  interposition of Miss C--, who suffered incredibly from cold and  wet, terror, vexation, and fatigue: yet happily no bad  consequence ensued. The coach and baggage were brought safely  into Florence next morning, when all of us found ourselves well  refreshed, and in good spirits. I am afraid this is not the case  with you, who must by this time be quite jaded with this long  epistle, which shall therefore be closed without further ceremony  by,--Yours always.

LETTER XXXV

NICE, March 20, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--The season being far advanced, and the weather growing  boisterous, I made but a short stay at Florence, and set out for  Pisa, with full resolution to take the nearest road to Lerici,  where we proposed to hire a felucca for Genoa. I had a great  desire to see Leghorn and Lucca; but the dread of a winter's  voyage by sea in an open boat effectually restrained my  curiosity. To avoid the trouble of having our baggage shifted  every post, I hired two chaises to Pisa for a couple of zequines,  and there we arrived in safety about seven in the evening, though  not without fear of the consequence, as the calesses were quite  open, and it rained all the way. I must own I was so sick of the  wretched accommodation one meets with in every part of Italy,  except the great cities, so averse to the sea at this season, and  so fond of the city of Pisa, that I should certainly have stayed  here the winter, had not I been separated from my books and  papers, as well as from other conveniencies and connexions which  I had at Nice; and foreseen that the thoughts of performing the  same disagreeable voyage in the spring would imbitter my whole  winter's enjoyment. I again hired two calesses for Lerici,  proposing to lie at Sarzana, three miles short of that place,  where we were told we should find comfortable lodging, and to  embark next day without halting. When we departed in the morning,  it rained very hard, and the Cerchio, which the chaises had  formerly passed, almost without wetting the wheels, was now  swelled to a mighty river, broad and deep and rapid. It was with  great difficulty I could persuade my wife to enter the boat; for  it blew a storm, and she had seen it in coming over from the  other side hurried down a considerable way by the rapidity of the  current, notwithstanding all the efforts of the watermen. Near  two hours were spent in transporting us with our chaises. The  road between this and Pietra Santa was rendered almost  impassable. When we arrived at Massa, it began to grow dark, and  the post-master assured us that the road to Sarzana was  overflowed in such a manner as not to be passed even in the day-time,  without imminent danger. We therefore took up our lodging  for the night at this house, which was in all respects one of the  worst we had yet entered. Next day, we found the Magra as large  and violent as the Cerchio: however, we passed it without any  accident, and in the afternoon arrived at Lerici. There we were  immediately besieged by a number of patrons of feluccas, from  among whom I chose a Spaniard, partly because he looked like an  honest man, and produced an ample certificate, signed by an  English gentleman; and partly, because he was not an Italian;  for, by this time, I had imbibed a strong prejudice against the  common people of that country. We embarked in the morning before  day, with a gale that made us run the lee-gunwale in the water;  but, when we pretended to turn the point of Porto Venere, we  found the wind full in our teeth, and were obliged to return to  our quarters, where we had been shamefully fleeced by the  landlord, who, nevertheless, was not such an exorbitant knave as  the post-master, whose house I would advise all travellers to  avoid. Here, indeed, I had occasion to see an instance of  prudence and oeconomy, which I should certainly imitate, if ever  I had occasion to travel this way by myself. An Englishman, who had hired a felucca from Antibes to  Leghorn, was put in here by stress of weather; but being aware of  the extortion of innkeepers, and the bad accommodation in their  houses, he slept on board on his own mattrasses; and there  likewise he had all his conveniencies for eating. He sent his  servant on shore occasionally to buy provision, and see it cooked  according to his direction in some public house; and had his  meals regularly in the felucca. This evening he came ashore to  stretch his legs, and took a solitary walk on the beach, avoiding  us with great care, although he knew we were English; his valet  who was abundantly communicative, told my servant, that in coming  through France, his master had travelled three days in company  with two other English gentlemen, whom he met upon the road, and  in all that time he never spoke a word to either, yet in other  respects, he was a good man, mild, charitable, and humane. This  is a character truly British. At five o'clock in the morning we  put to sea again, and though the wind was contrary, made shift to  reach the town of Sestri di Levante, where we were most  graciously received by the publican butcher and his family. The  house was in much better order than before; the people were much  more obliging; we passed a very tolerable night, and had a very  reasonable bill to pay in the morning. I cannot account for this  favourable change any other way, than by ascribing it to the  effects of a terrible storm, which had two days before torn up a  great number of their olive-trees by the roots, and done such  damage as terrified them into humility and submission. Next day,  the water being delightful, we arrived by one o'clock in the  afternoon at Genoa. Here I made another bargain with our patron  Antonio, to carry us to Nice. He had been hitherto remarkably  obliging, and seemingly modest. He spoke Latin fluently, and was  tinctured with the sciences. I began to imagine he was a person  of a good family, who had met with misfortunes in life, and  respected him accordingly: but I afterwards found him mercenary,  mean, and rapacious. The wind being still contrary, when we  departed from Genoa, we could get no further than Finale, where  we lodged in a very dismal habitation, which was recommended to  us as the best auberge in the place. What rendered it the more  uncomfortable, the night was cold, and there was not a fire-place  in the house, except in the kitchen. The beds (if they deserved  that name) were so shockingly nasty, that we could not have used  them, had not a friend of Mr. R-- supplied us with mattrasses,  sheets, and coverlets; for our own sheets were on board the  felucca, which was anchored at a distance from the shore. Our  fare was equally wretched: the master of the house was a surly  assassin, and his cameriere or waiter, stark-staring mad. Our  situation was at the same time shocking and ridiculous. Mr. R--  quarrelled over night with the master, who swore in broken French  to my man, that he had a good mind to poniard that impertinent  Piedmontese. In the morning, before day, Mr. R--, coming into my  chamber, gave me to understand that he had been insulted by the  landlord, who demanded six and thirty livres for our supper and  lodging. Incensed at the rascal's presumption, I assured him I  would make him take half the money, and a good beating into the  bargain. He replied, that he would have saved me the trouble of  beating him, had not the cameriere, who was a very sensible  fellow, assured him the padrone was out of his senses, and if  roughly handled, might commit some extravagance. Though I was  exceedingly ruffled, I could not help laughing at the mad  cameriere's palming himself upon R--y, as a sensible fellow, and  transferring the charge of madness upon his master, who seemed to  be much more knave than fool. While Mr. R-- went to mass, I  desired the cameriere to bid his master bring the bill, and to  tell him that if it was not reasonable, I would carry him before  the commandant. In the mean time I armed myself with my sword in  one hand and my cane in the other. The inn-keeper immediately  entered, pale and staring, and when I demanded his bill, he told  me, with a profound reverence that he should be satisfied with  whatever I myself thought proper to give. Surprised at this  moderation, I asked if he should be content with twelve livres,  and he answered, "Contentissimo," with another prostration. Then  he made an apology for the bad accommodation of his house, and  complained, that the reproaches of the other gentleman, whom he  was pleased to call my majorduomo, had almost turned his brain.  When he quitted the room, his cameriere, laying hold of his  master's last words, pointed to his own forehead, and said, he  had informed the gentleman over night that his patron was mad.  This day we were by a high wind in the afternoon, driven for  shelter into Porto Mauritio, where we found the post-house even  worse than that of Finale; and what rendered it more shocking was  a girl quite covered with the confluent smallpox, who lay in a  room through which it was necessary to pass to the other  chambers, and who smelled so strong as to perfume the whole  house. We were but fifteen miles from St. Remo, where I knew the  auberge was tolerable, and thither I resolved to travel by land.  I accordingly ordered five mules to travel post, and a very  ridiculous cavalcade we formed, the women being obliged to use  common saddles; for in this country even the ladies sit astride.  The road lay along one continued precipice, and was so difficult,  that the beasts never could exceed a walking pace. In some places  we were obliged to alight. Seven hours were spent in travelling  fifteen short miles: at length we arrived at our old lodgings in  St. Remo, which we found white-washed, and in great order. We  supped pretty comfortably; slept well; and had no reason to  complain of imposition in paying the bill. This was not the case  in the article of the mules, for which I was obliged to pay fifty  livres, according to the regulation of the posts. The postmaster,  who came along with us, had the effrontery to tell me, that if I  had hired the mules to carry me and my company to St. Remo, in  the way of common travelling, they would have cost me but fifteen  livres; but as I demanded post-horses, I must submit to the  regulations. This is a distinction the more absurd, as the road  is of such a nature as renders it impossible to travel faster in  one way than in another; nor indeed is there the least difference  either in the carriage or convenience, between travelling post  and journey riding. A publican might with the same reason charge  me three livres a pound for whiting, and if questioned about the  imposition, reply, that if I had asked for fish I should have had  the same whiting for the fifth part of the money: but that he  made a wide difference between selling it as fish, and selling it  as whiting. Our felucca came round from Porto Mauritio in the  night, and embarking next morning, we arrived at Nice about four  in the afternoon.

Thus have I given you a circumstantial detail of my Italian  expedition, during which I was exposed to a great number of  hardships, which I thought my weakened constitution could not  have bore; as well as to violent fits of passion, chequered,  however, with transports of a more agreeable nature; insomuch  that I may say I was for two months continually agitated either  in mind or body, and very often in both at the same time. As my  disorder at first arose from a sedentary life, producing a  relaxation of the fibres, which naturally brought on a  listlessness, indolence, and dejection of the spirits, I am  convinced that this hard exercise of mind and body, co-operated  with the change of air and objects, to brace up the relaxed  constitution, and promote a more vigorous circulation of the  juices, which had long languished even almost to stagnation. For  some years, I had been as subject to colds as a delicate woman  new delivered. If I ventured to go abroad when there was the  least moisture either in the air, or upon the ground, I was sure  to be laid up a fortnight with a cough and asthma. But, in this  journey, I suffered cold and rain, and stood, and walked in the  wet, heated myself with exercise, and sweated violently, without feeling the least disorder; but, on the contrary, felt  myself growing stronger every day in the midst of these excesses.  Since my return to Nice, it has rained the best part of two  months, to the astonishment of all the people in the country; yet  during all that time I have enjoyed good health and spirits. On  Christmas-Eve, I went to the cathedral at midnight, to hear high  mass celebrated by the new bishop of Nice, in pontificalibus, and  stood near two hours uncovered in a cold gallery, without having  any cause in the sequel to repent of my curiosity. In a word, I  am now so well that I no longer despair of seeing you and the  rest of my friends in England; a pleasure which is eagerly  desired by,--Dear Sir, Your affectionate humble Servant.

LETTER XXXVI

NICE, March 23, 1766.

DEAR SIR,--You ask whether I think the French people are more  taxed than the English; but I apprehend, the question would be  more apropos if you asked whether the French taxes are more  insupportable than the English; for, in comparing burthens, we  ought always to consider the strength of the shoulders that bear  them. I know no better way of estimating the strength, than by  examining the face of the country, and observing the appearance  of the common people, who constitute the bulk of every nation.  When I, therefore, see the country of England smiling with  cultivation; the grounds exhibiting all the perfection of  agriculture, parcelled out into beautiful inclosures, cornfields,  hay and pasture, woodland and common, when I see her meadows well  stocked with black cattle, her downs covered with sheep; when I  view her teams of horses and oxen, large and strong, fat and  sleek; when I see her farm-houses the habitations of plenty,  cleanliness, and convenience; and her peasants well fed, well  lodged, well cloathed, tall and stout, and hale and jolly; I  cannot help concluding that the people are well able to bear  those impositions which the public necessities have rendered  necessary. On the other hand, when I perceive such signs of  poverty, misery and dirt, among the commonalty of France, their  unfenced fields dug up in despair, without the intervention of  meadow or fallow ground, without cattle to furnish manure,  without horses to execute the plans of agriculture; their farm-houses  mean, their furniture wretched, their apparel beggarly;  themselves and their beasts the images of famine; I cannot help  thinking they groan under oppression, either from their  landlords, or their government; probably from both.

The principal impositions of the French government are these:  first, the taille, payed by all the commons, except those that  are privileged: secondly, the capitation, from which no persons  (not even the nobles) are excepted: thirdly, the tenths and  twentieths, called Dixiemes and Vingtiemes, which every body  pays. This tax was originally levied as an occasional aid in  times of war, and other emergencies; but by degrees is become a  standing revenue even in time of peace. All the money arising  from these impositions goes directly to the king's treasury; and  must undoubtedly amount to a very great sum. Besides these, he  has the revenue of the farms, consisting of the droits d'aydes,  or excise on wine, brandy, &c. of the custom-house duties; of the  gabelle, comprehending that most oppressive obligation on  individuals to take a certain quantity of salt at the price which  the farmers shall please to fix; of the exclusive privilege to  sell tobacco; of the droits de controlle, insinuation, centieme  denier, franchiefs, aubeine, echange et contre-echange arising  from the acts of voluntary jurisdiction, as well as certain law-suits.  These farms are said to bring into the king's coffers  above one hundred and twenty millions of livres yearly, amounting  to near five millions sterling: but the poor people are said to  pay about a third more than this sum, which the farmers retain to  enrich themselves, and bribe the great for their protection;  which protection of the great is the true reason why this most  iniquitous, oppressive, and absurd method of levying money is not  laid aside. Over and above those articles I have mentioned, the  French king draws considerable sums from his clergy, under the  denomination of dons gratuits, or free-gifts; as well as from the  subsidies given by the pays d'etats such as Provence, Languedoc,  and Bretagne, which are exempted from the taille. The whole  revenue of the French king amounts to between twelve and thirteen  millions sterling. These are great resources for the king: but  they will always keep the people miserable, and effectually  prevent them from making such improvements as might turn their  lands to the best advantage. But besides being eased in the  article of taxes, there is something else required to make them  exert themselves for the benefit of their country. They must be  free in their persons, secure in their property, indulged with  reasonable leases, and effectually protected by law from the  insolence and oppression of their superiors.

Great as the French king's resources may appear, they are hardly  sufficient to defray the enormous expence of his government.  About two millions sterling per annum of his revenue are said to  be anticipated for paying the interest of the public debts; and  the rest is found inadequate to the charge of a prodigious  standing army, a double frontier of fortified towns and the  extravagant appointments of ambassadors, generals, governors,  intendants, commandants, and other officers of the crown, all of  whom affect a pomp, which is equally ridiculous and prodigal. A  French general in the field is always attended by thirty or forty  cooks; and thinks it is incumbent upon him, for the glory of  France, to give a hundred dishes every day at his table. When don  Philip, and the marechal duke de Belleisle, had their quarters at  Nice, there were fifty scullions constantly employed in the great  square in plucking poultry. This absurd luxury infects their  whole army. Even the commissaries keep open table; and nothing is  seen but prodigality and profusion. The king of Sardinia proceeds  upon another plan. His troops are better cloathed, better payed,  and better fed than those of France. The commandant of Nice has  about four hundred a year of appointments, which enable him to  live decently, and even to entertain strangers. On the other  hand, the commandant of Antibes, which is in all respects more  inconsiderable than Nice, has from the French king above five  times the sum to support the glory of his monarch, which all the  sensible part of mankind treat with ridicule and contempt. But  the finances of France are so ill managed, that many of their  commandants, and other officers, have not been able to draw their  appointments these two years. In vain they complain and  remonstrate. When they grow troublesome they are removed. How  then must they support the glory of France? How, but by  oppressing the poor people. The treasurer makes use of their  money for his own benefit. The king knows it; he knows his  officers, thus defrauded, fleece and oppress his people: but he  thinks proper to wink at these abuses. That government may be  said to be weak and tottering which finds itself obliged to  connive at such proceedings. The king of France, in order to give  strength and stability to his administration, ought to have sense  to adopt a sage plan of oeconomy, and vigour of mind sufficient  to execute it in all its parts, with the most rigorous exactness.  He ought to have courage enough to find fault, and even to punish  the delinquents, of what quality soever they may be: and the  first act of reformation ought to be a total abolition of all the  farms. There are, undoubtedly, many marks of relaxation in the  reins of the French government, and, in all probability, the  subjects of France will be the first to take advantage of it.  There is at present a violent fermentation of different  principles among them, which under the reign of a very weak  prince, or during a long minority, may produce a great change in  the constitution. In proportion to the progress of reason and  philosophy, which have made great advances in this kingdom,  superstition loses ground; antient prejudices give way; a spirit  of freedom takes the ascendant. All the learned laity of France  detest the hierarchy as a plan of despotism, founded on imposture  and usurpation. The protestants, who are very numerous in  southern parts, abhor it with all the rancour of religious  fanaticism. Many of the commons, enriched by commerce and  manufacture, grow impatient of those odious distinctions, which  exclude them from the honours and privileges due to their  importance in the commonwealth; and all the parliaments, or  tribunals of justice in the kingdom, seem bent upon asserting  their rights and independence in the face of the king's  prerogative, and even at the expence of his power and authority.  Should any prince therefore be seduced by evil counsellors, or  misled by his own bigotry, to take some arbitrary step, that may  be extremely disagreeable to all those communities, without  having spirit to exert the violence of his power for the support  of his measures, he will become equally detested and despised;  and the influence of the commons will insensibly encroach upon  the pretensions of the crown. But if in the time of a minority,  the power of the government should be divided among different  competitors for the regency, the parliaments and people will find  it still more easy to acquire and ascertain the liberty at which  they aspire, because they will have the balance of power in their  hands, and be able to make either scale preponderate. I could say  a great deal more upon this subject; and I have some remarks to  make relating to the methods which might be taken in the case of  a fresh rupture with France, for making a vigorous impression on  that kingdom. But these I in list defer till another occasion,  having neither room nor leisure at present to add any thing, but  that I am, with great truth,--Dear Sir, Your very humble Servant.

LETTER XXXVII

NICE, April 2, 1765.

DEAR DOCTOR,--As I have now passed a second winter at Nice I  think myself qualified to make some further remarks on this  climate. During the heats of last summer, I flattered myself with  the prospect of the fine weather I should enjoy in the winter;  but neither I, nor any person in this country, could foresee the  rainy weather that prevailed from the middle of November, till  the twentieth of March. In this short period of four months, we  have had fifty-six days of rain, which I take to be a greater  quantity than generally falls during the six worst months of the  year in the county of Middlesex, especially as it was, for the  most part, a heavy, continued rain. The south winds generally  predominate in the wet season at Nice: but this winter the rain  was accompanied with every wind that blows, except the south;  though the most frequent were those that came from the east and  north quarters. Notwithstanding these great rains, such as were  never known before at Nice in the memory of man, the intermediate  days of fair weather were delightful, and the ground seemed  perfectly dry. The air itself was perfectly free from moisture.  Though I live upon a ground floor, surrounded on three sides by a  garden, I could not perceive the least damp, either on the  floors, or the furniture; neither was I much incommoded by the  asthma, which used always to harass me most in wet weather. In a  word, I passed the winter here much more comfortably than I  expected. About the vernal equinox, however, I caught a violent  cold, which was attended with a difficulty of breathing, and as  the sun advances towards the tropic, I find myself still more  subject to rheums. As the heat increases, the humours of the body  are rarefied, and, of consequence, the pores of the skin are  opened; while the east wind sweeping over the Alps and Apennines,  covered with snow, continues surprisingly sharp and penetrating.  Even the people of the country, who enjoy good health, are afraid  of exposing themselves to the air at this season, the  intemperature of which may last till the middle of May, when all  the snow on the mountains will probably be melted: then the air  will become mild and balmy, till, in the progress of summer, it  grows disagreeably hot, and the strong evaporation from the sea  makes it so saline, as to be unhealthy for those who have a  scorbutical habit. When the sea-breeze is high, this evaporation  is so great as to cover the surface of the body with a kind of  volatile brine, as I plainly perceived last summer. I am more and  more convinced that this climate is unfavourable for the scurvy.  Were I obliged to pass my life in it, I would endeavour to find a  country retreat among the mountains, at some distance from the  sea, where I might enjoy a cool air, free from this impregnation,  unmolested by those flies, gnats, and other vermin which render  the lower parts almost uninhabitable. To this place I would  retire in the month of June, and there continue till the  beginning of October, when I would return to my habitation in  Nice, where the winter is remarkably mild and agreeable. In March  and April however, I would not advise a valetudinarian to go  forth, without taking precaution against the cold. An agreeable  summer retreat may be found on the other side of the Var, at, or  near the town of Grasse, which is pleasantly situated on the  ascent of a hill in Provence, about seven English miles from  Nice. This place is famous for its pomatum, gloves, wash-balls,  perfumes, and toilette-boxes, lined with bergamot. I am told it  affords good lodging, and is well supplied with provisions.

We are now preparing for our journey to England, from the  exercise of which I promise myself much benefit: a journey  extremely agreeable, not only on that account, but also because  it will restore me to the company of my friends, and remove me  from a place where I leave nothing but the air which I can  possibly regret.

The only friendships I have contracted at Nice are with  strangers, who, like myself, only sojourn here for a season. I  now find by experience, it is great folly to buy furniture,  unless one is resolved to settle here for some years. The  Nissards assured me, with great confidence, that I should always  be able to sell it for a very little loss; whereas I find myself  obliged to part with it for about one-third of what it cost. I  have sent for a coach to Aix, and as soon as it arrives, shall  take my departure; so that the next letter you receive from me  will be dated at some place on the road. I purpose to take  Antibes, Toulon, Marseilles, Aix, Avignon, and Orange, in my way:  places which I have not yet seen; and where, perhaps, I shall  find something for your amusement, which will always be a  consideration of some weight with,--Dear Sir, Yours.

LETTER XXXVIII

To DR. S-- AT NICE

TURIN, March 18, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--Turin is about thirty leagues from Nice, the greater  part of the way lying over frightful mountains covered with snow.  The difficulty of the road, however, reaches no farther than  Coni, from whence there is an open highway through a fine plain  country, as far as the capital of Piedmont, and the traveller is  accommodated with chaise and horses to proceed either post, or by  cambiatura, as in other parts of Italy. There are only two ways  of performing the journey over the mountains from Nice; one is to  ride a mule-back, and the other to be carried in a chair. The  former I chose, and set out with my servant on the seventh day of  February at two in the afternoon. I was hardly clear of Nice,  when it began to rain so hard that in less than an hour the mud  was half a foot deep in many parts of the road. This was the only  inconvenience we suffered, the way being in other respects  practicable enough; for there is but one small hill to cross on  this side of the village of L'Escarene, where we arrived about  six in the evening. The ground in this neighbourhood is tolerably  cultivated, and the mountains are planted to the tops with olive  trees. The accommodation here is so very bad, that I had no  inclination to be a-bed longer than was absolutely necessary for  refreshment; and therefore I proceeded on my journey at two in  the morning, conducted by a guide, whom I hired for this purpose  at the rate of three livres a day. Having ascended one side, and  descended the other, of the mountain called Braus, which took up  four hours, though the road is not bad, we at six reached the  village of Sospello, which is agreeably situated in a small  valley, surrounded by prodigious high and barren mountains. This  little plain is pretty fertile, and being watered by a pleasant  stream, forms a delightful contrast with the hideous rocks that  surround it. Having reposed myself and my mules two hours at this  place, we continued our journey over the second mountain, called  Brovis, which is rather more considerable than the first, and in  four hours arrived at La Giandola, a tolerable inn situated  betwixt the high road and a small river, about a gunshot from the  town of Brieglie, which we leave on the right. As we jogged along  in the grey of the morning, I was a little startled at two  figures which I saw before me, and began to put my pistols in  order. It must be observed that these mountains are infested with  contrabandiers, a set of smuggling peasants, very bold and  desperate, who make a traffic of selling tobacco, salt, and other  merchandize, which have not payed duty, and sometimes lay  travellers under contribution. I did not doubt but there was a  gang of these free-booters at hand; but as no more than two  persons appeared, I resolved to let them know we were prepared  for defence, and fired one of my pistols, in hope that the report  of it, echoed from the surrounding rocks, would produce a proper  effect: but, the mountains and roads being entirely covered with  snow to a considerable depth, there was little or no  reverberation, and the sound was not louder than that of a pop-gun,  although the piece contained a good charge of powder.  Nevertheless, it did not fail to engage the attention of the  strangers, one of whom immediately wheeled to the left about, and  being by this time very near me, gave me an opportunity of  contemplating his whole person. He was very tall, meagre, and  yellow, with a long hooked nose, and small twinkling eyes. His  head was eased in a woollen night-cap, over which he wore a  flapped hat; he had a silk handkerchief about his neck, and his  mouth was furnished with a short wooden pipe, from which he  discharged wreathing clouds of tobacco-smoke. He was wrapped in a  kind of capot of green bays, lined with wolf-skin, had a pair of  monstrous boots, quilted on the inside with cotton, was almost  covered with dirt, and rode a mule so low that his long legs hung  dangling within six inches of the ground. This grotesque figure  was so much more ludicrous than terrible, that I could not help  laughing; when, taking his pipe out of his mouth, he very  politely accosted me by name. You may easily guess I was  exceedingly surprised at such an address on the top of the  mountain Brovis: but he forthwith put an end to it too, by  discovering himself to be the marquis M--, whom I had the honour  to be acquainted with at Nice. After having rallied him upon his  equipage, he gave me to understand he had set out from Nice the  morning of the same day that I departed; that he was going to  Turin, and that he had sent one of his servants before him to  Coni with his baggage. Knowing him to be an agreeable companion,  I was glad of this encounter, and we resolved to travel the rest  of the way together. We dined at La Giandola, and in the  afternoon rode along the little river Roida, which runs in a  bottom between frightful precipices, and in several places forms  natural cascades, the noise of which had well-nigh deprived us of the sense of hearing; after a winding  course among these mountains, it discharges itself into the  Mediterranean at Vintimiglia, in the territory of Genoa. As the  snow did not lie on these mountains, when we cracked our whips,  there was such a repercussion of the sound as is altogether  inconceivable. We passed by the village of Saorgio, situated on  an eminence, where there is a small fortress which commands the  whole pass, and in five hours arrived at our inn, on this side  the Col de Tende, where we took up our quarters, but had very  little reason to boast of our entertainment. Our greatest  difficulty, however, consisted in pulling off the marquis's  boots, which were of the kind called Seafarot, by this time so  loaded with dirt on the outside, and so swelled with the rain  within, that he could neither drag them after him as he walked,  nor disencumber his legs of them, without such violence as seemed  almost sufficient to tear him limb from limb. In a word, we were  obliged to tie a rope about his heel, and all the people in the  house assisting to pull, the poor marquis was drawn from one end  of the apartment to the other before the boot would give way: at  last his legs were happily disengaged, and the machines carefully  dried and stuffed for next day's journey.

We took our departure from hence at three in the morning, and at  four, began to mount the Col de Tende, which is by far the  highest mountain in the whole journey: it was now quite covered  with snow, which at the top of it was near twenty feet thick.  Half way up, there are quarters for a detachment of soldiers,  posted here to prevent smuggling, and an inn called La Ca, which  in the language of the country signifies the house. At this  place, we hired six men to assist us in ascending the mountain,  each of them provided with a kind of hough to break the ice, and  make a sort of steps for the mules. When we were near the top,  however, we were obliged to alight, and climb the mountain  supported each by two of those men, called Coulants who walk upon  the snow with great firmness and security. We were followed by  the mules, and though they are very sure-footed animals, and were  frost-shod for the occasion, they stumbled and fell very often;  the ice being so hard that the sharp-headed nails in their shoes  could not penetrate. Having reached the top of this mountain,  from whence there is no prospect but of other rocks and  mountains, we prepared for descending on the other side by the  Leze, which is an occasional sledge made of two pieces of wood,  carried up by the Coulants for this purpose. I did not much  relish this kind of carriage, especially as the mountain was very  steep, and covered with such a thick fog that we could hardly see  two or three yards before us. Nevertheless, our guides were so  confident, and my companion, who had passed the same way on other  occasions, was so secure, that I ventured to place myself on this  machine, one of the coulants standing behind me, and the other  sitting before, as the conductor, with his feet paddling among  the snow, in order to moderate the velocity of its descent. Thus  accommodated, we descended the mountain with such rapidity, that  in an hour we reached Limon, which is the native place of almost  all the muleteers who transport merchandize from Nice to Coni and  Turin. Here we waited full two hours for the mules, which  travelled with the servants by the common road. To each of the  coulants we paid forty sols, which are nearly equal to two  shillings sterling. Leaving Limon, we were in two hours quite  disengaged from the gorges of the mountains, which are partly  covered with wood and pasturage, though altogether inaccessible,  except in summer; but from the foot of the Col de Tende, the road  lies through a plain all the way to Turin. We took six hours to  travel from the inn where we had lodged over the mountain to  Limon, and five hours from thence to Coni. Here we found our  baggage, which we had sent off by the carriers one day before we  departed from Nice; and here we dismissed our guides, together  with the mules. In winter, you have a mule for this whole journey  at the rate of twenty livres; and the guides are payed at the rate of two livres a day, reckoning six  days, three for the journey to Coni, and three for their return  to Nice. We set out so early in the morning in order to avoid the  inconveniencies and dangers that attend the passage of this  mountain. The first of these arises from your meeting with long  strings of loaded mules in a slippery road, the breadth of which  does not exceed a foot and an half. As it is altogether  impossible for two mules to pass each other in such a narrow  path, the muleteers have made doublings or elbows in different  parts, and when the troops of mules meet, the least numerous is  obliged to turn off into one of these doublings, and there halt  until the others are past. Travellers, in order to avoid this  disagreeable delay, which is the more vexatious, considering the  excessive cold, begin the ascent of the mountain early in the  morning before the mules quit their inns. But the great danger of  travelling here when the sun is up, proceeds from what they call  the Valanches. These are balls of snow detached from the  mountains which over-top the road, either by the heat of the sun,  or the humidity of the weather. A piece of snow thus loosened  from the rock, though perhaps not above three or four feet in  diameter, increases sometimes in its descent to such a degree, as  to become two hundred paces in length, and rolls down with such  rapidity, that the traveller is crushed to death before he can  make three steps on the road. These dreadful heaps drag every  thing along with them in their descent. They tear up huge trees by the roots, and if they chance to fall upon a house, demolish  it to the foundation. Accidents of this nature seldom happen in  the winter while the weather is dry; and yet scarce a year passes  in which some mules and their drivers do not perish by the  valanches. At Coni we found the countess C-- from Nice, who had  made the same journey in a chair, carried by porters. This is no  other than a common elbow-chair of wood, with a	straw bottom,  covered above with waxed cloth, to protect the traveller from the  rain or snow, and provided with a foot-board upon which the feet  rest.

It is carried like a sedan-chair; and for this purpose six or  eight porters are employed at the rate of three or four livres a  head per day, according to the season, allowing three days for  their return. Of these six men, two are between the poles  carrying like common chairmen, and each of these is supported by  the other two, one at each hand: but as those in the middle  sustain the greatest burthen, they are relieved by the others in  a regular rotation. In descending the mountain, they carry the  poles on their shoulders, and in that case, four men are  employed, one at each end.

At Coni, you may have a chaise to go with the same horses to  Turin, for which you pay fifteen livres, and are a day and a half  on the way. You may post it, however, in one day, and then the  price is seven livres ten sols per post, and ten sols to the  postilion. The method we took was that of cambiatura. This is a  chaise with horses shifted at the same stages that are used in  posting: but as it is supposed to move slower, we pay but five  livres per post, and ten sols to the postilion. In order to  quicken its pace, we gave ten sols extraordinary to each  postilion, and for this gratification, he drove us even faster  than the post. The chaises are like those of Italy, and will take  on near two hundred weight of baggage.

Coni is situated between two small streams, and though neither  very large nor populous, is considerable for the strength of its  fortifications. It is honoured with the title of the Maiden-Fortress,  because though several times besieged, it was never  taken. The prince of Conti invested it in the war of 1744; but he  was obliged to raise the siege, after having given battle to the  king of Sardinia. The place was gallantly defended by the baron  Leutrum, a German protestant, the best general in the Sardinian  service: but what contributed most to the miscarriage of the  enemy, was a long tract of heavy rains, which destroyed all their  works, and rendered their advances impracticable.

I need not tell you that Piedmont is one of the most fertile and  agreeable countries in Europe, and this the most agreeable part  of all Piedmont, though it now appeared to disadvantage from the  rigorous season of the year: I shall only observe that we passed  through Sabellian, which is a considerable town, and arrived in  the evening at Turin. We entered this fine city by the gate of  Nice, and passing through the elegant Piazza di San Carlo, took  up our quarters at the Bona Fama, which stands at one corner of  the great square, called La Piazza Castel.

Were I even disposed to give a description of Turin, I should be  obliged to postpone it till another opportunity, having no room  at present to say any thing more, but that I am always--Yours.

LETTER XXXIX

AIX EN PROVENCE, May 10, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--I am thus far on my way to England. I had resolved to  leave Nice, without having the least dispute with any one native  of the place; but I found it impossible to keep this resolution.  My landlord, Mr. C--, a man of fashion, with whose family we had  always lived in friendship, was so reasonable as to expect I  should give him up the house and garden, though they were to be  paid for till Michaelmas, and peremptorily declared I should not  be permitted to sub-let them to any other person. He had of his  own accord assured me more than once that he would take my  furniture off my hands, and trusting to this assurance, I had  lost the opportunity, of disposing it to advantage: but, when the  time of my departure drew near, he refused to take it, at the  same time insisting upon having the key of the house and garden,  as well as on being paid the whole rent directly, though it would  not be due till the middle of September. I was so exasperated at  this treatment from a man whom I had cultivated with particular  respect, that I determined to contest it at law: but the affair  was accommodated by the mediation of a father of the Minims, a  friend to both, and a merchant of Nice, who charged himself with  the care of the house and furniture. A stranger must conduct  himself with the utmost circumspection to be able to live among  these people without being the dupe of imposition.

I had sent to Aix for a coach and four horses, which I hired at  the rate of eighteen French livres a day, being equal to fifteen  shillings and nine-pence sterling. The river Var was so swelled  by the melting of the snow on the mountains, as to be impassable  by any wheel-carriage; and, therefore, the coach remained at  Antibes, to which we went by water, the distance being about nine  or ten miles. This is the Antipolis of the antients, said to have  been built like Nice, by a colony from Marseilles. In all  probability, however, it was later than the foundation of Nice,  and took its name from its being situated directly opposite to  that city. Pliny says it was famous for its tunny-fishery; and to  this circumstance Martial alludes in the following lines

Antipolitani, fateor, sum filia thynni.  Essem si Scombri non tibi missa forem.

I'm spawned from Tunny of Antibes, 'tis true.  Right Scomber had I been, I ne'er had come to you.

The famous pickle Garum was made from the Thynnus or Tunny as  well as from the Scomber, but that from the Scomber was counted  the most delicate. Commentators, however, are not agreed about  the Scomber or Scombrus. Some suppose it was the Herring or  Sprat; others believe it was the mackarel; after all, perhaps it  was the Anchovy, which I do not find distinguished by any other  Latin name: for the Encrasicolus is a Greek appellation  altogether generical. Those who would be further informed about  the Garum and the Scomber may consult Caelius Apicius de  recogninaria, cum notis, variorum.

At present, Antibes is the frontier of France towards Italy,  pretty strongly fortified, and garrisoned by a battalion of  soldiers. The town is small and inconsiderable: but the basin of  the harbour is surrounded to seaward by a curious bulwark founded  upon piles driven in the water, consisting of a wall, ramparts,  casemates, and quay. Vessels lie very safe in this harbour; but  there is not water at the entrance of it to admit of ships of any  burthen. The shallows run so far off from the coast, that a ship  of force cannot lie near enough to batter the town; but it was  bombarded in the late war. Its chief strength by land consists in  a small quadrangular fort detached from the body of the place,  which, in a particular manner, commands the entrance of the  harbour. The wall of the town built in the sea has embrasures and  salient angles, on which a great number of cannon may be mounted.

I think the adjacent country is much more pleasant than that on  the side of Nice; and there is certainly no essential difference  in the climate. The ground here is not so encumbered; it is laid  out in agreeable inclosures, with intervals of open fields, and  the mountains rise with an easy ascent at a much greater distance  from the sea, than on the other side of the bay. Besides, here  are charming rides along the beach, which is smooth and firm.  When we passed in the last week of April, the corn was in the  ear; the cherries were almost ripe; and the figs had begun to  blacken. I had embarked my heavy baggage on board a London ship,  which happened to be at Nice, ready to sail: as for our small  trunks or portmanteaus, which we carried along with us, they were  examined at Antibes; but the ceremony was performed very  superficially, in consequence of tipping the searcher with half-a-crown,  which is a wonderful conciliator at all the bureaus in  this country.

We lay at Cannes, a neat village, charmingly situated on the  beach of the Mediterranean, exactly opposite to the isles  Marguerites, where state-prisoners are confined. As there are  some good houses in this place, I would rather live here for the  sake of the mild climate, than either at Antibes or Nice. Here  you are not cooped up within walls, nor crowded with soldiers and  people: but are already in the country, enjoy a fine air, and are  well supplied with all sorts of fish.

The mountains of Esterelles, which in one of my former letters I  described as a most romantic and noble plantation of ever-greens,  trees, shrubs, and aromatic plants, is at present quite desolate.  Last summer, some execrable villains set fire to the pines, when  the wind was high. It continued burning for several months, and  the conflagration extended above ten leagues, consuming an  incredible quantity of timber. The ground is now naked on each  side of the road, or occupied by the black trunks of the trees,  which have been scorched without falling. They stand as so many  monuments of the judgment of heaven, filling the mind with horror  and compassion. I could hardly refrain from shedding tears at  this dismal spectacle, when I recalled the idea of what it was  about eighteen months ago.

As we stayed all night at Frejus, I had an opportunity of viewing  the amphitheatre at leisure. As near as I can judge by the eye,  it is of the same dimensions with that of Nismes; but shockingly  dilapidated. The stone seats rising from the arena are still  extant, and the cells under them, where the wild beasts were  kept. There are likewise the remains of two galleries one over  another; and two vomitoria or great gateways at opposite sides of  the arena, which is now a fine green, with a road through the  middle of it: but all the external architecture and the ornaments  are demolished. The most intire part of the wall now constitutes  part of a monastery, the monks of which, I am told, have helped  to destroy the amphitheatre, by removing the stones for their own  purposes of building. In the neighbourhood of this amphitheatre,  which stands without the walls, are the vestiges of an old  edifice, said to have been the palace where the imperator or  president resided: for it was a Roman colony, much favoured by  Julius Caesar, who gave it the name of Forum Julii, and Civitas  Forojuliensis. In all probability, it was he who built the  amphitheatre, and brought hither the water ten leagues from the  river of Ciagne, by means of an aqueduct, some arcades of which  are still standing on the other side of the town. A great number  of statues were found in this place, together with antient  inscriptions, which have been published by different authors. I  need not tell you that Julius Agricola, the father-in-law of  Tacitus, the historian, was a native of Frejus, which is now a  very poor inconsiderable place. From hence the country opens to  the left, forming an extensive plain between the sea and the  mountains, which are a continuation of the Alps, that stretches  through Provence and Dauphine. This plain watered with pleasant  streams, and varied with vineyards, corn-fields, and meadow-ground,  afforded a most agreeable prospect to our eyes, which  were accustomed to the sight of scorching sands, rugged rocks,  and abrupt mountains in the neighbourhood of Nice. Although this  has much the appearance of a corn-country, I am told it does not  produce enough for the consumption of its inhabitants, who are  obliged to have annual supplies from abroad, imported at  Marseilles. A Frenchman, at an average, eats three times the  quantity of bread that satisfies a native of England, and indeed  it is undoubtedly the staff of his life. I am therefore surprised  that the Provencaux do not convert part of their vineyards into  corn-fields: for they may boast of their wine as they please; but  that which is drank by the common people, not only here, but also  in all the wine countries of France, is neither so strong,  nourishing, nor (in my opinion) so pleasant to the taste as the  small-beer of England. It must be owned that all the peasants who  have wine for their ordinary drink are of a diminutive size, in  comparison of those who use milk, beer, or even water; and it is  a constant observation, that when there is a scarcity of wine,  the common people are always more healthy, than in those seasons  when it abounds. The longer I live, the more I am convinced that  wine, and all fermented liquors, are pernicious to the human  constitution; and that for the preservation of health, and  exhilaration of the spirits, there is no beverage comparable to  simple water. Between Luc and Toulon, the country is delightfully  parcelled out into inclosures. Here is plenty of rich pasturage  for black cattle, and a greater number of pure streams and  rivulets than I have observed in any other parts of France.

Toulon is a considerable place, even exclusive of the basin,  docks, and arsenal, which indeed are such as justify the remark  made by a stranger when he viewed them. "The king of France (said  he) is greater at Toulon than at Versailles." The quay, the  jetties, the docks, and magazines, are contrived and executed  with precision, order, solidity, and magnificence. I counted  fourteen ships of the line lying unrigged in the basin, besides  the Tonant of eighty guns, which was in dock repairing, and a new  frigate on the stocks. I was credibly informed that in the last  war, the king of France was so ill-served with cannon for his  navy, that in every action there was scarce a ship which had not  several pieces burst. These accidents did great damage, and  discouraged the French mariners to such a degree, that they  became more afraid of their own guns than of those of the  English. There are now at Toulon above two thousand pieces of  iron cannon unfit for service. This is an undeniable proof of the  weakness and neglect of the French administration: but a more  suprizing proof of their imbecility, is the state of the  fortifications that defend the entrance of this very harbour. I  have some reason to think that they trusted for its security  entirely to our opinion that it must be inaccessible. Capt. E--,  of one of our frigates, lately entered the harbour with a  contrary wind, which by obliging him to tack, afforded an  opportunity of sounding the whole breadth and length of the  passage. He came in without a pilot, and made a pretence of  buying cordage, or some other stores; but the French officers  were much chagrined at the boldness of his enterprize. They  alleged that he came for no other reason but to sound the  channel; and that he had an engineer aboard, who made drawings of  the land and the forts, their bearings and distances. In all  probability, these suspicions were communicated to the ministry;  for an order immediately arrived, that no stranger should be  admitted into the docks and arsenal.

Part of the road from hence to Marseilles lies through a vast  mountain, which resembles that of Estrelles; but is not so well  covered with wood, though it has the advantage of an agreeable  stream running through the bottom.

I was much pleased with Marseilles, which is indeed a noble city,  large, populous, and flourishing. The streets of what is called  the new Town are open, airy and spacious; the houses well built,  and even magnificent. The harbour is an oval basin, surrounded on  every side either by the buildings or the land, so that the  shipping lies perfectly secure; and here is generally an  incredible number of vessels. On the city side, there is a semi-circular  quay of free-stone, which extends thirteen hundred  paces; and the space between this and the houses that front it,  is continually filled with a surprising crowd of people. The  gallies, to the number of eight or nine, are moored with their  sterns to one part of the wharf, and the slaves are permitted to  work for their own benefit at their respective occupations, in  little shops or booths, which they rent for a trifle. There you  see tradesmen of all kinds sitting at work, chained by one foot,  shoe-makers, taylors, silversmiths, watch and clock-makers,  barbers, stocking-weavers, jewellers, pattern-drawers,  scriveners, booksellers, cutlers, and all manner of shop-keepers.  They pay about two sols a day to the king for this indulgence;  live well and look jolly; and can afford to sell their goods and  labour much cheaper than other dealers and tradesmen. At night,  however, they are obliged to lie aboard. Notwithstanding the  great face of business at Marseilles, their trade is greatly on  the decline; and their merchants are failing every day. This  decay of commerce is in a great measure owing to the English,  who, at the peace, poured in such a quantity of European  merchandize into Martinique and Guadalupe, that when the  merchants of Marseilles sent over their cargoes, they found the  markets overstocked, and were obliged to sell for a considerable  loss. Besides, the French colonists had such a stock of sugars,  coffee, and other commodities lying by them during the war, that  upon the first notice of peace, they shipped them off in great  quantities for Marseilles. I am told that the produce of the  islands is at present cheaper here than where it grows; and on  the other hand the merchandize of this country sells for less  money at Martinique than in Provence.

A single person, who travels in this country, may live at a  reasonable rate in these towns, by eating at the public  ordinaries: but I would advise all families that come hither to  make any stay, to take furnished lodgings as soon as they can:  for the expence of living at an hotel is enormous. I was obliged  to pay at Marseilles four livres a head for every meal, and half  that price for my servant, and was charged six livres a day  besides for the apartment, so that our daily expence, including  breakfast and a valet de place, amounted to two loui'dores. The  same imposition prevails all over the south of France, though it  is generally supposed to be the cheapest and most plentiful part  of the kingdom. Without all doubt, it must be owing to the folly  and extravagance of English travellers, who have allowed  themselves to be fleeced without wincing, until this extortion is  become authorized by custom. It is very disagreeable riding in  the avenues of Marseilles, because you are confined in a dusty  high road, crouded with carriages and beasts of burden, between  two white walls, the reflection from which, while the sun shines,  is intolerable. But in this neighbourhood there is a vast number  of pleasant country-houses, called Bastides, said to amount to  twelve thousand, some of which may be rented ready furnished at a  very reasonable price. Marseilles is a gay city, and the  inhabitants indulge themselves in a variety of amusements.  They have assemblies, a concert spirituel, and a comedy.  Here is also a spacious cours, or walk shaded with trees, to  which in the evening there is a great resort of well-dressed  people.

Marseilles being a free port, there is a bureau about half a  league from the city on the road to Aix, where all carriages  undergo examination; and if any thing contraband is found, the  vehicle, baggage, and even the horses are confiscated. We escaped  this disagreeable ceremony by the sagacity of our driver. Of his  own accord, he declared at the bureau, that we had bought a pound  of coffee and some sugar at Marseilles, and were ready to pay the  duty, which amounted to about ten sols. They took the money, gave  him a receipt, and let the carriage pass, without further  question.

I proposed to stay one night only at Aix: but Mr. A--r, who is  here, had found such benefit from drinking the waters, that I was  persuaded to make trial of them for eight or ten days. I have  accordingly taken private lodgings, and drank them at the  fountain-head, not without finding considerable benefit. In my  next I shall say something further of these waters, though I am  afraid they will not prove a source of much entertainment. It  will be sufficient for me to find them contribute in any degree  to the health of--Dear Sir, Yours assuredly.

LETTER XL

BOULOGNE, May 23, 1765.

DEAR DOCTOR,--I found three English families at Aix, with whom I  could have passed my time very agreeably but the society is now dissolved. Mr. S--re and his lady left the  place in a few days after we arrived. Mr. A--r and lady Betty are  gone to Geneva; and Mr. G--r with his family remains at Aix. This  gentleman, who laboured under a most dreadful nervous asthma, has  obtained such relief from this climate, that he intends to stay  another year in the place: and Mr. A--r found surprizing benefit  from drinking the waters, for a scorbutical complaint. As I was  incommoded by both these disorders, I could not but in justice to  myself, try the united efforts of the air and the waters;  especially as this consideration was re-inforced by the kind and  pressing exhortations of Mr. A--r and lady Betty, which I could  not in gratitude resist.

Aix, the capital of Provence, is a large city, watered by the  small river Are. It was a Roman colony, said to be founded by  Caius Sextus Calvinus, above a century before the birth of  Christ. From the source of mineral water here found, added to the  consul's name, it was called Aquae Sextiae. It was here that  Marius, the conqueror of the Teutones, fixed his headquarters,  and embellished the place with temples, aqueducts, and thermae,  of which, however, nothing now remains. The city, as it now  stands, is well built, though the streets in general are narrow,  and kept in a very dirty condition. But it has a noble cours  planted with double rows of tall trees, and adorned with three or  four fine fountains, the middlemost of which discharges hot water  supplied from the source of the baths. On each side there is a  row of elegant houses, inhabited chiefly by the noblesse, of  which there is here a considerable number. The parliament, which  is held at Aix, brings hither a great resort of people; and as  many of the inhabitants are persons of fashion, they are well  bred, gay, and sociable. The duc de Villars, who is governor of  the province, resides on the spot, and keeps an open assembly,  where strangers are admitted without reserve, and made very  welcome, if they will engage in play, which is the sole  occupation of the whole company. Some of our English people  complain, that when they were presented to him, they met with a  very cold reception. The French, as well as other foreigners,  have no idea of a man of family and fashion, without the title of  duke, count, marquis, or lord, and where an English gentleman is  introduced by the simple expression of monsieur tel, Mr.  Suchathing, they think he is some plebeian, unworthy of any  particular attention.

Aix is situated in a bottom, almost surrounded by hills, which,  however, do not screen it from the Bize, or north wind, that  blows extremely sharp in the winter and spring, rendering the air  almost insupportably cold, and very dangerous to those who have  some kinds of pulmonary complaints, such as tubercules,  abscesses, or spitting of blood. Lord H--, who passed part of  last winter in this place, afflicted with some of these symptoms,  grew worse every day while he continued at Aix: but, he no sooner  removed to Marseilles, than all his complaints abated; such a  difference there is in the air of these two places, though the  distance between them does not exceed ten or twelve miles. But  the air of Marseilles, though much more mild than that of Aix in  the winter is not near so warm as the climate of Nice, where we  find in plenty such flowers, fruit, and vegetables, even in the  severest season, as will not grow and ripen, either at Marseilles  or Toulon.

If the air of Aix is disagreeably cold in the winter, it is  rendered quite insufferable in the summer, from excessive heat,  occasioned by the reflexion from the rocks and mountains, which  at the same time obstruct the circulation of air: for it must be  observed, that the same mountains which serve as funnels and  canals, to collect and discharge the keen blasts of winter, will  provide screens to intercept intirely the faint breezes of  summer. Aix, though pretty well provided with butcher's meat, is  very ill supplied with potherbs; and they have no poultry but  what comes at a vast distance from the Lionnois. They say their  want of roots, cabbage, cauliflower, etc. is owing to a scarcity  of water: but the truth is, they are very bad gardeners. Their  oil is good and cheap: their wine is indifferent: but their chief  care seems employed on the culture of silk, the staple of  Provence, which is every where shaded with plantations of  mulberry trees, for the nourishment of the worms. Notwithstanding  the boasted cheapness of every article of housekeeping, in the  south of France, I am persuaded a family may live for less money  at York, Durham, Hereford, and in many other cities of England  than at Aix in Provence; keep a more plentiful table; and be much  more comfortably situated in all respects. I found lodging and  provision at Aix fifty per cent dearer than at Montpellier, which  is counted the dearest place in Languedoc.

The baths of Aix, so famous in antiquity, were quite demolished  by the irruptions of the barbarians. The very source of the water  was lost, till the beginning of the present century (I think the  year 1704), when it was discovered by accident, in digging for  the foundation of a house, at the foot of a hill, just without  the city wall. Near the same place was found a small stone altar,  with the figure of a Priapus, and some letters in capitals, which  the antiquarians have differently interpreted. From this figure,  it was supposed that the waters were efficacious in cases of  barrenness. It was a long time, however, before any person would  venture to use them internally, as it did not appear that they  had ever been drank by the antients. On their re-appearance, they  were chiefly used for baths to horses, and other beasts which had  the mange, and other cutaneous eruptions. At length poor people  began to bathe in them for the same disorders, and received such  benefit from them, as attracted the attention of more curious  inquirers. A very superficial and imperfect analysis was made and  published, with a few remarkable histories of the cures they had  performed, by three different physicians of those days; and those  little treatises, I suppose, encouraged valetudinarians to drink  them without ceremony. They were found serviceable in the gout,  the gravel, scurvy, dropsy, palsy, indigestion, asthma, and  consumption; and their fame soon extended itself all over  Languedoc, Gascony, Dauphine, and Provence. The magistrates, with  a view to render them more useful and commodious, have raised a  plain building, in which there are a couple of private baths,  with a bedchamber adjoining to each, where individuals may use  them both internally and externally, for a moderate expence.  These baths are paved with marble, and supplied with water each  by a large brass cock, which you can turn at pleasure. At one end  of this edifice, there is an octagon, open at top, having a  bason, with a stone pillar in the middle, which discharges water  from the same source, all round, by eight small brass cocks; and  hither people of all ranks come of a morning, with their glasses,  to drink the water, or wash their sores, or subject their  contracted limbs to the stream. This last operation, called the  douche, however, is more effectually undergone in the private  bath, where the stream is much more powerful. The natural warmth  of this water, as nearly as I can judge from recollection, is  about the same degree of temperature with that in the Queen's  Bath, at Bath in Somersetshire. It is perfectly transparent,  sparkling in the glass, light and agreeable to the taste, and may  be drank without any preparation, to the quantity of three or  four pints at a time. There are many people at Aix who swallow  fourteen half pint glasses every morning, during the season,  which is in the month of May, though it may be taken with equal  benefit all the year round. It has no sensible operation but by  urine, an effect which pure water would produce, if drank in the  same quantity.

If we may believe those who have published their experiments,  this water produces neither agitation, cloud, or change of  colour, when mixed with acids, alkalies, tincture of galls, syrup  of violets, or solution of silver. The residue, after boiling,  evaporation, and filtration, affords a very small proportion of  purging salt, and calcarious earth, which last ferments with  strong acids. As I had neither hydrometer nor thermometer to  ascertain the weight and warmth of this water; nor time to  procure the proper utensils, to make the preparations, and repeat  the experiments necessary to exhibit a complete analysis, I did  not pretend to enter upon this process; but contented myself with  drinking, bathing, and using the douche, which perfectly answered  my expectation, having, in eight days, almost cured an ugly  scorbutic tetter, which had for some time deprived me of the use  of my right hand. I observed that the water, when used  externally, left always a kind of oily appearance on the skin:  that when, we boiled it at home, in an earthen pot, the steams  smelled like those of sulphur, and even affected my lungs in the  same manner: but the bath itself smelled strong of a lime-kiln.  The water, after standing all night in a bottle, yielded a  remarkably vinous taste and odour, something analogous to that of  dulcified spirit of nitre. Whether the active particles consist  of a volatile vitriol, or a very fine petroleum, or a mixture of  both, I shall not pretend to determine: but the best way I know  of discovering whether it is really impregnated with a vitriolic  principle, too subtil and fugitive for the usual operations of  chymistry, is to place bottles, filled with wine, in the bath, or  adjacent room, which wine, if there is really a volatile acid, in  any considerable quantity, will be pricked in eight and forty  hours.

Having ordered our coach to be refitted, and provided with fresh  horses, as well as with another postilion, in consequence of  which improvements, I payed at the rate of a loui'dore per diem  to Lyons and back again, we departed from Aix, and the second day  of our journey passing the Durance in a boat, lay at Avignon.  This river, the Druentia of the antients, is a considerable  stream, extremely rapid, which descends from the mountains, and  discharges itself in the Rhone. After violent rains it extends  its channel, so as to be impassable, and often overflows the  country to a great extent. In the middle of a plain, betwixt  Orgon and this river, we met the coach in which we had travelled  eighteen months before, from Lyons to Montpellier, conducted by  our old driver Joseph, who no sooner recognized my servant at a  distance, by his musquetoon, than he came running towards our  carriage, and seizing my hand, even shed tears of joy. Joseph had  been travelling through Spain, and was so imbrowned by the sun,  that he might have passed for an Iroquois. I was much pleased  with the marks of gratitude which the poor fellow expressed  towards his benefactors. He had some private conversation with  our voiturier, whose name was Claude, to whom he gave such a  favourable character of us, as in all probability induced him to  be wonderfully obliging during the whole journey.

You know Avignon is a large city belonging to the pope. It was  the Avenio Cavarum of the antients, and changed masters several  times, belonging successively to the Romans, Burgundians, Franks,  the kingdom of Arles, the counts of Provence, and the sovereigns  of Naples. It was sold in the fourteenth century, by queen Jane  I. of Naples, to Pope Clement VI. for the sum of eighty thousand  florins, and since that period has continued under the dominion  of the see of Rome. Not but that when the duc de Crequi, the  French ambassador, was insulted at Rome in the year 1662, the  parliament of Provence passed an arret, declaring the city of  Avignon, and the county Venaiss in part of the ancient domain of  Provence; and therefore reunited it to the crown of France, which  accordingly took possession; though it was afterwards restored to  the Roman see at the peace of Pisa. The pope, however, holds it  by a precarious title, at the mercy of the French king, who may  one day be induced to resume it, upon payment of the original  purchase-money. As a succession of popes resided here for the  space of seventy years, the city could not fail to be adorned  with a great number of magnificent churches and convents, which  are richly embellished with painting, sculpture, shrines,  reliques, and tombs. Among the last, is that of the celebrated  Laura, whom Petrarch has immortalized by his poetry, and for whom  Francis I. of France took the trouble to write an epitaph.  Avignon is governed by a vice-legate from the pope, and the  police of the city is regulated by the consuls.

It is a large place, situated in a fruitful plain, surrounded by  high walls built of hewn stone, which on the west side are washed  by the Rhone. Here was a noble bridge over the river, but it is  now in ruins. On the other side, a branch of the Sorgue runs  through part of the city. This is the river anciently called  Sulga, formed by the famous fountain of Vaucluse in this  neighbourhood, where the poet Petrarch resided. It is a charming  transparent stream, abounding with excellent trout and craw-fish.  We passed over it on a stone bridge, in our way to Orange, the  Arausio Cavarum of the Romans, still distinguished by some noble  monuments of antiquity. These consist of a circus, an aqueduct, a  temple, and a triumphal arch, which last was erected in honour of  Caius Marius, and Luctatius Catulus, after the great victory they  obtained in this country over the Cimbri and Teutones. It is a  very magnificent edifice, adorned on all sides with trophies and  battles in basso relievo. The ornaments of the architecture, and  the sculpture, are wonderfully elegant for the time in which it  was erected; and the whole is surprisingly well preserved,  considering its great antiquity. It seems to me to be as entire  and perfect as the arch of Septimius Severus at Rome. Next day we  passed two very impetuous streams, the Drome and the Isere. The  first, which very much resembles the Var, we forded: but the  Isere we crossed in a boat, which as well as that upon the  Durance, is managed by the traille, a moveable or running pulley,  on a rope stretched between two wooden machines erected on the  opposite sides of the river. The contrivance is simple and  effectual, and the passage equally safe and expeditious. The  boatman has nothing to do, but by means of a long massy rudder,  to keep the head obliquely to the stream, the force of which  pushes the boat along, the block to which it is fixed sliding  upon the rope from one side to the other. All these rivers take  their rise from the mountains, which are continued through  Provence and Dauphine, and fall into the Rhone: and all of them,  when swelled by sudden rains, overflow the flat country. Although  Dauphine affords little or no oil, it produces excellent wines,  particularly those of Hermitage and Cote-roti. The first of these  is sold on the spot for three livres the bottle, and the other  for two. The country likewise yields a considerable quantity of  corn, and a good deal of grass. It is well watered with streams,  and agreeably shaded with wood. The weather was pleasant, and we  had a continued song of nightingales from Aix to Fontainebleau.

I cannot pretend to specify the antiquities of Vienne, antiently  called Vienna Allobrogum. It was a Roman colony, and a  considerable city, which the antients spared no pains and expence  to embellish. It is still a large town, standing among several  hills on the banks of the Rhone, though all its former splendor  is eclipsed, its commerce decayed, and most of its antiquities  are buried in ruins. The church of Notre Dame de la Vie was  undoubtedly a temple. On the left of the road, as you enter it,  by the gate of Avignon, there is a handsome obelisk, or rather  pyramid, about thirty feet high, raised upon a vault supported by  four pillars of the Tuscan order. It is certainly a Roman work,  and Montfaucon supposes it to be a tomb, as he perceived an  oblong stone jetting out from the middle of the vault, in which  the ashes of the defunct were probably contained. The story of  Pontius Pilate, who is said to have ended his days in this place,  is a fable. On the seventh day of our journey from Aix, we  arrived at Lyons, where I shall take my leave of you for the  present, being with great truth--Yours, etc.

LETTER XLI

BOULOGNE, June 13, 1765.

DEAR SIR,--I am at last in a situation to indulge my view with a  sight of Britain, after an absence of two years; and indeed you  cannot imagine what pleasure I feel while I survey the white  cliffs of Dover, at this distance. Not that I am at all affected  by the nescia qua dulcedine natalis soli, of Horace. That seems  to be a kind of fanaticism founded on the prejudices of  education, which induces a Laplander to place the terrestrial  paradise among the snows of Norway, and a Swiss to prefer the  barren mountains of Solleure to the fruitful plains of Lombardy.  I am attached to my country, because it is the land of liberty,  cleanliness, and convenience: but I love it still more tenderly,  as the scene of all my interesting connexions; as the habitation  of my friends, for whose conversation, correspondence, and  esteem, I wish alone to live.

Our journey hither from Lyons produced neither accident nor  adventure worth notice; but abundance of little vexations, which  may be termed the Plagues of Posting. At Lyons, where we stayed  only a few days, I found a return-coach, which I hired to Paris  for six loui'dores. It was a fine roomy carriage, elegantly  furnished, and made for travelling; so strong and solid in all  its parts, that there was no danger of its being shaken to  pieces by the roughness of the road: but its weight and solidity  occasioned so much friction between the wheels and the axle-tree,  that we ran the risque of being set on fire three or four times a  day. Upon a just comparison of all circumstances posting is much  more easy, convenient, and reasonable in England than in France.  The English carriages, horses, harness, and roads are much  better; and the postilions more obliging and alert. The reason is  plain and obvious. If I am ill-used at the post-house in England,  I can be accommodated elsewhere. The publicans on the road are  sensible of this, and therefore they vie with each other in  giving satisfaction to travellers. But in France, where the post  is monopolized, the post-masters and postilions, knowing that the  traveller depends intirely upon them, are the more negligent and  remiss in their duty, as well as the more encouraged to insolence  and imposition. Indeed the stranger seems to be left intirely at  the mercy of those fellows, except in large towns, where he may  have recourse to the magistrate or commanding officer. The post  stands very often by itself in a lone country situation, or in a  paultry village, where the post-master is the principal  inhabitant; and in such a case, if you should be ill-treated, by  being supplied with bad horses; if you should be delayed on  frivolous pretences, in order to extort money; if the postilions  should drive at a waggon pace, with a view to provoke your  impatience; or should you in any shape be insulted by them or  their masters; and I know not any redress you can have, except by  a formal complaint to the comptroller of the posts, who is  generally one of the ministers of state, and pays little or no  regard to any such representations. I know an English gentleman,  the brother of an earl, who wrote a letter of complaint to the  Duc de Villars, governor of Provence, against the post-master of  Antibes, who had insulted and imposed upon him. The duke answered  his letter, promising to take order that the grievance should be  redressed; and never thought of it after. Another great  inconvenience which attends posting in France, is that if you are  retarded by any accident, you cannot in many parts of the kingdom  find a lodging, without perhaps travelling two or three posts  farther than you would choose to go, to the prejudice of your  health, and even the hazard of your life; whereas on any part of  the post-road in England, you will meet with tolerable  accommodation at every stage. Through the whole south of France,  except in large cities, the inns are cold, damp, dark, dismal,  and dirty; the landlords equally disobliging and rapacious; the  servants aukward, sluttish, and slothful; and the postilions  lazy, lounging, greedy, and impertinent. If you chide them for  lingering, they will continue to delay you the longer: if you  chastise them with sword, cane, cudgel, or horse-whip, they will  either disappear entirely, and leave you without resource; or  they will find means to take vengeance by overturning your  carriage. The best method I know of travelling with any degree of  comfort, is to allow yourself to become the dupe of imposition,  and stimulate their endeavours by extraordinary gratifications. I  laid down a resolution (and kept it) to give no more than four  and twenty sols per post between the two postilions; but I am now  persuaded that for three-pence a post more, I should have been  much better served, and should have performed the journey with  much greater pleasure. We met with no adventures upon the road  worth reciting. The first day we were retarded about two hours by  the dutchess D--lle, and her son the duc de R--f--t, who by  virtue of an order from the minister, had anticipated all the  horses at the post. They accosted my servant, and asked if his  master was a lord? He thought proper to answer in the  affirmative, upon which the duke declared that he must certainly  be of French extraction, inasmuch as he observed the lilies of  France in his arms on the coach. This young nobleman spoke a  little English. He asked whence we had come; and understanding we  had been in Italy, desired to know whether the man liked France  or Italy best? Upon his giving France the preference, he clapped  him on the shoulder, and said he was a lad of good taste. The  dutchess asked if her son spoke English well, and seemed mightily  pleased when my man assured her he did. They were much more free  and condescending with my servant than with myself; for, though  we saluted them in passing, and were even supposed to be persons  of quality, they did not open their lips, while we stood close by  them at the inn-door, till their horses were changed. They were  going to Geneva; and their equipage consisted of three coaches  and six, with five domestics a-horseback. The dutchess was a  tall, thin, raw-boned woman, with her head close shaved. This  delay obliged us to lie two posts short of Macon, at a solitary  auberge called Maison Blanche, which had nothing white about it,  but the name. The Lionnois is one of the most agreeable and best-cultivated  countries I ever beheld, diversified with hill, dale,  wood, and water, laid out in extensive corn-fields and rich  meadows, well stocked with black cattle, and adorned with a  surprising number of towns, villages, villas, and convents,  generally situated on the brows of gently swelling hills, so that  they appear to the greatest advantage. What contributes in a  great measure to the beauty of this, and the Maconnois, is the  charming pastoral Soame, which from the city of Chalons winds its  silent course so smooth and gentle, that one can scarce discern  which way its current flows. It is this placid appearance that  tempts so many people to bathe in it at Lions, where a good  number of individuals are drowned every summer: whereas there is  no instance of any persons thus perishing in the Rhone, the  rapidity of it deterring every body from bathing in its stream.  Next night we passed at Beaune where we found nothing good but  the wine, for which we paid forty sols the bottle. At Chalons our  axle-tree took fire; an accident which detained us so long, that  it was ten before we arrived at Auxerre, where we lay. In all  probability we must have lodged in the coach, had not we been  content to take four horses, and pay for six, two posts  successively. The alternative was, either to proceed with four on  those terms, or stay till the other horses should come in and be  refreshed. In such an emergency, I would advise the traveller to  put up with the four, and he will find the postilions so much  upon their mettle, that those stages will be performed sooner  than the others in which you have the full complement.

There was an English gentleman laid up at Auxerre with a broken  arm, to whom I sent my compliments, with offers of service; but  his servant told my man that he did not choose to see any  company, and had no occasion for my service. This sort of reserve  seems peculiar to the English disposition. When two natives of  any other country chance to meet abroad, they run into each  other's embrace like old friends, even though they have never  heard of one another till that moment; whereas two Englishmen in  the same situation maintain a mutual reserve and diffidence, and  keep without the sphere of each other's attraction, like two  bodies endowed with a repulsive power. We only stopped to change  horses at Dijon, the capital of Burgundy, which is a venerable  old city; but we passed part of a day at Sens, and visited a  manufacture of that stuff we call Manchester velvet, which is  here made and dyed to great perfection, under the direction of  English workmen, who have been seduced from their own country. At  Fontainebleau. we went to see the palace, or as it is called, the  castle, which though an irregular pile of building, affords a  great deal of lodging, and contains some very noble apartments,  particularly the hall of audience, with the king's and queen's  chambers, upon which the ornaments of carving and gilding are  lavished with profusion rather than propriety. Here are some rich  parterres of flower-garden, and a noble orangerie, which,  however, we did not greatly admire, after having lived among the  natural orange groves of Italy. Hitherto we had enjoyed fine  summer weather, and I found myself so well, that I imagined my  health was intirely restored: but betwixt Fontainebleau and  Paris, we were overtaken by a black storm of rain, sleet, and  hail, which seemed to reinstate winter in all its rigour; for the  cold weather continues to this day. There was no resisting this  attack. I caught cold immediately; and this was reinforced at  Paris, where I stayed but three days. The same man, (Pascal  Sellier, rue Guenegaud, fauxbourg St. Germain) who owned the  coach that brought us from Lyons, supplied me with a returned  berline to Boulogne, for six loui'dores, and we came hither by  easy journeys. The first night we lodged at Breteuil, where we  found an elegant inn, and very good accommodation. But the next  we were forced to take up our quarters, at the house where we had  formerly passed a very disagreeable night at Abbeville. I am now  in tolerable lodging, where I shall remain a few weeks, merely  for the sake of a little repose; then I shall gladly tempt that  invidious straight which still divides you from--Yours, &c.



APPENDIX A

A Short List of Works, mainly on Travel in France and Italy  during the Eighteenth Century, referred to in connection with the  Introduction.

ADDISON, JOSEPH. Remarks on Several Parts of Italy. London, 1705.

ANCONE, ALESSANDRO D'. Saggio di una bibliografia ragionata dei  Viaggi in Italia. 1895.

ANDREWS, Dr. JOHN. Letters to a Young Gentleman in setting out  for France. London, 1784.

ARCHENHOLTZ, J. W. VON. Tableau de l'Angleterre et de l'Italie. 3  vols. Gotha, 1788.

ARDOUIN-DUMAZET Voyage en France. Treizieme serie. La Provence  Maritime. Paris, 1898.

ASTRUC, JEAN. Memoires pour servir a l'histoire de la Faculte de  Medicine de Montpellier, 1767.

BABEAU, ANTOINE. Voyageurs en France. Paris, 1885.

BALLY, L. E. Souvenirs de Nice. 1860.

BARETTI, G. M. Account of the Manners and Customs of Italy. 2  vols. London, 1770.

BASTIDE, CHARLES. John Locke. Ses theories politiques en  Angleterre. Paris, 1907.

BECKFORD, WILLIAM. Italy, Spain, and Portugal. By the author of  "Vathek." London, 1834; new ed. 1840.

BERCHTOLD, LEOPOLD. An Essay to direct the Inquiries of Patriotic  Travellers. 2 vols. London, 1789.

BOULOGNE-SUR-MER et la region Boulonnaise. Ouvrage offert par la  ville aux membres de l'Association Francaise. 2 vols.  1899.

BRETON DE LA MARTINIERE, J. Voyage en Piemont. Paris, 1803.

BROSSES, CHARLES DE. Lettres familieres ecrites d'Italie. 1740.

BURTON, JOHN HILL. The Scot Abroad. 2 vols. Edinburgh. 1864.

CASANOVA DE SEINGALT, JACQUES. Memoires ecrits par lui-meme. 6  vols. Bruxelles, 1879.

CLEMENT, PIERRE. L'Italie en 1671. Paris, 1867. 12mo.

COOTE'S NEW GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY. 2 vols., folio, 1739.

CRAIG, G. DUNCAN. Mie jour; or Provencal Legend, Life, Language,  and Literature. London, 1877.

DAVIS, Dr. I. B. Ancient and Modern History of Nice. London,  1807.

DEJOB, C. Madame de Stael et l'Italie. Paris, 1890.

DEMPSTER, C. L. H. The Maritime Alps and their Sea-Board. London,  1885.

DORAN, DR. JOHN. Mann and Manners at the Court of Florence.  London, 1876.

DRAMARD, E. Bibliographie du Boulonnais, Calaisis, etc. Paris,  1869.

DUTENS, L. Itineraire des Routes. First edition, 1775.

EVELYN, JOHN. Diary, edited by H. B. Wheatley. 4 vols. London,  1879.

FERBER, G. G. Travels through Italy, translated by R. E. Raspe.  London, 1776.

FODERE, FRANCOIS EMILE. Voyage aux Alpes Maritimes. 2 vols.  Paris, 1821.

FORSYTH, JOSEPH. Remarks on Antiquities, Arts, and Letters,  during an Excursion in Italy in the year 1S02 and 1803. London,  1812; 4th Edition, I835.

GARDNER, EDMUND G. The Story of Florence. London, 1900.

GERMAIN, M. A. Histoire de la Commune de Montpellier. 3 vols.  Montpellier, 1853.

GIOFFREDO, PIETRO. Storia delle Alpi Marittime . . . libri xxvi.  Ed. Gazzera. 1836.

GOETHE. Autobiography, Tour in Italy, Miscellaneous Travels, and  Wilhelm Meister's Travels (Bohn).

GROSLEY, PIERRE JEAN. Nouveaux Memoires sur l'Italie. London,  1764. New Observations on Italy. Translated by Thomas Nugent.  1769.

HARE, AUGUSTUS J. C. The Rivieras. 1897.

HILLARD, G. S. Six Months in Italy. Boston, 1853; 7th edition,  1863.

JEFFERYS, THOMAS. Description of the Maritime Parts of France.  With Maps. 1761.

JOANNE, ADOLPHE. Provence, Alpes Maritimes. Paris, 1881  (Bibliog., p. xxvii).

JONES (of Nayland), WILLIAM. Observations in a Journey to Paris.  London, 1777.

KOTZEBUE, A. F. F. VON. Travels through Italy in 1804 and 1805. 4  vols. London, 1807.

LALANDE, J. J. DE. Voyage en Italie. 6 vols. 12mo. 1768.

LEE, EDWIN. Nice et son climat. Paris, 1863.

LENOTRE, G. Paris revolutionnaire. Paris, 1895.

LENTHERIC, CHARLES. La Provence Maritime, ancienne et moderne.  Paris, 1880. Les voies antiques de la Region du Rhone. Avignon,  1882.

LUCHAIRE, A. Hist. des Instit. Monarchiques de la France. 2 vols.  1891.

MAUGHAM, H. N. The Book of Italian Travel. London, 1903.

MERCIER, M. New Pictures of Paris. London, I8OO.

METRIVIER, H. Monaco et ses Princes. 2 vols. I862.

MILLINGEN, J. G. Sketches of Ancient and Modern Boulogne. London,  1826.

MONTAIGNE, MICHEL DE. Journal du Voyage en Italie (Querlon).  Rome, 1774.

MONTESQUIEU, CHARLES DE SECONDAT, BARON DE. Voyages. Bordeaux,  1894.

MONTFAUCON. Travels of the Learned Dr. Montfaucon from Paris  through Italy. London, 1712.

MOORE, DR. JOHN. A View of Society and Manners in France (2  vols., 1779), and in Italy (2 vols., 1781)

NASH, JAMES. Guide to Nice, 1884.

NORTHALL, JOHN. Travels through Italy. London, 1766.

NUGENT, THOMAS. The Grand Tour. 3rd edition. 4 vols. 1778.

PALLIARI, LEA. Notices historiques sur le comte et la ville de  Nice. Nice, 1875.

PETHERICK, E, A. Catalogue of the York Gate Library. An Index to  the Literature of Geography. London, 1881.

PIOZZI, HESTER LYNCH. Observations and Reflections made in the  course of a Journey through France, Italy, and Germany. In 2  vols. London, 1789.

RAE, JOHN. Life of Adam Smith. London, 1885.

RICHARD, L'ABBE. Description historique et critique de l'Italie.  6 vols. Paris, 1768.

RICHARDERIE, BOUCHER DE LA. Bibliotheque des voyages. Paris,  1808.

RIGBY, DR. Letters from France in 1789, edited by Lady Eastlake.  London, 1880.

ROSE, WILLIAM STEWART. Letters from the North of Italy to Henry  Hallam. 2 vols. 1819.

ROUX, JOSEPH. Statistique des Alpes Maritimes. 2 vols. 1863.

RUFFINI, GIOVANNI, D. Doctor Antonio; a Tale. Paris, 1855.

SAYOUS, A. Le Dix-huitieme siecle a l'etranger. 2 vols. Paris,  1861.

SECCOMBE, THOMAS. Smollett's Travels, edited with bibliographical  note, etc. By Thomas Seccombe (Works, Constable's Edition, vol.  xi.). 1900.

SHARP, SAMUEL. Letters from Italy. London, 1769.

SHERLOCK, MARTIN. Letters from an English Traveller. (New English  version.) 2 vols. 1802.

SMOLLETT, T. Travels through France and Italy. 2 vols. London,  1766.

SPALDING, WILLIAM. Italy and the Italian Islands. 3 vols. London,  1841.

STAEL, MME. DE. Corinne, ou l'Italie. 1807.

STARKE, MARIANA. Letters from Italy, 1792-1798. 9 vols. 1800.  Travels on the Continent for the use of Travellers. 1800, 1820,  1824, etc.

STENDHAL. Rome, Naples, and Florence, in 1817. London, 1818.

STERNE, LAURENCE. A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy.  By Mr. Yorick. 2 vols. London, 1768.

STOLBERZ, COUNT F. L. ZU. Travels through Germany, Switzerland,  Italy, etc. Translated by Thomas Holcroft. 1796.

TAINE, HENRI. Voyage en Italie. 1866.

TALBOT, SIR R. Letters on the French Nation. London, 2 vols.1771,  12mo.

TEYSSEIRE, T. Monographie sur le climat de Nice. 1881.

THICKNESSE, PHILIP. Useful Hints to those who make the Tour of  France in a Series of Letters. London, 1768. A year's Journey  through France, etc. 2, vols. 1777.

TISSERAND, E. Chronique de Provence . . . de la cite de Nice,  etc. 2 vols. Nice, 1862.

TWINING FAMILY PAPERS. London, 1887.

VIOLLET, PAUL. Hist. des Instit. polit. et administratifs de la  France. 2 vols. Paris, 1890-98.

WHATLEY, STEPHEN. The Travels and Adventures of J. Massey.  Translated from the French. 1743.

WILLIAMS, C. THEODORE. The Climate of the South of France. 1869.

WINCKELMANN, J. J. Lettres familieres. Amsterdam, 1781.  Reflections on the Painting and Sculpture of the Greeks.  Translated by H. Fuseli. London, 1765. Voyage en Italie de J. J.  Barthelemy . . . avec des morceaux inedits de Winckelmann. 1801.

YOUNG, ARTHUR. Travels in France during 1787, 1788, 1789, edited  by M. Betham-Edwards. 1889.

YOUNG, EDWARD. Sa vie et ses oeuvres, par W. Thomas. Paris,  1901.

APPENDIX B

Short Notes on one or two unfamiliar Words which Smollett helped  to domesticate in England.

Berline. Swift and Chesterfield both use this for a heavy coach.  The most famous berline was that used in the flight to Varennes.  The name came from Brandenburg in the time of Frederick William.

Bize. Smollett's spelling of bise--the cutting N.N.E. wind which  makes Geneva so beautiful, but intolerable in the winter.

Brasiere=brasero. A tray for hot charcoal used for warming rooms  at Nice. Smollett practically introduced this word. Dried olives  were often used as fuel.

Calesse, calash, caleche. A low two-wheeled carriage of light  construction, with a movable folding hood; hence applied to a  hood bonnet as in Mrs. Gaskell's Cranford.

Cassine. Latin casa, cassa, cassina; the Italian cassina, A small  detached house in the fields, often whitewashed and of mean  appearance. Smollett uses the word as an equivalent for summer  cottage. Cf. bastide as used by Dumas. Cabane has practically  replaced cassine in modern French. See Letter XXIV.

Cambiatura. The system of changing chaises every post, common in  England, but unusual abroad except in Tuscany.

Cicisbeo. The word is used by Lady Mary Montagu in her Letters  (17I8) as cecisbeo. Smollett's best account is in Letter XVII.  See Introduction, p. xliii.

Conversazione. Gray uses the word for assembly in 1710, but  Smollett, I believe, is about the first Englishman to define it  properly.

Corinth. This was still used as a variant of currant, though  adherence to it was probably rather pedantic on Smollett's part  (cf. his use of "hough" for hoe). Boswell uses the modern form.

Corridore. This word was used by Evelyn, and the correct modern  spelling given by Johnson in 1753; but Smollett as often adheres  to the old form.

Douche. Italian doccia. Smollett is perhaps the first writer to  explain the word and assign to it the now familiar French form  (Letter XL).

Feluca. An Arab word to denote a coasting boat, oar or sail  propelled. Nelson and Marryat write felucca. It was large enough  to accommodate a post-chaise (Letter XXV).

Gabelle. Supposed to be derived from the Arabic kabala, the  irksome tax on salt, from which few provinces in France were  altogether free, swept away in 1790. Smollett describes the  exaction in San Remo.

Garum. Used by Smollett for the rich fish sauce of the ancients,  equivalent to a saumure, perhaps, in modern French cookery. In  the Middle Ages the word is used both for a condiment and a  beverage.

Improvisatore. A performer in the Commedia delle Arte, of which  Smollett gives a brief admiring account in his description of  Florence (Letter XXVII). For details of the various elements, the  doti, generici, lazzi, etc., see Carlo Gozzi.

Liqueur. First used by Pope. "An affected, contemptible  expression" (Johnson).

Macaroni. "The paste called macaroni" (Letter XXVI) was seen by  Smollett in the neighbourhood of its origin near Genoa, which  city formed the chief market.

Maestral. An old form of mistral, the very dry wind from the  N.N.W., described by Smollett as the coldest he ever experienced.

Patois. See Letter XXII. ad fin.

Pietre commesse. A sort of inlaying with stones, analogous to the  fineering of cabinets in wood (Letter XXVIII). Used by Evelyn in  1644.

Polenta. A meal ground from maize, which makes a good "pectoral"  (Letter XXII).

Pomi carli. The most agreeable apples Smollett tasted, stated to  come from the marquisate of Final, sold by the Emperor Charles  VI. to the Genoese.

Preniac. A small white wine, mentioned in Letter IV., from  Boulogne, as agreeable and very cheap.

Seafarot boots. Jack-boots or wading boots, worn by a Marquis of  Savoy, and removed by means of a tug-of-war team and a rope  coiled round the heel (see Letter XXVIII).

Sporcherie. With respect to delicacy and decorum you may peruse  Dean Swift's description of the Yahoos, and then you will have  some idea of the sporcherie that distinguishes the gallantry of  Nice (Letter XVII). Ital. sporcheria, sporcizia.

Strappado or corda. Performed by hoisting the criminal by his  hands tied behind his back and dropping him suddenly "with  incredible pain" (Letter XX). See Introduction, p. xliv, and  Christie, Etienne Dolet, 1899, P. 231.

Tartane. From Italian tartana, Arabic taridha; a similar word  being used in Valencia and Grand Canary for a two-wheeled open  cart. One of the commonest craft on the Mediterranean (cf. the  topo of the Adriatic). For different types see Larousse's Nouveau  Dictionnaire.

Tip. To "tip the wink" is found in Addison's Tatler (No. 86), but  "to tip" in the sense of to gratify is not common before  Smollett, who uses it more than once or twice in this sense (cf.  Roderick Random, chap. xiv. ad fin.)

Valanches. For avalanches (dangers from to travellers, see Letter  XXXVIII).

Villeggiatura. An early adaptation by Smollett of the Italian  word for country retirement (Letter XXIX).


APPENDIX C

Currency of Savoy in the time of Smollett.

Ten bajocci=one paolo (6d.).  Ten paoli=one scudo (six livres or about 5s.).  Two scudi=one zequin.  Two zequin=one louid'or.

Afterword. -I should be ungrateful were I not to create an  epilogue for the express purpose of thanking M. Morel, H. S  Spencer  Scott, Dr. Norman Moore, W. P. Courtney, G. Whale, D. S.  MacColl, Walter Sichel (there may be others), who have supplied  hints for my annotations, and I should like further, if one might  inscribe such a trifle, to inscribe this to that difficult  critic, Mr. Arthur Vincent, who, when I told him I was about it,  gave expression to the cordial regret that so well hidden a  treasure of our literature (as he regarded the Travels) was to be  "vulgarised."





End  